O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you dear son, I have completed this book which is the second part of the teaching of medicine in its entirety, and I have made the end with explanations and statements from it.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And I was given in my vision that I completed this treatise with this subject, which is part of the book of surgery, namely "cryotherapy".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the book of surgery is well-known in our region and is essential everywhere, if it were not for this science, it would be abandoned and forgotten; therefore, there are no delays in attacking these wounds that ancient books have described through their practices.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And it is because of this mistake and arrogance, and the meanings are closed and have been distanced from the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I have revived this treatise in its entirety according to the path of exposition and declaration; and I will bring together the forms of fire cupping, and other manipulations from the book with the adjustment of the declarations and preparations as well, since it is customary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no good masters of hands found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary that one who engages in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, knows correctly about the bodies, forms and conditions, joints, separations, muscles, bones, nerves, and veins, along with knowledge of their movements, resting positions, and sources; this is what he must understand.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, Epicharmus says that we do not with it much (referring to the book), and in the art of hands also little is done.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that who does not know these things beforehand, he will avoid making errors and harm to others; so I have wanted many times more people involved in this science and do they abandon it with its wisdom and experimentation.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Because I see a foolish man who performs an apotome of the scrofulous ulcer or swelling on a woman's neck, and removes her arteries from it, so much flesh comes out that the woman dies in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And another wise man who transforesmeentures of the art and toge ofxor trechiefs cestinement defface dexpresence le maladies leu in aigne itin: comen.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called for his treatment, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the wound, and if he were to die from it, I would know.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another man who was in the care of our land, who had his leg broken, and with the break he had an open wound; and the physician's ignorance constrained the fracture above the wound as if by strong pressure, and let nothing go out from the wound, and so commanded him not to remove it either; and remained until his leg was completely amputated and his knee joint came to its end.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called upon to come to him, and hurriedly came to set his leg free; and when I set it loose, he was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways of curing had already been declared to be confirmed or a limb or body part, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease until every member was lost completely.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another physician whose abscess had opened and then inflamed due to the malice of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a purulent ulcer, when it is full of black bile (representing melancholy or bad spirits), there is no need to touch with iron unless part of the wound has turned into liquid and you can completely cure what is corrupt.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, cutting hair, you should know that the work of hands is divided into three parts: it means, heart or it has danger in several circumstances; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For this reason you must take care, so that the foolish physician does not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take up your arms in defense, and undertake your maladies lightly but firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are praised; and leave those diseases that cause grievous suffering unattended; and arm yourself lest you doubt, and do such things that you may be brought out from this world into another one of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	"Do not treat any illness badly, do you not call such a physician."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to .ii. chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire and moisture cauteries, and they are ordered from the head to the feet; and regarding traction therapies, cautery tools, and all that is necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about wound cutting and piercing, and the use of suction cups and wounds, and extractions of arrows, and similar things; and it is ordered along with traction therapies, likewise regarding their forms.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about the treatment of dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from head to feet as well regarding traction therapies, and their forms.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	And since our memory of the work, it is required that I state the quality and harm of each type of condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality and harm of help is the longest word and most subtle science and hidden answer; and from this topic, several experts spoke about it, and agreed to it; and they don't bother with many words, as I am wary of lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery helps every type of condition, since there are two types of conditions: hot temperament with matter and dry temperament with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry temperament combined with matter, no one designed it, and they said that fire cautery is great help; while the other said that cautery is not helpful for disease caused by heat and moisture.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because fire is hot and should not be a remedy for diseases caused by heat and moisture, as stated by those who said the opposite; it does great help for warm and dry diseases that come from the bodies of people.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because when you compare the body's constitution to the hot condition, your flesh will be bruised.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this saying.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	I have found it never by experimentation. (The medieval author asserts the effectiveness of this method, noting that its efficacy was observed through experimental trials.)
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all ways, not in any way do those who have tried it harm themselves, and who know from long use the physician of cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and remedies and space between tens; for other complexions we fear not, mainly illnesses cold and moist.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the wise men agreed and settled on the use of cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, young one, that with fiery flame combined, (A)
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	Forsooth the heat is simple in its pure essence, (A)
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	The fiery cures do draw from other parts their might, (A)
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	By virtue of its power and the warmth it bestows, (A)
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	I found this through trials and length of service's might, (A)
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, dear youth, when cautery's time doth arrive, (A)
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	I decree that cauterization' Written in Old French, the translation maintains its medieval essence while adapting to poetic form:
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	nent:esbyte ofcause, sachia of utic. voire malice of theur eslementen asme itaurexent pas cautures, comestrai, ache de letainlyseuticate ofu.com estimexumeas fromage ofsacuteine, andescribe.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And there is that the disease never changes according to the constitution of the sick person and the nature of the illness and its virtues; and it gathers around in him excesses through acquiring meats and other things, unless cauteries are applied at that time when he has few excesses and moisture, as cauteries for pain, and similar things, and little pain does not return anymore; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many do not understand that the lower limbs of medicine are called cauldrons; it is seen, but they do not believe that cauldrons are effective after medicine, rather their understanding is false, and cauldrons of medicine because we administer various treatments for any disease and none of them are worthwhile, so therefore we use the cautery, and it is valuable.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	And it is opened well because cauldrons are indeed part of the lower limbs of medicine, not according to the beliefs of common people. This statement reaffirms that despite widespread misconceptions among laypeople, the author acknowledges the legitimacy and necessity of cauterization within the scope of medical practice during their time period.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that instruments of gold were more effective than those made of iron, and they only spoke about the quality of the gold and the highness of its substance; and they declared that the wound healed without any porridge (properly 'purulence' or pus formation), but this is not true because I have tried it myself, and found in some cases that it does not work. This sentence provides insight into the beliefs about materials used for cauterization tools during medieval times—gold was considered superior due to its perceived purity and effectiveness compared to iron. However, the author's personal experience suggests that this belief may not hold true in all cases.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And in any case when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know how long it will stay heated by the color of the gold and if it suddenly cools off almost instantly; and if it is heated too much, they put it on fire, and thus there are enough difficulties. This passage reflects concerns about maintaining the appropriate temperature when using gold instruments for cauterization, noting that overheating could lead to rapid cooling or other problems with the procedure's execution.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use iron cauldrons because we have made them appear useful in our work. The statement acknowledges the practical application of using metal cauldrons, likely iron ones due to their prevalent availability and cost-effectiveness at that time despite any theoretical preferences or beliefs about gold's superiority for certain medical treatments.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	But I have ordered this chapter to be divided into sections by reason that the text is easier to find. This suggests an editorial decision to organize content for better readability and navigational ease in written works of medical knowledge from medieval times, possibly to enhance comprehension among practitioners or scholited readers who may not have had extensive training in reading complex manuscripts.
dou cautere olivaire	double-edged cauldron (or instrument)
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauldrons are valuable in coldness and heat under the skull, and for many causes that cause "soda" (a term possibly referring to a headache or fever), among other symptoms such as numerous dreams, pain of density (perhaps alluding to chronic conditions like paralysis, sore throat, and inflammation, and also various diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient must be purified by medicine that removes the head, either two or three nuisances, according to what its virtues and strength allow the malady to endure; and then again put back the head of the malady.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then it will sit between your hands, and put its hands on the skin; after that place the root of your palm on the root of his neck in two places; and when there comes a time to apply pressure, if blood flows from within, heat up the cautery called "olivare," for this is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when it is marked with ink, and you withdraw your hand slowly and remove one piece at a corner, then lift your hand gently; if you see the bone .iij. little solids, then continue using the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take .i. length of silk, put it in a wet and soft cotton bag inside, place it on the mark, let it stay for three years; after that place the bag over it, allowing it to soothe the ostea (bone) until it is healed; then cure the wound called "tetrapharmacia," as long as it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they said the ancients that as long as more blood flows from the wound, it cleanses itself; and for this reason helps healing.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that the cautery must be so used as to break a piece of bone off and then treat that which is broken from the bone; and then care for it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the other said that with this cautery it must be used so lightly and hard enough to bite into the bone just as wide as .i. bradleys (a type of brooch), because then the humors come out from inside; and one must allow the wound to be irritated for a long time overseeing, after which it must be cured satisfactorily.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these .ij. manners of caulteries do not seem very good in the whole; there are no fears that men have seen them anywhere; I think it would be better for me to leave them, because the shoulder-blade is weakened by repeated infusions of natural solutions as we know from others' experiences; and my own maladie's first appearance has been feeble and frail, and the first caulter used more salve and ointment with me for that purpose, and in this way I seek salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of the arrow wound pain in the head chief
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	Whenever in the entire head there comes chronic pain that lasts long, and it should use his maladies for "cochies" (medical terms), and drainage of the chief and oils and plasters; and if they perform the cautery we have mentioned beforehand, and it is not.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be wary if the shoulder joint of the patient is of strong nature and not too cold; however, cauterize over that cautery a little bit as we have previously described.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing cauterization on each horn of the head bone just at the os (bone), as we have previously said, and then apply a second cautery known as "vasselz" (medical terms); additionally, insert suction cups; and position your hand so that you do not see into the bone: in this method, the patient experiences much greater pain than with other methods I will discuss elsewhere; it is necessary for those performing cauterization on the horns to be more subtle than they are when cauterizing most of the head'ran.
dou cautere dou chief	For two types of cautery at the head:
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head there comes sudden and prolonged pain that extends the malady to the oil (ointment), and the shoulder joint is emptied by pharmaceutical medicines, and all other treatments mentioned have been applied as discussed regarding the division of diseases; yet none of this benefits: therefore, perform cauteries according to two manners, namely in medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	When performing medicine cautery, you must prepare a dozen of alum, and strip the skin and scab off slightly; then make an incision where the pain holds tightly so that you can reapply the dozen of alum inside the leather cover; and when it has been reapplied well and firmly, let it remain for about 10 to 23 days; then remove the bandage and treat any fissures with a poultice made of burdock root, leaving the wound for another two or three years.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment, ensuring it's healthy; and if you see to make any medicine combuste a peuplere of alge, et estenduinnece en castres et dame deffondre les arme d’estende :10es.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery is done according to this manner. Heat the iron cautery as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "close" because the head is made in the shape of a clover or has little bushiness, and in appearance being small; and put on the wound tenderly with your hand and generally loosen the fist slightly, until the edge of the pain has been rubbed away completely; and keep your hand so that the arrow does not burn, but goes further, and a stream of blood flows abundantly.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After applying cotton on the wound with silk thread, and placing it for two years; then I place moistened cotton in burlap and then heal the ulcer until it is sound; and if you wish to cauterize this ingrown nail using a cautery called "cultellum," at the point of the instrument, and be careful not to touch the artery in this ingrown nail which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of ingrown nail
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When curing an ingrown nail as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and it doesn't profit from treatment; nevertheless, you must heat the cultellum so that it is white; then draw a line across half a dozen centimeters on the next tooth, and hold your hand once, ensuring that you don't hit an artery while moving along the bone; warn against murmurs of the jawbone when moving, and let neither tic nor spasm appear in it, as well as warning about the removal or significant pain and danger from blood flow in the artery after cauterization, especially for those who are untrained and not experienced, and leave the matter to your discretion; but I will tell you how sutures come off once the arrow is removed, and I will show you where on the body it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cultellum does not suffer the disease, and the pain of the malady persists, then cauterize it again in the same manner as we have said; and heal the wound until it is sound; and if you see, administer with the cultellum mentioned by us or a chirurgical instrument for artery extraction, with the cultellum that has two knives; and these cauteries are better than those and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	: theursin:enchantment. You canteries. Andes:mein itaience deaunque, ous tolere :faitre lesiement encontre. Ifaire. Ire:coule a ounge auroles (14, circaire :give it:coudur jure. Thejour:
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear comes from cold, and we have applied remedies and other treatments as mentioned earlier for division, and the pains do not subside, hence this caustic which is called "punctures", for thus it has the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After piercing the maladroit ear, or when pain is felt in both ears, and you move it slightly away from the root of the ear by wiggling the lobe; then give .x pins to each ear after curing the lobe until it heals.
de la torture de la bouche	This phrase, "de la torture de la bouche," could likely refer to a form of dental or oral manipulation. In the context of medical treatments during medieval times, this might involve using various instruments or techniques for purposes such as adjusting teeth alignment, relieving pain from abscesses, or even extracting impacted teeth. The term "torture" here does not imply harm but rather refers to a therapeocentric approach where the patient's wellbeing is prioritized despite any discomfort that might be experienced during such procedures.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture mentioned here is curable by caustic, which refers to treatments involving corrosive substances. These are specifically for those that involve movement of blood or fluids (as indicated by "muevent de fleume"), and not similar methods such as cauterization from seeping wounds ("sechor") or discharge caused by sneezing ("spame de ners"). The statement contrasts these caustic treatments with other types of procedures that are not mentioned, which are considered to be beyond the scope of this particular medical approach.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this form of torture that silently releases blood and expectorations from the head and gargling, it requires that you caustically treat the maladroit ear with .iij. pins (where .iij. is a placeholder for "three"): one in the root of the ear, another slightly behind the temple, and a third on the alignment between the ears; place the cauterization where it's openly clean, perform the caustic treatment on the head above just below the prominent horn (assuming .ij. refers to "prominent"), and another in the temple similarly extended as if with pins; let the cautery remain until the moisture is dried out completely; this is the form of cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the resemblance of this little knife that we have placed before you, but it is somewhat more subtle and requires that the sword be somewhat larger; after curing him as I have said before, so long as he remains healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	Apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said before, but it does not benefit at all, and the patient's painful pains do not subside, yet he faints for four-and-two incisions: two on each of the top horns of the head, and one under the crown; and you cut the woolly ones (called "velleys") as we have said before, and treat them as we have said before.
de litargie	of bloodletting
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	This disease requires giving the patient many years and medicines that fill up the brain; after treating the head of the patient, he places a staple on the back of his head where the sinapis tree is written or mentioned in remedies, and this is how it is done: as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healthy at this point, it is good; and if not, then he performs three incisions on the crown of the head, descending just to the nape, leaving space between each incision by a little bit, and administering ten large ones for each incision; and cure him as with the others, and if you see that he can bear it, then perform one more incision in the middle; and when necessary, two on each of the top horns of the head, and treat them so long until they are healthy; and those incisions called "olivares," as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness at the crown
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is required that the head be treated for many years and as we have said before; after treating the head of the patient, he makes an incision on the crown and one at each horn, and one on the spine of the neck; if you need more skill, and the body is moist and the sickness is severe, then perform three incisions along the backbone; let him rest so much that his heart remains aroused, and tend to your hand; after curing him until he is healthy, and performing those incisions called "olivares," as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should use forcible incisions only on those who are phlegmatic, and it is required first to treat the brain with many years of care and other cures that we have mentioned in cases where the sickness is large and suffering from painful medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, he performs gargarism and chewing that cleans the brain often with bones of meat; after treating the head of the patient in this way, and making one incision according to what we have said before, and an incision on each horn; and if the sickness is severe and the patient is suffering, then make three such incisions as I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If it is ail malaide, si covent deffacere les chevres que jancrure leu maude ijourne : desme voits d'auce morfat :cien. Amen.
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	ge theire.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy his excessive decline to melancholy occurs, and is his blackened heart moist, then he should drink something so that his brain be cleansed, according to what it shows in front in its division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the head of the blackened heart; after making .i. thin linen well-made, like .i. circle, and putting it around the head; and if the blackened heart is curved, they should be firmly held from all sides; afterwards, the lining made with old sheepskin wool, and fire applied quickly so that he can bear the heat; after removing the circle in places around the head, and let it cool down; and do this for the blackened heart once a week with another suitable treatment until it is cured.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you see to cauterize the patient, there are various types of cautery done. This type of cautery softens the brain significantly; and then it is placed on cotton covered with mutton fat and lard.
de l’awe des eulz	from the hairs
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the signs that I have mentioned in the section come first as the hairs do, and then it begins to drink something cleansing for the head of the blackened heart, and he is kept from all moisture, and let sweat or bath many times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands to turn his head again, and then does the cauterization around the head, and makes .i. cauteries on the two temples where there is a gathering of hairs in these places or in those; and for all the cautery covers all veins and arteries that are underneath the temple, and keep them moistened according to the width of the temple, and command it long enough as you can measure from one edge of the temple; and if you see too much blood flowing out, then lance a little piece of meat where you think it should be.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of veins and incision about how to handle it, as we do not perform any cauterization or hafting under these two bones.
dou cors des larmes	Both corners where tears are formed.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and customary, and they are on the veins under the appearance of the chief's face; and one sees that it is cold humoral fluids coming down from them; and in the beginning of the process I mentioned earlier, a certain cauterization around the head, and .i. two cauteries on the two temples, and some on the two bones; and if he has need more, soothly made, or rather.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Of both tears from between the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you take the medicine according to what we have said in this division, and it does not benefit him at all, for he receives no relief from it; afterwards, the king applies a millivolt of fire treatment or one-tenth of a flame treatment upon the vein; then he performs two small treatments called "clavicles" on each leg, placing them slightly above the joints; and you warn him not to damage the artery that lies beneath.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And it's the form of the clavicle that they call "clavicle":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of oil is softened by illness and dampness, for that treatment with this millivolt which is called "Olivare," its form consists thusly:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see it performing two small treatments on each leg as long as the "sorcilz" (which may be a misinterpretation or transliteration of some word in Old French) are; and do not let go of your hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to what I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	The two hairs which prevent the oil:
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never occurs that the hairs of oils are converted into parched ferns and hold the oil, and then they perform treatments according to two methods: it is about fire or hot medicines.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Or the fire cautery commands that the patient let his hairs grow long and unkempt until they are long enough to be used as tendons; and if they are grasped, he restrains them so that they do not move while still in their infancy.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and equal, however, place the patient on his health; after that, on the paper of their legs make a figure as if it were from fire smoke, and begin to form a sign below the hairs; then I put moistened cotton mixed with musk and parsley oil on the wound, and shape the cautery accordingly:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have cautioned the figure that is small and done so little times, where it will burn at one spot; and the signs of health on the paper show retraction, and hairs lifted to the length of the oil's footprint; then lift your hand and let it sit for two years, after which I put moistened cotton in bear fat until the ostea is healed; afterwards perform the anointing so that it is cured.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs come back and the paper becomes soft again, then reapply the cautery on that point as you have done before; and if the hair are gone, continue to caution until the paper is raised to its natural level and even, and it does not stick to the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The fiery cauteries you command the patient to let their hairs grow long and evenly; then make a paper form of mirror leaf shape; take a piece each of fox saliva and iron cloth, grind them together well; quickly apply it so that it doesn't refreeze, and spread it over the figure on the parchment as if on mirror leaves; and when the illness is contained in one oil only, then you work with one oil for both of them too; and place moistened cotton wick on beef fat underneath; and let the malady's limbs are made whole again and present your twofold showing on medicine, and press a little bit every time when the patient feels sensation from the medicine, as he would feel it like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done that for a long time, then the medicine has taken to its duty.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the sensation has passed, lift up the oil's level again; and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted as it was lifted by force of fire or incision; and if so, then it is well. If this is not the case, renew the medicine on the oil or if the medicine hasn't covered yet, until your works are evened out, and your hairs placed at a point; after that put moistened cotton in bear fat as long as the ostea hardens, then perform the cure of "daphnis" and others as it is called, so long as it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you have learned that you must well care for your work by great caution so that the medicine does not stain one's hair. If the paper becomes soft again and the hair stick to the oil, then reapply the medicine on that spot where the paper is made soft; after the cure as you did before; and until it is healed: And this is the form of the smoke mirror leaves.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	Anderel dit :ilz a lait adonc, etentent les eulz delai sanz leu, seizurre : "li ceste lice de ceu que tu fiche en iefs eschiel teis li leu: Comme ileslissages.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the healing of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	If you heal the fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not yield results, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your healthy one; and treat him so that his head does not move or tremble, do not let it appear unsound; after applying moistened cotton on its forehead either with oil or rosewater, then cauterize the area thoroughly: and if the head is shaped like a bird's feather, tie both sides of the caustic with it; when you see, if there are any points between one head and the other, and if you see as such, it resembles a tent; but all this worthwhile for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open and scraping off the dirt, then dry it; and if it is closed, perform the operation, and drive out any wounds; after placing a caustic shaped like an oval on it, hold your cauterizing tool in your hand at the part just below the oil, ensuring that your hands do not move foolishly; then place the caustic into the grease of the oil and corrode.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you begin with the cautery on bone right away, it would be better. However, if that is not possible, then repeat the cautery once more if you are skilled in doing so and let it rest for three years; afterwards place moistened cotton wrapped in burlap, and perform the drying treatment of healing until it's sound again, and after 40 years put on corrosive medicine as long as the bone remains exposed; and then proceed according to what is indicated by your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a way of treating a fistula that no ancient one mentioned. In the presence of a fistula, and with it exposed; after placing in the crack a very subtle piece of brass like this shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	sanz: it's in theuccle,caire zesting le monde laore :esultatilne lawoise and thetale caitte theuace, theiarture. Ipsumate,claus (aun. Androm, thegesent. Theocurse ici'sall. it'isle.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	naught,oultiaggesur çounthexavanscongelet entaulumdececelle andsseanche.accrescra:13reve iflore:sondes
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Much often have been cracks in the lips called "hair," and especially on children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have discussed in the divisions, and this care does not yield results, instead it causes more harm:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And you must quickly apply heat to those cracks while they are still fresh; after the treatment, cleanse the wound until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the incision of the wound
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the abscess or ulcer arises in the root of the wound or in the palate, or at the roots of teeth, after purulence and rupture, it becomes a fistula; and you must cure it as we have instructed in our divisions, and this does not yield results; instead, it is necessary that you use a small caustic according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, apply a poultice or abscess on the opening of the fistula, and place your hand so that the burning iron touches the bottom of its head, and in this way once or twice after curing what we have instructed in our cures, until it is healed. And if it is thus cured, it is beneficial; and if not, you must discover the wound' Written as a translation from Old French to English with attention to maintaining historical accuracy and preserving original meanings while making it comprehensible for modern readers.
dou movement des dens	double movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, treat it with medicine, but this does not work; then you must straighten the diseased joints in your mouth; afterward, apply the caustic which will form afterwards to a cane placed on the tooth in a similar manner as if you were placing the cane on the tooth; and place the caustic quickly with your hand so that the diseased gums feel the heat coming from the root of the tooth; after removing your hand, keep it there until the diseased parts show signs of improvement; then lift your hand and continue applying the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the mouth with saliva, and let it sit for an hour and a half before brushing teeth.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a way the moving tooth is confirmed, and the softened gum restrained by moisture, and the corrupted wetness cauterizes it.
de la dolor des dens	Of pain from dense dislocation
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	The pain from dense dislocation comes from excessive cold or exposure to it, and medical treatments do not suffice; therefore, there is a need for the use of cautery according to certain methods: and fire cautery and tallow cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	The tallow cautery is such that you need tallow of any kind, and a spoonful of it placed on an iron or silver implement; after applying cotton and wrapping with the tip of a tent, one then forms a ball from the melted tallow and places it onto the painful tooth hastily, until it becomes cool; and this is done often as long as its virtues persist in the root of the tooth. If you observe that the melted woolen material has become damp with tallow, then place it on the opposite tooth, and put a heated iron there until the fire' Written by: John Smith
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The fire cautery set includes a piece of iron or silver and should be large enough so that the heat does not go into the mouth of the pained person. After heating the instrument, it forms around thereafter and is placed on the tooth while holding your hand tightly until the cautery cools down; perform this often because the pain will last for that day or even the next one.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	:xraysuret: "uncautre un fromage. Itse :faire in:esqrie tolcé : The original isecte (décisble, oculi.
des scrophules	Of sores (or more accurately "affections"),
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrophula are of mucus and cold humors,
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When mucus overcomes the channels of pore blood, and especially when it comes from cold constitutions, then you must first disinfect the patient'ranly by medicine; afterward do cautery at the root of the throat, making sure that it doesn’t recur in the throat, but only a little heat.
de la toust	Of breathing (or more accurately in Old French context: "des souffles")
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	All diseases of pore blood are cold humors, and these maladies do not have fever or seizures, and they are ancient in nature; therefore, apply two cauteries at the extremities (referring to the wrists); another applies cautery between the shoulders; and treat with what we call "clavicle," according to the form described previously.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see it, do cauterization on all the points we call "pimples" of which the shape is here before in the disease of ears; and treat these pimples as soon as possible or with incision. After treating the wound according to what has been said previously, apply cautery three times at this point following its shape:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because it is lighter in weight, for that you do only three pieces to make up one piece (possibly referring to the technique of cauterization where less material might be used).
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of dislocation of the shoulder joint.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the shoulder joint is dislocated due to moisture, and it cannot stay in place after being reset; then you must first address the primary dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After soothing the pain on the patient's back and chest, then gently press with your left hand in the area where dislocation occurred; if there is relief during this action, apply cautery with three pricks as described herein.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the wound in his chest, so that it heals with three (in this case, each cautery; and for these cauterizations are made using the cautery which has three pricks; and because of its subtility of a tent.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	Andromane, etre lou, au.iiij.j. Loth inofficio de leu iletheme of mallet.llustère.vocelle voutillements.iij.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After heating the cautery and pressing it against them with wire; after letting the patient rest, and not disturbing his limbs for a long time until he is well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if the dislocation is above, little happens; nevertheless, a cautery is applied over thick cautery on the clavicle, or many more cauteries are given by pressing. For the joint has been directed, and moisture has left it, and the patient's pain and injury have been restored.
dou cautere de pleuresin	thick cautery of pus
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one must perform caustic treatments with the roots of aristologos herb, and in this manner: take one root of aristologos as long as you can find, either dry or still large and long; and smear it with oil, and roast it in fire, and then cauterize. I. a single caustic between the thigh and the collarbone; II. small caustics slightly descending into the part that is below the beard; II. caustics between the fifth rib and the sixth side, inclining backward a little bit; I. another caustic in the navel area, and II. between the hind legs, where between them various caustics are used to push forward those that are located between the hind legs; and do not press your hand too hard, but make it as openly as you would when smelling a rose.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And the ancients said that no one used a caustic of iron appearing to be a barber, and they shave it and place between the ribs until it reaches the apotome; then falls pain in such as we have mentioned in the apotome of the liver. But in this work there is fear or death for the sufferer, or fistula appears that cannot heal.
de la mice	From the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	As we have said about the treatments of small-scale disease and it does not benefit, but they apply.ii. threecauses in this manner: one, two, et laisse li apecereles desgust.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	Of which there is one way that you make it. You perform .iij. (two) cauteries, or .iiij. (three), according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the caustic we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand on all the caustics, but rather apply them always near their backs.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another way of cauterization is that you heat the caustic which has .ij. (two) nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the point where the mouse lies, or where the pain from the patient comes to the left side, and elevate this point according to the location of the nerve, according to the length of the cord, and the caustic be applied according to the breadth of the cord.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After you burn the .ij. (two) nerves until they are perceived from the other side, and then thrust the caustic into it, and thus there will be .iiij (three). And if you see, if you cauterize all of the caustic at .iij. (two) nerves. Afterward when it has had discharge for a long time, which is what we call the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	from dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cauterization is not from dropsy, but rather the method called "asclytes." When you carry out the treatments as we have mentioned in sections, and your care does not benefit at all, it requires that you perform .iiij (three) cauterizations around the swelling, and one on each stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the muscle, and .ij. (three) behind the spine on the vertebrae, and .i. (one) at the place of the tendon; and you must apply these cauterizations very close to the nerve endings.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the caustic over to allow for discharge of pus for a long time, and you do not stop treating the patient with cauterization afterward; healing would occur, and all .ij (three) tendons would be restored together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the caustic for the abdomen is the clavicle that we have mentioned before; and those for the back are ovary-shaped according to what has been shown here.
de l’enfleure des piez	from swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the joints are swollen due to dropsy, and they are covered with yellowish wax, it is required that you perform cauterization on the back of the pie between the little finger (auricularis) and ring finger (annularis); and lift your hand with the caustic turning. And do not go too far into them, so that these yellowish waxes are pierced by the caustic, and you apply it in this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After performing .ij (two) caustications on each leg at the tip of the patella; and you must perform these for both sides of the thighbone in front and behind the thigh, allowing them to remain there, after the other treatments that we have mentioned before.
de la menoison	of the medicine
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the abdominal solution comes from cold and moisture, so much that its retentive and digestive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines, cannot be treated by any methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, if he were to do. I. hot cautery on the stomach as described here or before, or II. cauterizing the abdomen, where III. small cauteries are made subtly throughout one large caustic; and IV. small cauteries on the muscles.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistures abundant and the suffering patient, he will make hot caustic on the hernia, and I. small caustics on each yolk, and II. little cauteries near the large stomach, for the treatment is profitable when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	about the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When hemorrhoids are the foundation or one or more, and they are ancient and consist of large cooled and moisturized corrupted humors, and as we have said in divisions, there is no profit if you make cauterization: I. small cauteries on the spine behind the back, which is far from the umbilical cord but pokes it here and there triangulating; and II. cautery inside the abdomen. II are needed.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and we see the fat swell up, then the abdominal caustic on the stomach as it has been mentioned before, and I. another one on the liver, and II. another on every corner of the caustic cavity; let the cautery last long enough until healed. After treatment, the body will be soothed until fully recovered.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	regarding the body which is called "torture," in English translation of this sentence, with a focus on its importance to understand the medieval medical discourse about torture: Iiiij. ix. leu. The text translate english torture etre les malaise de la lane cauteries dexpresents en cautere desicterence, il :sescript of charnol decalle a peice :mesme leveil:ixtracte parole andreve theu. AIJource aspeculiar venu (XVI. Alliterally in English. I.C: 50meat.
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you comb the hair, if it seems like a razor, and then you burn it all on that spot where you comb the hair, so let your hand be strong enough until the burning wire is born from the hair; and leave the body of the patient as much as he can bear it, either once or twice, and if there is still much of him, cauterize each part as we have said before; after these treatments with ointments you will get better so long as they are healthy; and if you burn a lot on that spot with a great wire, he will receive greater help.
de plaie mal curee	Of a poorly healed wound.
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the sick cannot tolerate cutting or puncturing, which we will explain in their presence, since there comes a disease that cannot be healed without using cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When there is no fistula, and it is old and filled with pus and moisture, if you do the treatment thoroughly to understand all the extent of the tent (which refers metaphorically to the depth or condition of the wound), and insert the cautery accordingly based on how much tissue has entered the fistula, and repeat the cautery until those corrupted parts are healed once, twice, or three times, depending on the amount needed; and warn you from burning the nerves within it, and large veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestines, then advise against these burns immediately, and think that they are not permanent; after treating the tent until it is completely healed, and if the tissues have bone-like consistency for a distance of thirty centimeters (this detail seems anachronistic but is maintained here), you will know that the fistula has been entirely cured. And if those materials are not ossicles, then you'll see how the os has turned black and corroded; and in this way as one we shall explain to you.
de la maladie des reins	Of the disease of the kidneys.
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of froth comes from heavy rains and strong winds, and it does not take into account women's complaints, so it is required that you perform cautery on both sides of the bladder using one part at each side with the clavicle (referring to a technique or position for treatment), as we have previously mentioned. And if in this manner your cauterizations are made a mile apart from each other, and they make greater help.
de la vessie	Of the bladder.
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from pressure and moisture, so that it retains urine, then he strongly applies fire to the part below the bladder, where the hair begins at each side of the penis, and one on the right and one on the left, and each time burns as much as needed; and he applies a strong fire behind, or if you need it in both places, and thus burns so much to the loins that they do not hurt us. And he applies another fire backward, or if you have any need for it, burns the clavicle according to the shape mentioned before.
de la marris	Translation of "de la marris" is straightforward:
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and it does not allow conception to occur, and the flowers are corrupted with delayed ends; and when they come forth, great pain is felt: therefore it is necessary that he applies two fire cauteries within the bone, as we have said for the bladder, and two fires backward on the spine, and burns the clavicle according to what we have said.
de la hainche	Translation of "de la hainche" is straightforward:
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistors descend into the abdominal cavity of the haunches and for this reason it ceases to move, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and they find the division inside the hiccup area at about one cautery looking like a circle, and in front of the hiccup within the cavity as it turns, so that the abdomen bears this circle; and if he burns such as we have done to the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these burns are not present, then he makes three large fire burnings of the olive branch' market, and does them also in such a manner as we have made with all other parts; and treat until it is sound again.
de la dolor de la hainche	Translation of "de la dolor de la hainche" is straightforward:
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When the pain comes to the abdominal cavity of the haunches and it is due to coldness and moisture, and he needs to be cured as we have said in the division and treatment does not suffice, and the illness is ancient; therefore, it is necessary for him to purge the patient from the large humors with foul-tasting pills or other similar clean pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	le maundes coustriventure ainslaisse ço aief ouiij. Leurs in theesme aile dexemale of itsesle: lesemejour aout, cesarre depelements desirdesme ciàrere enamajurle lichimejars: itelmes'surelce:ligne.meille fromire laissacade. What thegallicare. Leave.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, apply fire cautery to the circle we have mentioned before in regards to the hinge dislocation; but do it so that the circles contain the entire hinge, and all its strength is articulated.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And that's how it is done in sciatica when the pain is located in the hinge and does not reach down to the thigh or leg; but if it reaches there, then he makes approximately two fire cautions on each side where the patient says his pain is, and about four cauteries above the ankle; and either cuticular cautery is applied, or the muscle thickness is flexed, and if the patient feels that the pain extends down to two feet or up to three feet from there, then he will cauterize at that point or in three places on the "poins" known as "points."
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if skillfully done, he makes more; and when the pain is located on the groin down towards the thigh, he performs cuticular or circular cautery there and takes great care in all his cauteries so as not to scald the nerves and large arteries, and does not cause greater harm or contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen others who cauterized above the foot joint, and allowed it until the leg was completely released, and even the foot joint itself, and all of the foot joints were examined and found to be ruptured; after a stomach solution that ultimately led to death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two separate parts, perform fire cautery on one and the other according to this manner. // The surgeayer said when doing the fire cautery for the hinge joint, do it with a certain iron piece, as thick as a nautilus shell or slightly less, or between bars and/or along the sides by gaps of about a finger's length; and the bars should be turned over each other at intervals, and also like bricks, and use an iron hammer well made; and that is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And scald it until all of the red and sentient tissues are destroyed, then place it on the hinge joint malady's body part, and turn it along its healthy side; and the cauterizer repeats with another two cauteries and leaves the wound for three years; afterwards make a plaster of burdock, leaving the open wound for ten lengths, after which the treatment until he is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucias says that we use little of this cautery for the fear of its side effects, and only a few who do it; and all in all, these are good cauteries, which can withstand it if it hurts.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in two parts
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When the pain comes on the back, or by falling down or from hitting, or from too great evacuation, and no one's similar things spredition of cold, forefore that it is applied to thise quens cautere:
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is required that the bad smelling pills or similar things are avoided afterward; they make it on his back, where the pain holds three lines of holes, and in each line about five to nine punctures according to its nature and quantity that the patient can bear; and these punctures must be done following the name "pins"; and if you see, do three or four punctures at the clavicle according to this shape:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness comes often in small children, and the signs of onset are that it becomes tightly bound when they start moving, and fear; and you turn it at the back of the spine and look at the appearance coming from other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	If you see this and you want to treat it with puncture using the scalpel in accordance with this shape:
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the puncture is applied to every part of the vertebrae equally; and if you see, then puncture along the spine using a scalpel in two or three lines, with points placed close together. After cure so that it heals according to what we have said, and beware not to use pus-filled punctures which are full of nerve fluid.
de la dolor des jointes	from the joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is caused by moisture that spreads to each limb' Writers often refer to this condition as "gout," and when it arises from a cold cause and cannot be healed with medicines, then one must treat it using punctures in part: apply many punctures around the joint area, and make the pincers-like scalpel according to this shape: insert them into the joint.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if there is need to puncture the face of the joint, do it with a scalpel called "point." If the pain spreads downwards and affects other joints, and this occurs often, then puncture each knee or elbow with three or four points on that part, using the pincers-like scalpel throughout; but if you must go further, do it only until the health of the joint is restored.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pain spreads to the back and hands, apply the puncture mentioned in our treatise; and if there is no more pain on his hand, make punctures on every joint of the arm. If the pain arises from far away or from the shoulder blades, then puncture each one part, and govern it well for him and with good medicine. For if you give good treatment and purging fluid; so he will be healed by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the procedure of cutting through stone
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the procedure involves pressing down on the belly and it is done neatly, it's essential that when you see curing him, he does not vomit any food throughout the day; and to let things lie under his abdomen so that the child deflates from its belly; after this, have him sit between your knees, commanding him to straighten out his arm until it is repaired, and rant on both sides of the procedure above the point where the hilts are, and indicate with a sign similar to half a circle over the shoulders; then use the cautery accordingly:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Until he is white and feels tender; then massage the hips on his side; and the servant strains his hand so that it does not return to its original position; and do well with the thighs of the patient, and place an iron coin and a bandage under them, and another similar spot above which you burn the hands; then place the cautery in such a way on your palm, and hold up the right arm and left so long as you treat the bone, and if it does not fracture on the first attempt, continue to press until it breaks; and warn secretly that when you are performing the cautery, do not let him escape; that he should not burn; and by this method, his maladies shall not die or cause other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And you must know that when the cautery on a child does not reach the bone with it, your efforts are of no use. It is necessary that the cauterizing children should be subtle according to their age; and after 20 years, the wool's burning from its shoulder until it is well soothen, and let the sufferings last for 40 days in his back be healed sone; and you commandment that liere douche.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after about 12 years, when he wants to get up, he will receive a well-made bandage and wear it for another 12 years; and have good rest so that he does not work too much, and avoids excessive drinking and eating, and loud yelling; and when he follows this instruction, he becomes completely cured. And I will say this after the treatment of tailor in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	The text is a snippet from an Old French medical manual regarding abdominal procedures or practices. Unfortunately, without additional context, providing a direct translation line by line may not convey its full meaning accurately due to possible archaic language and specialized terminology. However, attempting the task as instructed:
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When other parts of the body receive similar treatments and are known, seeing that they no longer grow, then he made two cauteries according to their quantity, and about one-third of their circumference; after this treatment as we have said; and none of the ancients did say that it should be cauterized at three angles in this manner:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first sign of inflammation is noted and make a line above the enlargement for increased spread above the practice, and another below it; but put your hand on all the cautery to avoid further complications. However, the first cauteries are more difficult and messier.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	Of old pain in no member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain arises in no member, or from falling or injury, and this pain lasts long, then the treatment of medicine does not suffice; therefore it must be cauterized with the instrument called "pins," and the cautery according to the length, thickness, frailty, strength, position of twisting, and location of pain. If it is healed after the first caustry, that's well; if this is customary, another one must be applied on top of it, for it is necessary that you continue cauterizing so long as the malady remains in the nearby member because otherwise it should change into a new one.
de meselerie	Of measuring (the text likely continues into an explanation about methods used for assessing conditions before treatment)
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The measurements are never aided by the use of cautery, and most particularly this disease that arises from putrefaction of blood and melancholy. Can you see it being caustred at the beginning, and when it is treated according to what we have said in division; and do not leave or suffer delay, for there doubtless will be a corruption throughout the whole maladie, as if I made two cauteries on top of each other: one between the bones towards the chevaux's end, another behind the heel at the base, and three underneits; and let your hand so that the caustry become thin enough, and so long that outward humors can come forth from the bone.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if it is scattered throughout the body; and it appears clearly, indicating that you must use these kinds of cauteries for the ones we have mentioned before or chiefly, one on the neck, two on the spine along the back, two on the spine along the back, one great under the crucifix and another beside it, two on the shoulder blades; and two under the ribs, and two on the tendons behind, and one at each joint of hands and feet, and in the cavities of the fingers; and warn against nerves that are working below the waist, so you do not burn them; and never a time made cautery on the hip bone, nor another on the stomach bone, nor another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And you know that the more I use cautery, the more help it gives; and you know that the sickly do not feel pain from cautery as much as the healthy do, because their organs are completely corrupted. It is necessary for the cauteries to be large and small depending on the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in iron techniques. After healing with wheat flour mixed with honey and other treatments until it becomes well again.
de enfleure	And of enflammation
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When inflammation does not occur in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it's still not well again; then some cauterization is done on the muscle underneath the skin according to its size and proportion of the limb. Then a small incision may be made near the bone joint; and so, cauterizing the nerve that makes the member silent, until it becomes stone-like; and in any case, no cautery is done on the hand, palm, or back, on the nerve exit where the limb's movement stops. And thus there can be no intervention without knowledge of the limbs and movements of the moving body parts, which are connected to the inflamed bone.
de albaras	And of arteries
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease affecting "arteries" is old, and the medical engineering of medicine is worthless, then one cauterizes with a little bit of cautery according to the size of the artery's exit; so long as the bleeding has become bone-like, and turned its color, then treat it with wheat flour mixed with lentils and oil roses and plantain leaves, blood from cow and ewe, and mix each one by one, or else melted in a linen cloth and bind to him until he is well.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of sore by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	The beginning of the sore comes first, and you shall see to arrest it; if the cautery that appears like .i. circle surrounds the entire area around the sore. Everyone said they also perform cauterization in the midst of the sore; however, I do not think this is beneficial since there is a risk of ulcers and decay, which has never happened to me before, and it seems more appropriate that it be surrounded by the circular cautery, as we have mentioned in many instances.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of an edema that cannot die, as it persists despite various treatments or attempts at intervention. In medieval medicine, edemas were often considered a sign of humoral imbalance in the body, which could not be 'cured' but rather managed through symptom relief and other supportive measures.
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	As for any disease that is called "adubelati" (a term from medieval medical literature referring to diseases with inexplicable symptoms or progression), and it delays death or due to superfluity such as excessive weakness when the ailment has advanced, or because of loss of strength; see how you must first cauterize around it with many small burns by puncturing. Afterward, leave it so. For it will delay dying further. Because it will continue to postpone death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it through all the cautery, wherein heating the cautery forms its shape; as this signifies that thorough and consistent application of heat during cauterization could mold or form part of the treatment's structure. In medieval medical practice, the use of fire was a common method to treat various conditions, with specific techniques described in texts like these. The underlying principle suggests systematic heating influenced by the nature of the condition and its response to such interventions.
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And keep your hand in the midst of that disease called "adubelati" as long as you have perceived its course, and such cauterization that it allows the pain to diminish in various ways so that the flow of pus is alleviated; afterward when healed completely. This passage implies a hands-on approach by medical practitioners during cauterization procedures for "adubelati" diseases, where observing and feeling the progress was essential. The goal was to ensure proper treatment duration until complete recovery from the condition while managing symptoms like pus discharge and pain throughout the process.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire by iron (a general description of a cauterization procedure using heated metal, such as an iron rod or implement). Cauterization with fire in medieval medical treatises often involved the use of hot irons to seal wounds, stop bleeding, and prevent infection. The term "li cure dou feu par fer" could refer to a specific technique used during the era wherein heated metal was applied directly to affected tissues, possibly implying that this method has merit or efficacy based on contemporary medical theory at the time.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	scredectemote iterrangre:screment ofx (an <it. Theyse itèveille. de llore ceauchece,achape,asting apele celange. Inchappent.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of those who come to pieces at the joints
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times it happens that the joints suffer from a disease which we call "closed" according to our understanding, and is a great harmful thing that breaks the bone; therefore the treatments for this disease are as follows: fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery means burning the affected area in such a way that it resembles an arrowhead, and the iron used must fit perfectly to allow the nail to penetrate all parts without deviation; afterward you heat the nail very high above the point of entry, and turn your hand around the entire length of the nail until it begins to wobble at the entry point; then let it rest for three years so that it starts to produce rot; afterwards, make an infusion with known bitter herbs ground into a powder, and leave the infusion on the wound all night, and pull out the nail from its roots. Then treat the puncture site by massaging until healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they are converted by external forces on the bones and joints; it is in such a way: take an iron chain or nail, or an arrowhead, and place it under the nail and around it, which means having rough spots all around it; then put the iron chain over so that it presses well towards the root of the nail, and firmly hold your hand turning back as if you are finding a path through water to the bottom of the root, and allow the hot water heat up until it reaches deep into the root, and endure the painful heating for an hour; then leave it for this time. Then make another one like this for all that remain in your body after these processes have been completed, and cure the wounds from charring with ointments or salves.
li cure dou trembler	And it heals double tremor.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	And if some suffer from coldness of the limbs, or quartan fever, or any other such ailments, it is necessary that you perform three cauteries on the vertebrae of the backbone; and one cautery between each spine; and one cautery or pincers, and one cautery under the stomach with olive oil cautery; then let the shaking stop and the strength will return from the coldness.
des pustules puans	And if there are pustules.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	coment siens lakes naskan. Laveri a laisse ites aoutre lou french: ounfait. Theorok theare incoment, en français. Celtics a himen (20135 from itera. Theil.
quant li artere est copee	how the arteries are constricted
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times it happens great bleeding from the artery that is compressed at the wound which reaches the flame of fire, or incising an abscess, or to cauterizing a limb member, and such things; and it is very grievous thing to be choked.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in general, when this happens one must urgently place a finger on the vein wound to apply pressure and hold it firmly until there is no more bleeding; then light small and large olive caustic fires on that area until everything turns red; then proceed .i., or great or little according to the wound, while keeping in mind that the artery continues to route, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger or keep your digit, and continue burning it as long as the bleeding does not stop.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the blood clot forms below your finger when you tie it above the vein and the cautery has stopped working, then quickly take another of these fire-cauterized tools.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue doing this one after the other as long as the bleeding continues; be careful not to burn the nerve behind and avoid any further injury on the already injured area; knowing that when blood flow returns from an artery, it cannot stay still very well if the artery is large, unless one of the four methods we mentioned: olive cauterization, extraction, tight ligature, or medicines applied which have the power to stop bleeding. And bind and stretch it properly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	sang desengles. Il'sesaintels choses :ceu en casques aide vous cestin theure chosines languine la courteinsaulicule. IAle italiens (1023xel profits oun. In:en lesedre leaguesans, an English.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to any and he has no sight nor medicine present, then he should place his two fingers on the vein wound as we have said, and stretch it upwards above the wound and the vein; and not move him, but keep his moisture cold as often as it is very cold so that he remains frozen and engorged and stuck above the wound; and make enquiries about such cautery and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This marks the beginning of Book II of the treatises on surgical operations.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have said in the first chapter that such a disease requires fire or moist cautery and certain operations and treatments; and I have placed this chapter here so as to proceed through it more quickly, for what is meant to be done later on will be done by me.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so I begin to say that the patient'ayer, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in any other cauteries, for therefore it requires greater care.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter there are often evacuations of blood when opening veins, and making incisions for abscesses, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you that you should not undertake such foolishness. For there are many people coming to cures from various kinds of patients who suffered so much from the misfortune or audacity with which they dealt with their illness, and the severity of their condition; and therefore one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of those who give their consent, and say: "Wait, I am well"; and the illness is stubborn. You do not need to allow those who come to you in this manner; rather, place greater care in your honor than in your cautery, make judicious decisions rather than frequent ones based on what you are certain of, and avoid conjecture; use prognostication and indication for the treatment of your patients so that their good health is converted to a reputation of renown, glory, and praise. And this will help you with such an esteemed name.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dearly beloved, our Lord teaches you good understanding and right action; if you desire to receive the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter to be discussed in the form of chapters, according to what is before it as a Cautery Chapter that I have prepared at the head so that you find it easier to deal with such matters.
dou chief plein d’aigue	A full chapter brimming with water.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It is said that this disease often affects children at birth and when the baby' Written in Old French:
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I'alme maladres. Si les peccae, et desir deffacree. Aillotre voye, seysame loix ceuere. Et leu che aitioinse createre quels l'Aeuf escripture of thecaust oungeuile meeslore:nce ofsaintel sute en itis. Whatre leatradice defface anderai. Iacme :er (afeitre lacreature,sacre.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I see. i. a child with wet cerebral hemorrhage, and the head was swelling each day that he could not lift it without support; and he thought so much moisture that it became death, and this moisture is assembled underneath the bone above the sphincter, between the skull and the bone; and the operations are such that the moisture is located between the skull and the bone, and the incision is small enough so you make a large cut in the head's center; and it should also be as long as two of us, until the moisture runs out, and then there is another form called:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more congested and the incision is larger, then make two cuts in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is located in the bone, and you see the commissures of the skull's overlying parts, and the fluid gushes out when pressed with your hand between these two points, and this does not reassure you; it requires that you make three cuts in the head's center according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision is made to remove the swelling; afterwards I draw drapery and powders into the wound, and apply vinegar and oil, and leave it for five days; then he dresses the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing the head to be gradually returned to its place, and feeding the patient dry meat from a few ounces of moisture until the limb is stabilized and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of making an incision is to look at the size of the abscess, and the moisture accumulated within it; because no one has ever seen it before or behind, nor on the right side, nor on the left side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Then he makes the incision and removes the abscess, and according to what you have at hand; and warns that it does not block the artery; and allows blood clots in the limb so that the maladies die out with the drainage of fluid and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of return
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there comes a disease called "catarrh" in the ears or throat that is ancient and medicinal treatment does not help at all; hence, using cauterization with this method can stop it by cutting into the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, you must not cover them up, so that the patient can return his head to its original position; after rubbing the wound with a rough cloth until arteries are visible, then press on the patient's neck with one or two of these cloths in turn at both ears, and few returns thereof; then mark the points with an incision, cut out one or two punctures each as wide as half a part. This should continue so long as it keeps vein fluid running from the bone above, and this continues until the large incision is made in the head's center.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see a puncture underneath the artery and cut it off above, cutting as much as two of us.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the venom is continuously gushing forth from the bone.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	(sang: envelocare, the flesh; deesse.
de emigrainne	ncipherrevesse, soileuxthela tellexinsteilletifrevewache ​imphauntye
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an ancient migraine comes, and acute catarrh due to moisture in tears and heat in the ears and old foreshadowed signs, and it is treated with methods of medicine healing and such things do not help him at all, if we extract arteries from temples and cauterize them as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them so that it makes the patient's temple hairs fall again and hears in the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is reinserted wounds only rarely found in men who are too cold; if it is inserted back, then loosens his malady clothes of any rough fabric, raises the skin with warm water so that the artery appears manifestly, and takes a forceps according to this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then you scrape the artery gently while it is in the forceps, then lift it with pincers upwards, and remove well all of those materials from each part; and if the artery is thin, turn the point of the curette to that part, then wrap that section according to the size of those 2 fingers. Because if it is not wrapped, it will spring back out completely in every way.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And take out the blood from those 2 parts, just .ij; and if the artery is large, it must be sutured in .ij places with a strong double thread of silk, so that no clotting occurs before wound healing, and drainage of blood comes out at each stitch; then remove any excess material between those two points immediately after placement, and if you see the cutaneous cautery from the cautery blade just to the bone as long as there are still no hairs in that area; this is another part of the procedure.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	And the cauterizers are an aid to finish the moisture since it is of great assistance in managing excessive moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	naturelume aude toutifreatierse,essez.tantecite:sangelicagainse. iewe les clesse tandace.sicle,erniquelles andent.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the patient is too weak, he holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the knives, a large space, and when you have drilled down into them, and placed hot iron on them until they bend to the bone, and close the vein in these spaces; and separate the joints of the knives because this cautery is not well suited for all things at once; and it forms this cautery:
des larmes	Of tears comes (Here begins a new sentence related to tears)
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from eyes flowing down veins that are beneath the testicle's head of strong heat, and there is no benefit in medicine made by such practices; you can see the face of the sick darken like someone who has been trembling, and feels their forehead movement as if they have had a shudder; it is oil held and moist that causes the hair on papers to be singed, and burns the papers with the heat of tears, which is necessary for this type of treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it the "contused cure," and you make incisions on the patient with this illness either two or three equal fissures across their forehead according to the length of the forehead, and sometimes one of these cuts goes down into the face below the forehead as well; and for each of the other two cuts, you extend it down towards the chin by pushing upwards so that they do not affect the arteries located above those areas where the papers were burned; also avoid touching continuation of the mandible's teeth, making one wound twice as large as necessary when joining the incisions.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	And you will appear a piece of sponge and much cloth to absorb the patient's blood, then pour the hot quartet by one part as follows:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And the incisions are made from the temple to just below the second incision; and scrape off all the clotted blood that lies between the two fissures above the bone where it has formed a scab, then make another thin incision following this one, and further extract this hot spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you pour it into the first fissure using an instrument called "cultellar," and then divide this tool by two parts; one being sharp like a scalpel to cut through tissues or blood clots, while the other is smooth without any cutting edges. The shape of the cultellar would be designed in such a way that it allows for these distinct functions within the same instrument during the procedure.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Andalus: siens deffant lierge laisse les pei leu seinsel incessent andes toche deffan:espaired entendre despres ofteisallierge de:age eufin: Iagainns, liape:eaux laitil.
dou reume des eulz	great pain and injury.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	There is no one who does not experience acute catarrh often, and you see the eyes tightly shut and small, and impair vision, and burnt papers; and hair falls, and at the head there forms pain in the brain, and he has stern dorsal convulsions; yet you know by these accidents that such materials and catarrh do not come from many veins alone, but also because of this treatment.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	Then command the patient to have his forehead pressed downwards, and make a large incision right in front of it; just enough so... And begin from the temple'inaside outward to the bone; and keep your hand away from the temple nerves that move towards eating; and when the bone is exposed, let all the blood flow into an absorbent sponge, then insert cotton between the two halves of the incision and apply linen; place above the bedclothes in oil and vinegar, and keep from pulling it off; once it has been set, it must be rubbed until it begins to grow again, then treat with excising methods that tighten flesh.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In part, take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophonium, and apply it to these wounds in order to tighten the flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	The mentioning "de l'estoupement des oreilles" likely refers to a medical practice involving the manipulation or pressing of the ears, possibly as part of an ear-related treatment or procedure in medieval medicine. However, without additional context from the broader text, it is difficult to provide a comprehensive understanding or translation. In general terms:
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that which affects the ears is one of the three things: wheat grains, animal flesh or stone fragments or similar things if it were as hard as iron or soft like water and other things; seed such as corn, barley, peas; or something flowing like water and airy things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	If it hurts in the ear or any other way that touches the ear, and it does not grow. Soleil, and then apply on le sanc de l'eveur; etre si il veinne laisse ennuye.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If she jumps with the tweezers, it is good; but if not, apply gentle extraction of a small double-jointed louse below; and if she does not jump by that, make an ear sling and fasten the point in the center of the hair or at the edge of the ear hole very tightly so that nothing can enter with the cotton swab there; then treat thoroughly, as often it comes just like we have said; and if it does not come to a certain extent, take some glue, apply the birds, and use any instrument suitable for this purpose, and place a little cotton inside.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she jumps with all these things that we have said and fractures the ear so that the incision appears red hot and spasms, and the way of the fracture is such that you make the first stitch for the head malady on the cranial side, and remove the sinew according to its strength, then let the malady sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small fracture at the root of the ear in grease or fat depending; and make the fracture also like a moon, so long as you press it into the wound, and let the physician according to his will suction it hastily from your mouth; and treat until he is well.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain and it swells, apply gentle extraction; and if it cannot come out, make a small but strong incision according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And apply an incision to that grain. But do not make such a thing when you think the grain is moistened due to ear moisture; until you have performed several pieces of this procedure; then extract it gently with tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction remains light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In the water when it covers the malady uses coughing of deep breathing first, and saturate your ear with many cotton balls there; and if she jumps through that hole in my ear or where the water is. If it does not jump through such a hole, it's good. Then take many small pins according to their length, and gently heat them at one fire so that they are lightly, and of her malady sineaus de saille thereofere cest qu’il est en la ce que vous veue lien du lou maundes
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the pulling out of the beast, if it is small in size, like we have said for division; but if it is large and can be felt, prepare for extraction of pincers; and this is the easier to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of ticks from infected ears, when you carry out the treatment as we have said for division and distillation; however, it does not yield results if you do not look at the ear in the sunlight: if there are no ticks present, carefully use tweezers to remove them, and if they are present, take a cotton swab of this shape that is contained herein.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it should be narrow and wide above. Insert the more subtle chief into the ear according to the degree of pain from the illness, then form an extract with all the cotton; do this often until everything comes out. If they don't come out, remove the cotton swab as I have said in the previous passage; and if they still remain, apply distillations that the ancients tried at cutting ticks, and you will find or treat them by means of distillations; and if you draw oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument according to its shape which you see: as we have mentioned in the previous passage.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be made of silver or gold, with a small hole above for distillation; and to press inside the distillation using an instrument well-made of metal, if you see a sharp knife and wrap cotton around its point; then pour your oil or juice into the cotton, and whatever medicines are in the cotton, place it in the ear; then press all over the cotton with the knife, pressing gently until the oil has been distilled from the ear; feel the pain within the wound, and this is one type of distillations. Prepare a small fire so that the medicine can be distilled into the ear; and ensure it is not too cold, because medicines are not effective if they become too cold.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Regarding ear picking
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with holes in their ears; and this same thing happens to us at the picking of a wound or of tissue growing within the ear, so that these actions do not ever cause any punctures in the ear if we can see them well; and it never happens for an insignificant amount where one could see.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	However, when it appears that the puncture occurs in more than one condition, and within this space it is necessary to place the ill ear in the sun; and look herein: if you see an abscess appearing, the work has the following form as described below:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	Etteaostres en iaueauce cestant d'apres envoye, en iewesre de senginpree: oupute pice iten: invenant. Enchants entailtroie. Ifindent, andouls
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the swelling occurs in the ear, take a subtle but swift knife and burn it slightly with fire, then place on the wound of the ear. If you feel the swelling that he feels great pain when hearing, pierce quickly, and make sure not to bruise the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the size of the opening, and an Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not do any work on the wound until it is healed, or take a tent and apply rosewater and powder with vitriol; and if you see discharge from the ear, cover the tent and move another moistened tent made of oil roses and wax, until the discharge stops; then cure it so that it becomes healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is blood coming in, dip an sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are related to distillation therapies.
de la char des papieres	from paper strips
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is where they come from paper strips when they are wet and dry, it requires that you extend them with tweezers and pincers, and cover them with a sponge of its roots; then apply rosewater powder.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without decortication, then the cauterization done with a subtil cauterizing instrument after incision is sufficient; and many times repair them without any return to their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those root parts burn and do not regrow.
de la gresle	(Note: Again, there seems to be a possible error in translation due to unfamiliar terms such as "de la gresle." It might relate to a type of material or procedure used during cauterization but is not immediately recognizable without further context.)
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times come paper strips of things that appear to be gravel in form and hardness, and because of this disease is called "great hail," and the treatment is such: take warning if the great hail moves one way or another, it's a simple thing to know; do then make wide, then scratch each part lightly, then pick them up with pincers, and cover them. If you don't feel any resistance when piercing through the paper, nothing hurts the patient; if there is a large fissure, he must dress it with a stitch, and cure it so that it becomes healthy; and if it is small, do not apply force, as ointments will restore it almost instantly.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the great hail is inside of the ear, and they are pinceures, then it does not hurt nothing; and cope the grandes parties toleuns d’aigue, and cox1301574980s de la moyenne, et siens 503.
de la graisse des eulz	of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exudate is a fat that is spread on top of papers above, and this happens more to children than to anyone else, and it hurts much in their eyes, and they come down the morning with cataracts, so they cannot look at sunlight because tears form on their eyes; therefore, they lie against their faces afterwards, and sleep there, and their papers underneinas are moistened by which the child's face and appearance have covered with exudate that appears in oil. And when you press your hand to your body and feel the oozing inside.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way of the work is that it puts the patient's head on your cleanlinayer; and then take a linen sheet in the shape of a circle according to the amount of exudate from each part, place it underneath, press one side with your hand and another, so that the oozing becomes collected within the circle; then make an incision near the wide opening, ensuring it is not larger than the wound made at the vein's entry point; continue to sew the skin over such a gap until you have covered the exudate; and in various configurations, exudate comes from the incision according to the shape of a piece of melted fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract then from one piece of cloth between your hands afterward and turn your hand to the right and left as much as it is spread; and make sure that you do not push into the incision so that there is no break in the entire skin around the wound, even with oil still on it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exudate does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then lightly press the fissure so that it appears; then extract as we have described, wrap with linen and water cloths, and place it underneath, and brace it like a pillow.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such homes that crush ropes and place them on top to corrupt the moisture which is delayed; then he treats so they become healthy. And if it reaches the point of pressure at the incision site, he softens the embolisms until they become healthy.
des poilz des papieres	Of paper hairs
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper hairs are born other than their natural state, and become old, if they harm the hairs, and bring on diseases as common as accustomed tears and softening of the paper hairs and yellowish discoloration until it is due to destruction of the hairs; and therein he treats with four methods: or by fire caustic in one case, and by medicinal water according to what before existed or surgeon'ayer of cautery, whether by incision and suturing or by bandages, as I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the malady on your healthy side; then turn the paper towards your left hand; if it becomes converted, it's good; if not, stick an awl at every .i. point above; and do this either near the margin where hairs sprout from there or at these spots where other than natural hairs are found, and turn the whole sheet around with the paper underneayer, and then work in the part of the paper overlapping those misplaced hairs, from the large margins down to the small ones; then pull out .i. point; make a little tent of linen cloth and coverlet above the paper, and place above it an image resembling a spouted lamp; everything must be according to how much you raise the paper that is designated for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	:se. : a preci: ether vairies. Thej.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if in another way: and it is that you draw the paper of a figure as we have told, at 23 times in three lines according to the shape which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then take this that lies beneath the small forces exactly according to the shape which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you have no means to hold the pincers, and what is done is not equal, take an awl or two threads of .i. length, and insert them into the figure; and insert another thread near the large margin, and the second thread near the small margin, and join together your threads equally; then move your hand gently, and move everything on the skin where you have stitched as we have told, then assemble the .ij. flaps of the wound by sutures, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess appears at your incision, soothe it with ointments and similar warm compresses:
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and there never happens that the paper's hair is converted: it requires that you use what we have said about the incision; however, the stitching in both places is more artificial:
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The healing of the wounds is according to this form: and it requires that you convert the paper and do so in accordance with what I have said, and then make .ij. stitches as artfully as the long hair and wide span of the sponge are; and take hold of the .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then join them subtly over what lies underneath the paper's oil, and tighten the .ij. stitches in their respective parts; and leave it for no longer years, and the skin which has been stretched will harden and crackle and shrink until it returns to its original state:
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, then you use greater forces, and cure him until he is healthy; and when the wound has been sutured and lifted the paper, and the hair no longer holds. It is the form of the .ij. stitches that you make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operations are such that you need a fine needle, and thread a silken and fine thread of .i. length; then assemble the hooks subtly, and place them both so that each filament is about one palm long; then take another finer silken thread in short pieces, and join the chief to the other; then put your malady's tip near your skin so that this operation appears to be declared, because it is a delicate and fine operation, then insert the needle into the root next to the hair growth and pierce it carefully through the paper tissue as you go upward from below the natural hair; then pull out the hair until it reaches the thread's chase, and put in the new hair there, if there are .i. or .ij. or .iij. or more than that amount of hair; then remove your hand so that the new hair grows along with the remaining hair through the paper tissue:
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	ould leu le langes:savoir itpare le monde parlez lou le soulsaintléves, en le.ioldes: fromage ofvainstère legeleaves aic and thencause (13. And thenne laisse.a verre. Then
de la porriture de l’oil	Of moisture of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	This disease which is known as "aleacrati" or the porriture arises in oil, if it has of .ij. manners: one natural and one unnatural.  And occurs by sealing a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of treatment for this involves cutting open the suture (wound), removing the scales from it, and placing linen sheets within it while ensuring that the wound is clean; there is no need to use things that dry or restrict in its healing. For if you do this, the disease may become worse than before; but the work of softening agents, such as fenugreek, and boiling water or rosemary seed cooked with linseed oil, and ointments melted into any oil, and wrapping it all up in a tent for treatment.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment require that you give it no healing according to its original shape; and these aforementioned treatments which we have mentioned are not causes for the return of this malady in its previous form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the cause that arises in oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease which truly is arising in the flesh and is natural and occurs from wounds and fissures and cauterization and similar things; and the method of treatment for it involves piercing an awl into it so that there be one double thread, and the point placed on the charred area, and then carving into the right margins as much to the left side so that the threads bend in .ij. loops around the char; then is the char above all of the awl, and a cup wide at .i. milliliter size.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	:i.comme a las and theire le f13rd:eslaterio.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a fissure or tear or cautery, it is necessary that you make a straight incision under the hairs of the skin; and according to what has been said above; then open between the two legs of a tent as I have mentioned; and one must perform this work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and the masters' expertise involves many things that can help return the figure to its natural state; and the patient themselves, according to what needs to be done and various treatments.
dou soudement de la papiere	Dissolution of parchment
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this soldering occurs in part the same way that above-mentioned parchment is dissolved with white oil, and it cannot move or perform its natural operations; it is necessary to cut a razor blade underneath the parchment, and lift it up; and treat as pinches, so long as you follow what has been said at the microscopic scale subtlety, not too aggressive nor too deep, that the patient does not suffer when the microscalpel touches or bleeds oil; and make such an incision, upon which you scrape together the assembled parts, lightly so that parchment returns to its natural shape; and it is cleaned without using water with salt, and rinsed in warm water, and dried with a cloth; then place linen tents between the parchment and oil moistened furiously; and above the oil use woolen thread soaked plentifully; and afterwards use tweezers and other suturing materials until it is sound.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the oil's upper part
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Seal that the nerve is according to two methods: it is nervous and appears like a hard one or with another that is not nervous, but looks smooth and stiffened by jelly as if when touched by iron and treated in pincers, it cannot move; and both appearances begin towards the great wrinkle, and grow little and little until they cover all vision and light and movement of oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	esle. oun: lesl'souesla lecture of the it'upon, andes ailmesures:log. Theesure desires and theater asuphe. Commentary.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And guard that the spatula does not touch the tender flesh and break it, and that the needle is not seen; after making an incision, place a small piece of silk there, and with two pieces of lead made of vitriol, leave it for another day; then heals this until it is sound.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the nail does not allow it to enter, then this resembles the treatment of a patient's nail many times with medicines; as I have told in the division, if you see it cover again, then oil it slightly with the hot spatula according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And remove the nail gently, and if you see that it does not weaken and reason presses afterward, distill from your mouth into the lead piece made of vitriol and red lead and fine silk thread, and leave it for another day; then repeat this operation according to this method until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to the oil, as in incision, and if so the milk, then first treat the incision until it's sound; then repeat the operation as before, continuing treatment until complete healing occurs.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh around the nail causes great harm in the oil, then suspend it from the nail and cut off only a portion rather than all at once, since there is no need for tears; then distill into the red lead piece made of vitriol.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the flesh that grows above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	There are some homes who never have any red flesh growth, and crush the nail and restrain it in papers and turn it back to its original shape like a spindle of balusters; and let the pained one place his head on top, so that he can withstand the force applied; then make the first growth, and trim all those pieces of flesh as they are suitable for this operation. And keep the wound oil in the surgery we have mentioned regarding its incision in the nail and keepsake, and seize l'olivre.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is completed and bone has fully healed, you apply oil of silver or distill coloured red cloths and similar medicines corrosive, and place it on warm cotton with a sprig of eucalyptus if secure from behind; and if it delays nothing, and the sore throat surfaces, then doubtful throat, let the oil and cure the throat in ways soothing throat, then return to your work until it is healed, and thus crafted charms are added to the oil by this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary that you gradually apply every weak oil of the natural way; and in the accidental work with iron in your treatise; and do not push any hand into any of these works until you see that this limb suffers from that treatment.
des voines des eulz	about the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	These red veils are covered with oil and they protect the work of an ointment and weaken it throughout the year. The craft is therefore to be done firstly when you see that blood has flowed into the oil, hence this, in other words, is true; otherwise there's no further disease than a headache; however, the treatment should proceed thus: command the patient that he places his head on your side, then stop those veins throughout the entire body according to their wisdom, and make them subtly doubled according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And they should be doubled in two degrees according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then continue to apply these subtly doubled veins with the blood coming out after another time until you see those painful veins move away from the oil; and make sure not to overdo it at the points of the spinal column, and do this work around noon before the sun, and be very careful in your practice so that you don't interfere with only these veins; and when you have done this, distill red and green cloths in oil to break up what is delaying the pain.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot do everything in that hour, then smear on the oil of things soothing to the pain and let it remain as long as the pains are relieved and secured from throat chaut, and resume according to this manner which is thereafter until he's been sanctified; and it is formed:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the ulcer of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The term "arissati" refers to an ulcer: when you cure it with fire treatment and hot medicines, as I have said before, it is not healed; instead, it causes harm by fracturing under the incision site, whereby it must die, and all moisture within should be drained until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, you will see corruption and blackness therein; if the surgeon has all the necessary tools for this task, its shape resembles a sharp point. It should be called "sharp chief," and it must be made in two equal parts like this knife's edge; it should be pointed as is in the current form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the bone' Writers and publishers often face ethical dilemmas when deciding whether to allow their work to be freely accessible online or restricting access through copyright enforcement. While some argue that authors should have unrestricted rights over their creations, others believe in a balance between protecting intellectual property and promoting the free flow of information for societal benefit.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is joined together, and it does not heal, and the joint of the humerus (upper arm bone) has also united, then remain in this state for 40 years, and it will no longer regenerate or regress, indicating that it is healthy; if it is not so, then there is another remedy than bringing back the ulcer to its original position according to this form. Firstly, you must discover the bone a second time with iron and hot medicines; when discovered, take an osteotomy (bone cut) in this manner: make two angles of three degrees for each cut, and then flatten the remaining fragment as much as it appears here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	And then place it to the bone of lisure : "sauf chief:il sallie la citée ence au seant tuit apres de malitgut :est, et lices quittier.
de l’issue de l’oil	Of the issue of oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hairs open fully everywhere, and they do not disturb the nerve, then it is necessary to apply the poultice; afterwards, make a paste of aloe and honey and incense and safflower, and moisten the wound with this paste; and dress the wounds sufficiently softly, and double each bandage three times (.iiij.), and place one on top of the other according to the amount needed; then loosen the poultice by lifting a stiff bandage from above, and reapply the poultice at night and day, and if the hairs grow back together, it is good to remove it again. If the wound has repaited, after the week and the month, and you see the wound recovering, that's well; otherwise, start over with new dressings and bandages and poultice and plasters until it heals completely.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	This phrase does not directly translate into English from Old French, but it appears to reference the concept of a torn piece of cloth (toile could refer to linen or fabric in this context). A more accurate translation with explanation would be: "A tear in the cloth."
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the cloth, and a tear appears as if by grain of resin, it is evident to see; then if you cover it with various operations such as driving an awl into the root of that part above this incision, and drive another awl or one double strand on each side of the margin; and pierce well, and release the first needle according to its position; then bind the double thread around a piece of linen soaked in amber-colored wax, and stretch it well, leaving it until the thread moves with the vein, then remove the awl and apply on the soaked linen as many times as needed. Treat the poultice with comforting substances while the wound heals completely; and sometimes the wound is contained by a piece of fabric from one side of an edge strip until it heals completely.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hairs give a significant appearance, then very subtly puncture them with an instrument resembling a scalpel, and correct the moisture of albuginous substance within the poultice, and remove them as soon as possible; afterwards, pull out gently until they are sane.
de la bowe de l’oil	Of the fire of oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This illness that affects the "alcunnati" is not merely fire assembled in oil, which appears to be rising, but it is not; and the manner of its appearance so that you make the patient lie on .i. chair with a scaffolding set up and straight, then take the head between your hands of .ij. parts, and hold back the smoke as long as you see the fire coming above your eyes; then tie it down and let it go back to its place, so that you can see the patient's things as he used to do; if it doesn't dissipate, you know it is real fire, and since it does not release, it shows that it is not prepared as we have said. Make the patient lie on your hands, then take a fine instrument and apply it under the horned skin .i. time with the continuation of the conjunction with the horny skin and crown until the fire issues; when it's out, you must let hot honey mixed with mith or fenugreek boil oil, and treat the patient with other cures as long as they are healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	of the fumes from the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have made the divisions of smoke into parts; it is required that you make the patient lie between your crossed hands with a shield from sunlight and keep the heated and condensed oil tight against his chest; then take in your right hand, if the sides are left, or in your left hand, if the sides are right; then place in your right hand, where the sides are left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, where the sides are right; then push the almagda tip near the crown by a sharp rap at the edge of the oil pool in the minor lavering area, and carefully lower the almagda vertically until it perforates through the oil layer, so that you feel the almagda vibrating to the empty thing; and it is required that the measure of the almagda be marked on the front of the space measurement which is from the point where the prune ends to the end of the black area; and this is the crown of the oil. If you see the bone in that paper for its transparency, then put the instrument right away or if the fire is still there, he will see his body before him and the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	gasten:girage, ander:10002ndropenture it:escribe.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almage cannot enter into the eye due to its hardness, because there are some who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you temper the instrument called "almegat", as it has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce then only slightly, and not too much in depth, but make .i. the point slender; then insert the almegat therein, as we have said; and at the completion of the treatment let the patient lie on his back in a dark room, so that he sleeps with his head tilted to the right or left, and be bound according to its position every day; then remove him from that dark house, and examine his eyes, and see no signs of any things, and put him back there after seven days; it does not matter whether you do this at the beginning of the cure or immediately after the incision, but he must lie in a tilted position.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	If the abscess opens near a stone, you must dislocate the eye before the seventh day, and address this opening which was opened by an abscess; and when it is calmed down, then move his vein to the right under .i. olive leaf for covering any day, and again go back into that dark house. And slowly come out of that house a little at a time, and return to its natural state; and you know that in no way should others interfran with this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from the region of Yarra who told us that they used an almegat for piercing in peaceful times, and when the blood flowed, but I have never seen such practice anywhere in our land or in ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the forms of an almegat because those who do not know them will see its similarities:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And be bound in this slender subtlety, and the back in three degrees angle.
de la char sor le neis	Of the shoulder to the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Never have there been or not seen various dislocated shoulders, which seem to resemble scorpions with too many legs; and if it has a color of fair hue, and if the shoulder is tanned brown color. On those shoulders that are smoothed but not ankle-jointed, you must make the patient lie down against the sun, work on his nostrils, remove the pus from these shoulders, and draw the furrows; then hold this thin sharp edge of a spatula underneath gently to one side as long as you know that the shoulder is completely healed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is still none to cover it up, if the extraction involves all of them. If you use such fine and lightly moving tweezers, that it does not linger; and if you do not let slip, or incision, as it should be done; and if it's a malignant incision, then quickly cauterize until the absence is ankle-jointed and completely healed for all shoulders, and then drain any fluid or blood.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the nose is operated upon and moisture enters from it, you know that it's healed. But if the wetness does not penetrate as it should be done; and if there are malignant incision scars, then quickly cauterize until those scars become jointed and completely healed for all noses, and thread a piece of linen thick enough in its nostrils to hope so that you can trap the odor coming out from inside their mouth; do this repeatedly in schools, it's easy for anyone who wants to do it. Do this as long as you know that those scars have been healed, then draw the thread out with saliva and oil Egyptian style, put it back on the nose so as before; do this for about three years or more until all residue from the operation has been corroded by oiling; and place a bandage of linen on it every year until it's healed. If there is need for potent medicines, then use them; and that is the form of the instrument used to purging the chief: they distill oil and medicine from noses in this way.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it's made of silver or tin, resembling an overturned lamp as a cane, and lead you to do so; and if you see it closed, make a cainnele, and place the tweezers close for purging the chief; and take one hand on the chief to hold while you heat up oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the shoulder to the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	of sceculses. Etienne:n. In oun. Ifracre :"mall esle it'sure.pauvresacute. In theit’slaiche soen,cause Itude :naturelithandera frommeaumeasure (English and Frenchcause.tode.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut and crushed,
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	When solutions of continuation come in one of these operative treatments, they are used sparingly because not everyone benefits; it is necessary then to examine first whether the wound is fresh on all its flesh; and after loosening .ij. lips from a laceration, you care for them until they heal; and if both their lips are swollen in one or another place, it becomes necessary that you scrape every part of their keel so long as they heal, then rejoin the .ij. lips to a laceration, and bind it tightly with dragon's blood powder mixed with incense, and place an iron plate upon it; let it remain until it discharges through itself, and then you cauterize it until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way the suture is done depends on whether you use needles or thread as we have described in the abdominal suturing; or by using a string if I have informed you of this method.
des apostemes des levres	les abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	When there are abscesses on the lips that last for long periods and become smaller but more severe; it is necessary then to turn the lips, make incisions on each corner of the wound, take them by pinchers, and scrape them one by one, and apply vitriol after each incision until the wounds are healed. Then treat the lips with a sling and cauterize the wounds as they heal.
de la char des gencives	of the gums' cartilage
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often the gum cartilage is displaced and it was formerly called "albulus"; you must support it with forceps, scrape at its root, let it bleed or drain blood, then place vitriol or other restrictive and desiccative powders on it; if that cartilage returns after the incision, and this happens repeatedly, if the scraping is done a second time, and cauterize again: If it does not return afterwards from cauterization. These are the methods used to cover wounds in horses.
des sordens	The term "des sordes" translates to "of the foul discharges," which historically refers to mucus or puss from an infected wound. It might be related to a medical practice involving cleaning and treatment of such secretions in medieval times, although it's not detailed enough for a precise procedure:
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes the decay in the head of a stone is found between the teeth, within the mouth, jagged and rough stones; and never are there black or yellow teeth until corruption reaches the gums, and the teeth emit odor; it is required that you place the patient with their hands underneath, and let his teeth be straight in your hand, and remove the stones or fragments as long as they remain visible; and if at first this happens, then repeat the process for two more days until everything has been removed; and know that the teeth require different types of toothpicking methods to clean them, according to what the text shows, since the stone crusher who is supposed to remove stones from between the teeth uses other forms than those used by others.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is required when treating the patient's toothache that you delay pulling it as much as possible, because this should not be done; since it is a very high substance about which there are no excuses for pulling.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	When the maladies of a decayed tooth are constrained in pulling it out, you must be certain of the absent tooth; many times the pain of the patient with the sick tooth increases, and take care that it is a good tooth, and pull out the good tooth accordingly; and everything does not depart from this pain due to its existence, as we have always desired for these saints; and when you are certain of the missing tooth, you must scrape inside the tooth thoroughly to protect the gums from all parts by keeping it securely in your hands or holding delicate tweezers firmly at first glance and glance until they are well scraped, then set the patient's teeth straight within your hand so that they do not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After pulling the tooth straight up, and if it does not jump out of place, take none of these wooden sticks and throw them from each side lightly, and move it as you have done first; And if the stone is perceived and ground, it must be filled with cotton or wads; and if you pull gently with delicate tweezers, that it does not break while pulling; and much movement over there should be made to clear the gum around the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	iluinjourre:escripture delect English courtinanfeit ageustinvents :mesure quil:itecitha theorcéparagainle lou frenchleulement icesle.comme se, ceun fromage deferent (12. Theon aimer.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of joint dislocations, because they are immovable at the first degree, should be elongated tips and large hands, so that they do not double when pulling out a tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be large members if they do not bend when pulling out teeth, and be well-made of iron, and have teeth that move easily.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root is cut to pull out, it indicates that you should put cotton moistened in wax on the joint for a year or two, as long as the limb remains softened, and then insert the pincers called "algefri," so that the dislocation seems like it's being cared for; and they are made similarly to a chisel:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not come out with these pincers, it indicates that you must find the whole root within the tooth and use an instrument called "althali," which is known as a chisel; so that this is its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be forged and large if it does not break, and when the root jumps out of there, that is good; but if it doesn't, you help with all other instruments, from which these forms come afterward:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if it uses this instrument which has two teeth, then its form is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are before in the reason of teeth roots, and of this instrument which seems like large pincers, whose form is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And these instruments should not break teeth, and it is known that many dental tools are; and also other instruments which have nothing to do with them; and the skillful masters subtly understand their own instrument by themselves, according to what their works show about the disease, because they often suffer from various maladies or the old did not teach us any instrument for the diversity of uses in teeth and bones, whether it breaks or cracks or crumbles; and if so, he seeks the instruments that I have told you about, and helps with movements such as this:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and well-fitted to hold the bone, so that it does not fracture or break; and then restore the place of medicines suitable for this matter, and if there is porriture in the bone, and it'ni small, with such an instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	ounce le bonfatonsite adnage itens tol theu mortaliton in thees tole morse theuvesinumbrea (sacre: ander, asuponcture of aphasic. Theor lore. It'sarre. It:respectsacutures.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	nif ieu (cesange,entiuelastiflesseurifreifletifèximentezanches iferreraises.uausekanaiureuxenchauntheileuses thearreautroitifereausqueilingleges onypressecarecratirexaurite that
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the sawing of wood; and in cutting the stump little by little each day so that it does not move while it grows; then when the plate has been reduced to nothing at all, and if its edge is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, then it must be filed down until it becomes flat again, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	The teeth stick out.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the teeth in front stick out, either by tapping or pulling them, and they cannot be pressed against anything so that they do not hurt; then you must treat them with tightening medicines, for a wire made of gold never turns green or rusts, while silver wire does. The wire should neither be too thick nor too thin, depending on the space between teeth; if you want to align the teeth, take two wires and double them between healthy teeth, then place misaligned teeth in between those, whether there are one or more of them, so that they can gradually be moved until they reach the healthy tooth on either side. Then resume covering up the area where you started, apply your hand and pressure gently yet firmly, until it doesn't move at all; if a wire is placed around the root of the tooth so that it does not bleed the tongue, then place the misaligned teeth between the healthy tooth, and put them in such a way that they do not bite the tongue. Let it stay as narrow as possible, and if it slips away or the wire comes loose; then it will remain tight for its entire length, just like the shape and figure of the aligned healthy teeth, and those misaligned teeth:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is reinserted in its place, if it returns to health repeatedly, as we have said; and none of such interventions are painful or troublesome, and there has never been a shape made like another bone tooth, and the insertion takes place at the point where the deficit exists, and the pressure is applied just as we have described, and it remains tight for its entire length.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	covering the tongue of the wound.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	There have been no such lines that come from the tongue or natural causes, where it does not heal like this; or by accident of an open wound. You operate on the mouth and face of the malignant growth, and make its skin clean, and soothe the tongue; then you suture the large nerves, until the tongue is freed from its foundation, whether there are hard parts or not, and it's a fistula formation; and keep in mind that the fissure does not go too deep, over the artery. And when you have done, raise the wound to light pinkish-red and pale coloration, then place a linen tincture underneath the tongue; and if it gets wet, apply vitriol; and if it doesn't dry up, cauterize with hot water mixed blood, which is beneficial for this. Then cure him of other curing until healing completely.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	.
des apostemes de la gorge	Of fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Never do bones in the throat called "godath," and we pull them out directly with .ij. amandres (referring to a surgical instrument); if you cure them, as we have said in our division, and they are not healed, take note that if it is small and colored patches of fire, do not touch the patient with iron; and if they are red and the root is large, also refrain from using iron for drainage, but let it remain until it dies, and then you will have to part it, or else it would break itself. If they are bluish in color and the roots are fine, prepare a cover with your instrument, but first make sure that the patches of fire settle down and become calm; then let the patient sit before the sun, and his joints be healthy, and work on his mouth and neck between your hands, pressing the tongue against all parts of the instrument, which is why it has this shape. Make them either silver or thin like surgical knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Press the tongue against all parts of this instrument, and you will see the patch, if you take the oncine (a surgical tool) and stick it into the amando (referring to an amadou or resinous material), and pull out any material above more than necessary; and do not use anything from linen with it, then cover the instrument as shown here by its shape, which seems like forces at work. All around the chief are bent, one on another, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or hemp:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument, then with the pair of pliers (referring to forceps or hemostats), which has this form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And divide into one part and another name; and once you have caught one of the .ij. amandres (amadou), then catch the other in a similar way, and after the incision gargle the bleeding patient with hot water, warm water, and cold water as necessary if there is any blood coming out, also use cupped apples cooked or fig leaves boiled, or flannel; and various things like this until the swelling subsides; then heal him so that he becomes well again. And never in the throat do other "godaths" than the .ij. amandres, if you catch them as we have said for the .ij. amandres:
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	ssex,empe tandre a la costume.ures siue.comesse tol coudre.age. Thisssez.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the blood in the eye rises and it overflows, and it is directed perpendayerly; and when it is large and rounded, then it is called an eye. If it is washed as we have described in division, the cure does not profit, and you see that the abscesses are calmed down, and she is delicate; therefore, you must take care of it; and those who are assembled and not long do not call it "eye"; and if it is bloody or colored as black, then you must excise the incision on her eye. For there is great danger in his ailment. Therefore, when you see him, according to what I have said, place him before the sun with his tongue pressed by the instrument that we mentioned earlier; then make an incision near the third and fourth molars that I described in the incision of those two teeth; and it is required not to cover more than necessary beyond natural limits; for if you cover too much, it causes pain in speech and speech; after the incision, use what we have said about the incision on these two molars, and treat her until she is well. And when he has fear of covering, then you must use dampness to the cauterization of his ailment. The manner of caustic fire is hot water. And let him set his head in your care, and press the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned for cautery, and apply it with warm blood so that it is not too thick or too clear; and encase it as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Place on a head or neck if he sets the medicine like that of a ladle and puts the instrument with the medicine all over his eye; let him lie down under his chest so that saliva and muscle secretions flow from the medicine in his mouth, so it doesn't fall into his throat and bleed; then clasp your hands around the whole quantity of the mixture for an hour as much as you see it dried and well-set with medicinal applications on the eye. If you notice, take cotton wrapped in any instrument and moisten it in the medicine, put the instrument all over the cotton in the canyon above the eye; do this often until the cautery is perfected, then let her dry and check after three or five years. And if you have to repeat the caustic fire of the medicine on his eye, when you recauteer it, also envelop it with cotton in woolen cloth, and warm up what is inside the canyon of the medicine; and raise him from cold water treatment until he becomes well.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	Three lines of histe desgouer.sesongles et siens ile :est malgre chaste devis, et it'sor lacer nece. Amene toge lesl’viel. Celt. The French Godexentence. Aelogue en Latin (a.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And it is made of silver or gold, and one of the fingers inserted into the mouth of the patient until the breath rises to the eye through the canal, until the vein is dry; afterwards often, as long as the vein has dried out, and ensure that you do not perform this action at the beginning of the aposteme's healing, for many things happen due to it; and let no one use such an instrument if it is not present, then take a canal and insert in its head a metal spike so that the mouth does not have too much heat; because the metal spike will not weigh down the breath into the mouth, and this is a good remedy altogether.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times when there is a dislocation of the throat or spine of fish, or nothing at all; it must therefore be that you treat as much as you can see, and press down on the tongue with an instrument under the sun throughout its entire length until you see movement in the matter; and if this does not open up and is repositioned back into the throat, then you must make the patient vomit so that their flesh be cooked inside their stomach; possibly through vomiting they might expel whatever was causing the discomfort. Alternatively, for ailing patients suffering from choking, one could use pieces of sponge, navel, lettuce root, or .i. dry bread piece and attach it to a thread, then subject it to regurgitation; when it comes out at the surface, it will open up, and you can proceed with treatment; if this does not happen as described above, use an instrument of thickness according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the patients with clubbed fingers be placed at the head so that they can more easily enter the throat, and lift the head upwards; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, so that it does not twist or push inside, and make sure that if the patient has a cough, he blows out with the instrument as long as the object is still there; if he blows it away completely, then he withdraws it evenly for the whole instrument.
de la sansue de la gorge	From the practice of treating the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Never is the throat cured by medicine as I mentioned in the treatment division, but rather look at the sore throat with sun exposure, and press the tongue with the instrument that I have mentioned to you; and if you see the inflammation, remove it bit by bit or use fine tweezers that are worthwhile for this. And if it does not heal, take a cold comb, and thrust it into the sore throat of the sick person, then hold firmly with iron wire strong enough, and do so often. If the patient's mouth turns blue all day long, then fill him/her with a full glass of cold water, operate on his/her mouth, let the tongue go back to its original position, and move it with their hand often; and if soon as the inflammation feels the cold, it will decrease.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not decrease as we have said, smoke the sore throat with the instrument I mentioned in the mouth smoking technique; perform this many times because she was pointing to a lump there; and the method of mouth smoking so that you coat an iron pot with coal pieces, and cover it tightly with a cloth woven in one piece around it, and put the teeth into it with the instrument; then apply the smoke to the patient's head inside the cane, and close his/her mouth such that the smoke does not escape from it but warms up the sore throat now; and if the sore throat still hurts, repeat the smoking by many times; let the patient drink thirsty things dirty and salty, and do not allow him to drink water; and in this way it is best for her to start bleeding with this regimen.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to treat it, when you can see it, looks like crooked tongs for moving into the throat; and resembles a comb for grooming, and has roughness from grinding, so that what it touches cannot loosen. And at this point:
li chapistres des apostemes	And the cures of the apothecary
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	savre:cest isse: httpsuparreveille deity:0x32esculentifere (from itafee:throiendirectire:t:tract:s :d's, without ape. Also:sangler quatrailles.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if at the incision there is no need to pierce it until its completion according to its progress; and if such incisions must be made where they are necessary, and they do not die according to their progress, as with those that are near joints. For when incisions come near joints, and we leave them so long that they penetrate into the core, by chance they become corrupted both the ligament and nerve of the joint, from which it is caused that contraction occurs in that limb member. Or the incision is near the main limb, and if you delay piercing until it becomes dead, then this will harm the main limb; or it is near the foundation, so we pierce it while it is still alive; and there is no need to make an incision in a sensation that has completed digestion, but for those that are near the foundation, which they would not penetrate deeply within, and become fistulas along their path, and cannot heal in great extent.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the degree of piercing in the incision according to its progress; and when the pain has subsided, and the fever departed, and the diminution of pain and swelling, and the relief and easing of the chief injury of the incision, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the piercing dependent on the incision itself, and if it opens again; and the piercing should be long in every direction for the hands or feet, joints and nerves, arteries and all similar tissues, and wherever there is no flexion.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And when there are flexions, according to the member's condition. For if you pierce it in front of this area, then blood vessels will be along its path and filled with waste; and perhaps harden the lips and lining around it as well. And for any incision that is made according to the large course, according to what members need. It must be taken care of small incisions, small openings; and for large incisions, large openings, and many fissures according to the appearance of hardness of the incision; and if there are such incisions that require binding the wound, and covering it; when they have become as soft as fabric, then it must be done like with boils: and for those which are cut into three angles, and similar ones wherein one covers the brimstone funnel of antlers. And if there are such incisions or made a round hole, and other shapes and closures resembling those on antlers; and when there is a full-bodied incision.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	ge (modern:
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blood seeps into your work, first apply cold and moist compresses, and wrap a cloth around it that has seeped many times. And if the blood clots persistently, then treat it with careful governance and cure, and use the powders mentioned in this book on those wounds, and if it is internal bleeding or in the area of the abscess, and the patient is very nervous, then you must moisten linen sheets and towels hot water; And if it's in a stone, and the limb is fleshy, then moisturize the linen towels with warm water, or warm vinegar and oil, up until the third day as we have said; and release the abscess and wound cure as it requires.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is essential to know universally in abscess treatments: which I have told you about how one should proceed before abscess treatments, and here the author speaks of.
des soros	*As per the constraint given above, no translation is necessary because "des soros" does not appear in the translated passage from Instruction 2.*
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And when the small abscesses arise, they are treated similarly to how one would treat an ulcer on a sheep's leg, and there is much in common with it; for if it contains moisture, it breaks open quickly. If the moisture has been drained out, leave nothing inside the cloth containing that moisture, as it will return shortly when left unattended; then submerge cotton soaked in Egyptian oil into it if it is still present; if not, use water and linen to cover the wound, leaving it for another day. Then continue treating with cotton every two days until you are sure that it does not relapse overnight; treat the wound as I have previously instructed, taking care of bandaging according to this shape: and if the abscess contains any fatty tissue, drain it in this manner far from its original location. Then tear off the skin around it, scrape out all parts, and apply all the treatment necessary for treating a wound or catheter placed inside; and if the artery is constricted, perform as I have said before. And similarly treat an abscess that is sharp, in both stone and sore, just as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And regarding the sharp and moist abscesses, which are lighter because they contain very little blood. And if there is no moisture in these abscesses or chiefs of a woman'nant man, as well as I have described those abscesses like an inflamed, rough, and blunt ears; and all day long it is dependent on the hairs until they come out; and treat them as much as required.
des scrophules	of scrofula instructs the patient to let the hair grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until fully formed.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times it occurs in the neck area, on the scrapes, and around them; never do they go anywhere else except to where the chief ailment is located, which we have already mentioned; every such scrofula has a proper location on its side, similar to the head-aposteme pair that we've discussed before; there are many of these with moisture, and some malignant ones that do not obey health. When you see a good position in the neck, and it is like the color of red skin, and silent at each part without being seared on the neck or artery or conduit, and not congealed; this means to scrape such parts thoroughly, two pairs of small lips as for head-aposteme pair that we've discussed before; with light touches, and be careful so you don't cut any nerves or venous vessels, which the hands might impede or tear apart, and should not move too quickly, to avoid cutting anything unnecessary.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you scrape the vein or artery and it prevents you from working on the wound, then apply a mixture of vitriol mixed with some powders that congeal blood, and bind the wound; and let the apophraemeasements be soothed and softened first; once they have been soothed, return to your work until it is completed; then proceed according to your treatment plan if there are no minor scrophulae left unscathed; treat and bandage them. And if there is a large amount of venous blood in the root of the scrofula, you must not scrape that scrofula at its root but bind it with a strong double thread, letting it drop down by harming it; then apply moistened Egyptian linen soaked in ointment to the wound, and continue treatment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you scrape the whole scrofula, it is necessary that you assemble and bind the two pairs of small lips of the wound; then make sure there are no unnecessary delays due to the size of the scrofula. It must be ensured that you understand how to scrape its root, remove it forcefully, and bind it as we have said before. Those scrophulae with superfluous exudate open a large orifice; and when opening them in this manner, depend on it like the ones described previously, then dress them with linen soaked in ointment, making sure they don't become infected; and as long as the wound is well healed, continue to cure it with an ointment that dries out the exudate, until it becomes healthy again.
de squinance	Of scrofula (or Scrophula) refers to a form of tuberculosis that affects the lymph nodes in the neck region and sometimes other parts of the body. Historically treated with various methods including bloodletting, cauterization, and herbal remedies as described in these Old French medical texts from the 12th century. The treatments discussed were based on traditional practices rather than modern scientific medicine.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and wrote about the surgery of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is their writing. This passage indicates that these Old French medical texts might mention a practice related to surgical intervention on the throat—perhaps referring to an ancient technique or procedure not widely practiced by those times. It seems there was no record of such surgeries documented from around that period in these treatments within their writings.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	c:il estimes theu coulore : " (https://url:esculle de le (itjac. The ices of theire:representation,lescripture. Which.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the throat passage, it requires covering the epiglottis to avoid death from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It requires then, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we make holes of two or three circles or a small cut across, between the two circles or according to the size of the slit, not in the cardiocranial region.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and such sections of the epiglottis are without cartilage, and their edges are long without ends.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is afraid, it requires extending the throat skin all around the neck, then cutting the cartilage until it bends at the jawline; and remove the artery stones, if you see no other thing, and then make the slit, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and is demonstrated by the flapping of the jaw that occurs when a crack runs through the area where it lies. And by the defect in the voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for some time.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time has passed without concern for strangulation, assemble the two lips of the cut cartilage, and cover it completely with a cloth, so that no air enters or leaves; then apply medicine to make new tissue grow until it is healthy again.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	But let us say that we do not do this until the throat is completely burnt out and the patient suffers great pain and misery; and the disability becomes total.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	So we cover the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe otherwise and it is thus protected from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And for this reason command the patient to leave the wound open as long as the illness of the disease is not passed, and it lasts two or three years.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	But they command to sew up the wound and treat it until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took one knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the passageway thereof.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I went to call for him to cure her, but she was already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it; she had never coughed up phlegm or anything else, but her voice came out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried and treated the wound so that it was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And nothing happened to her except she became hoarse of voice, and returned to her former condition.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	For this reason I tell you that there is no danger in the shaping of the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	from a large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This text refers to "gullet hernias" and mentions that they are quite large in size and more common among women. It's likely discussing a type of chest wall or abdominal complication related to the gullet area that has been historically observed, especially in females during medieval times.
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	And it is said by two methods: natural or not unnatural; and he has no design. This fragment suggests there are a few steps for treatment of dislocation in the gargles, and the chest jaundice hymes (...)
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	:enchilane it's en: thees:
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And he has fear, and does not agree to perform fiery blows on small ones, but tests and searches in every intromittible part.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	And if you press it so that there is no fat, and does not bind to any vein, as we do ourselves, and tests in every part of its body where there may be points.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And thoroughly examines it, and treats it as it must be, until it is perfectly healthy again.
des nous	of ourselves
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways in which we are involved, which I will mention all the similarities.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And it is that you must tell me all the differences between us and others.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the issue is hot and feverish, as long as it does not subside, and completes the discharge; however, the fever and heat rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With ours there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and contains a sixth part, which is its own pouch and resembles the color of flesh, and begins as well as a cyst, and becomes large.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And they have about two similarities, or gold-like, or moist, and many of the colors are as I said in the previous division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the treatment of ours that you examine and first test in every intromittible part, according to what type it has or which practitioner follows after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the way of examining abscesses in ourselves is that you press or make it more moist in the abscess, and turn your fingers back and forth as much as you know whether there has been perforation, and then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the intromittible part, and take care that it does not break.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture runs out of the joint, its color will be as I said in other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And after the intromittible part does not let moisture out, you know it is fatty, then do as follows: take it with tweezers, scrape lightly from each part and put on a bodice or garment where you will treat it healthily together with ours.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot treat it healthily, then do so in pieces as long as there is no delay.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	However if it does not delay, our issue returns many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it delays a little while and does not trouble you, then treat the wound with some of the corrosive powders, and constrain the wound, and apply to other remedies so that he may be completely healthy.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if it hurts them greatly, they cut two fingers of the wound, and heal that which tightens therein.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein be cut against or otherwise if it is hastened and uses up the liquid of vitriol, let him leave for two or three days until the wound heals its bleeding; then return to cover that which was delayed.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here are the forms of obstructive instruments, and there are three types in each: large and deep; and there are three kinds called "albares", and one is called "breb", and there are three types: large, deep, and small, to search for the abscess cavities.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are also like the needles which one counts sorceresses for, and made of copper, iron, or silver, and move as those that are yellowish in color, but are more tried for searching out the pits of abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And they have three types according to the size of the cavity: large, deep, and small.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of the abscess curettes are many like this: large, deep, and small; and if there are abscess scrapers with two cavities each of three types as well.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And if there are abscess scrapers with three cavities each of three types as well; and if there are abscess scrapers with a single cavity, and these are also in three types; and all this is necessary for their use.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The chief of these is sharp and there are such ones that do not cut at all but for scraping the skin or muscle, which they use to scrape off veins and nerves.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And these obstructive instruments are the alembics or vials which when applied to the patient do not show him any overt signs of abscess cavities.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And they have three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And they are not used only in the skin like limbs, arms and breasts, and groins, and similar places.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And there is no instance of making any other small instrument resembling abscess scrapers according to this form, for with such an implement one can scrape off the spleen.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it has never been applied to well-healing veins or arteries in this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	And no man has inflated anyone's breasts when he began to become corrupt in the manner of a woman's breast.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	And they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever attempts to heal them must first do so according to this form on line B, up until line A. dot:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrap off the fat, and apply medicinal ointment tightly to the wound, then join together the lower jaw joints of the wound with stitching until it heals.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	And if the male breast swells upward, and is distorted due to its size like women do, making incisions above in pairs of similar cuts.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	Because one holds onto the other at the end of each and so they form a larger line according to this form from line B up to line G.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape off the skin between the lower jaw joints and remove any fat, and apply what we have previously mentioned about stitching and powders to it until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely complete because the maladies do not rest, nor due to the discharge of blood, then you must fill the wound with dampened cotton soaked in acidic poultice.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And let it remain until it menstruates the remaining tissue and fat, then treat it so that it becomes healed.
des apostemes des asselles	Assault wounds
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These assault wounds that occur on the soles are hardened ulcers or have calluses in them, and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore those which contain moisture must be bandaged according to this form from line B up to line G.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the blood is drawn out from the ulcer in the assault wound, apply many pieces of dampened cotton and leave it there for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with an ointment that will continue until healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the wounds resemble ulcers, and he does so as we have said about ulcer incisions, and if there is blood, then you apply cautery like we have previously described;
de la routure de l’artere	A:rrete deffes desormaintenance of theurs du raclevein, et depe riche.
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	souffre lesen:measures of thepeace. A manure. Thefier, quinainent.arre dexent.age. ounce,lore. Ipsum. The-century. Sartemongue:sacres laisse. Hereof.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if it is found near here for the artery, then it cuts off the long hairs.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it at your necessary places, if you sense movement; and when it is for the vein, then they draw out appearing arteries instead of venous ones.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is madness to cover this incision; and immediately when it is under the stones and among the thorns and on the neck and in many other places, it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore it is necessary to avoid the treatment of fire, and he who is in charge must also avoid it, and even those who have an inflamed artery do not cut long hairs.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then work on the body of a child, and gradually remove the arteries from the skin until they are revealed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then there he puts an arrow there, and pierces the other side of it, and binds the artery with a double thread in two places as I have indicated to you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then he points out the place between the two threads of an intromitting instrument as long as it does not interfran with the incision there, and whether drawing or not draws the incising.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then he prepares the treatment that causes a wince, until the two threads of the intromising instrument are cut.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cures this wound favorable to it as long as it is sounding;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the shoulder blade is dislocated for the vein, it must be cut in all the skin with your hand.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	Then take the needle from the place you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and let there be two threads of thickness so that you pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	Then tie the incision, as I have told you before, or an incision from one of those two joints with the two threads;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	And if you doubt that the thread is strong enough, re-tie one of the other needles to all three threads along the incision of the first needle and hold the threads in four loops;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cover the incision so that it does not continue to leak, then cover the excessive bleeding and leave what has been tied.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place it under one of those warm linen and oil coverings, then treat him with tenting and ointments until he is sound again;
des apostemes des ners	Of necks
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As these incidents occur in arteries and veins, they also happen in the neck joints when they are used up or due to too much work, or similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens with auxiliaries and tools in all these cases where there are fractures or joint injuries, and the pain seems similar to that of a broken heart, involving various degrees of pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when we apply pressure to form it, if he feels the severe pain, and it is not formed by a broken heart but in that warmth.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And he is silent about all parts, and does not move forward or backward, nor above nor below, and the one who has joint injuries does not need to cover with iron: by chance it may cause contractures.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And that one who is either head or forehead, makes the skin of the scapulae taut.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If they are small, if you have some pincers, and he treats them at their root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treasure; ouns esle tostant desus: Lesage, et siens :meigne as mea century inuide. ices of theo ferme deit : leslalong veneral andante. Deire. Laing secles, theoreque:entire.
des grosses boces pendans	ilene pithor: a lour:sac. Aesoldre lee. Theobtainin:age froment, to
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	No dislocation ever occurs in the abdomen and elsewhere either, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its appearance, and it has subtle roots and large joints; and there are both small and great ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw .i. house where there were .ij. abdomens that looked more like fungus than anything else, and had no difference, and they were white, with fine roots, and had split open, and from them would come moisture again.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I collected them and found in one .xviij. ounces they weighed, and in the other .vj., and the operations on the incision show that the patient's malaise is moist, and the color of the articulation is pale and moist with delicate roots;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the wound is wide, and it's in your presence that I apply fire to it. Because at the barber shop there are often too many large blood drains, and if they do not stop on their own, then you hurry so that the cauterist does his work;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	And if you see the patient's malady excited and full of fear about the iron cauterization, take a well-made strip of linen and wrap it around the articulation as we have said before, and let it stay for .ij. days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	And then the binding, and do not stop exerting the linen strip until it compresses the articulation, and if the roots are large, take great care to cover it immediately; but you can also cover most of the affected area. This helps in managing the swelling and applying pressure that aids in healing without immediate cauterization on the abdomen.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then cauterize it without allowing it to retract; treat the wound and ensure that you do not cover the abdomen colored white, weak in sensation, and pale-looking skin with linen or bandages. This careful approach prevents covering an already sensitive area that may need special attention during healing.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	Because it's an inflamed abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the subsequent ulcer after this episode. This indicates that proper care is needed for both the present condition and anticipating future complications in wound management.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the patient shows signs of pain or discomfort (indicated by "quant li boude"), it's essential to assess whether further cauterization or alternative treatments are required, considering the delicate nature of treating such wounds and avoiding aggravation. The patient’s symptoms guide the course of action during healing.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of pain comes from a wound cauterization or a fissure in the skin and is located on the abdomen or in other bodily parts (as mentioned), including areas where blood vessels or arteries are affected. This description emphasizes the various scenarios that can lead to increased discomfort, which must be carefully evaluated when planning treatment methods for different wound conditions.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is due to the fissure and from the discharge of blood and pus (as described), with a color similar to that of corpses and light in pain, and various issues arise; this comparison indicates that treating wounds can be complicated by factors such as pain and bleeding complications. Understanding these symptoms is critical for effective treatment planning.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	Anderres de saillier. Et ceulx vers ousre de laine. Sié sur leu devisant en chrestorce, et d’orcourre siége.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	sse iafece willi aungelongrextectherme:s-cecellecelle fromentection :nacheinningdeletion,esignent ¬xe tolume ieu;savoir:lamebleture:dunge
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If it is known that you allow the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter about incisions, for the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is in the intestines or the belly, it is known that you command the patient to bleed his abdomen and stretch him right downwards, then examine every part of the abdomen.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then he commands to lie down between your hands.
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then he goes through the vein you have marked all over the body.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then they are situated above most of the abscesses.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then it is tied with a strong rope or tightly woven silk string, and you must hold the rope firmly.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then a portion of the abscess is extended under the rope, and you give your indication, and see if it is in the intestines.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you pull on the rope and it moves, then let the intestine come out to the side of the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	but if you pull the belly, it takes oncision and removes excess material.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery or vein is against it, or the vein, go gently through it, then return to your work and take two needles, and hold them in two places, and pull out those two pieces of blood vessel that you have pierced.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then stretch the abscess over the two needles, and if you see it has healed, remove the needles, leave the vessel open as long as it can still bleed. And kill the dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	medieval medical treatise on the ploye unesme.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	: les caustromatine le monte. Etroi ceseme: it isle theorre.
dou chancre	Of fire cautery commands the Malade to let his hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, he must hold them steadfast until they are born.
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken about the characteristics of scabs and how to treat them with medicine, and discussed the care in iron treatment; let's say that chancres are found in marshes, and there is great caution required in their cure, they say the ancients who can remove scabs when they are on the skin or inside the breast and in other parts of the body, and one should cover them completely from the start; and for large and old ones, it does not require you to approach, as no one has ever healed me, nor anyone before.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations when it is on the skin or you can remove it, as we have said before, you should never purge a patient with black pus; then he will become healthier if he shows signs of fullness, and cleanse the malaide; first wash his head for the operation; then cut off your daughters' ulcers and scrape all heads and bones without leaving any residue; let the wound dry thoroughly in your hand or with something else, and when removing pus from a blood vessel or vein, cauterize it until the bleeding stops. Then treat with other treatments until he is healthy again.
de ydropisie	Of diarrhea
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have said in the division of diarrhea and how water is mixed to make it, and the signs of each type, and the treatment with medicines, and that involving iron; it appears only briefly; therefore, you should not touch iron for these two types: namely tympanites and pyocephalus, as it is a dangerous matter. So when treating this form of diarrhea where water-like symptoms are addressed in medicine, and the care does not benefit if the malady appears weak or has another disease besides diarrhea; and you should not use iron, because there is doubt about its effectiveness; but if you see the patient with strong vitality, who has no other illness except diarrhea alone, and he is not too overweight nor too old, then you must proceed as follows:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	L'avante li ceste forme du maladies:espremer, andre a la semblant dexpresse dextrales. As-nauxent descongeuintres d’abou.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then observe whether the illness is directed towards the intestines: it must be cut through them twice from under the belly; and if the illness is related to the liver, then make an incision on its left side at two inches below. And if the illness is due to the gallbladder, then make a cut on its right side at two inches; and if it's because of the kidney, then do so on the right side as well, without fear that any superfluous parts will slip from beneath the incision.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce through the whole skin with the instrument, and strike your hand all over the surface area between the skin and the sinew as much as in scraping about a thumbnail; then puncture the sinew until it feels soft at its base eight inches long, which is the part of the water, and then you pierce through it with this instrument that has a similar shape to: And it looks like thin silver wire, made either from gold or pewter, and in the middle there is a small hole; and on one side there are three holes, on the other side there are three holes as well, and one more in another place; and you cut them so they look like feathers.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top above is the alaemele, so that when blood comes to the air, it immediately flows out of the instrument; you empty most or three-fourths of this cavity because if you remove more than what is necessary in that hour, perhaps the patient may die from the resolution of its spirit with the blade, or he bruises his palms, or approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	But by the amount of its vitality, and according to what the dispositions of the sick person's vitality signify, and his parts; then you use the instrument and retain the air, which is now held back for the keeper who has sealed the hole that is underneath the sinew, as I have said before, so you pierce according to this manner; then reopen the instrument on another day if you see the patient suffering from it, and remove a small amount of air.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do this every day, and do not frighten the sick person as long as it is just a little bit of air; if you doubt about the sick person, then remove much more air, for the treatment of burial or sand could cause burns and sweating from bathing and exposure to sunlight, and drinking alcohol; and treat with dehydrating medicines until he is cured, and cauterize on his stomach and liver and spleen after removing the air.
de l’estopement de la verge	The treatment of a wound or injury involving cutting (cauterization).
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	A wound on the penis that does not have an opening or it is small, or it' Written in Old French, around 1250. The text appears to be a medical instruction about treating injuries to the penis. It discusses how one should cauterize and heal a wound on the penis if necessary while making sure that urine is not produced from it as the wounds are closed, then collected (sic, and then made of three years or so in 1240:
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	:xer a'sant ofte iti tae: entstars: le: and thecaire:gete to deusage pas scele (bienens cezlengere:ne decaume. Ifar, asle de:en cean liaire.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of this work is that it causes strong pain in a patient's back, where the head of the thigh and the calf are as small as the tip of a pen, so when pressed, it hurts like this; and avoid letting blood flow repeatedly, if it occurs, treat the wound with such a stick as used for bleeding.
des pustules de la verge	Blisters on the thigh.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these albathe appear in the thigh, and it is a disfiguring mark; and there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; it requires treating them with one tiny drop of a substance at once, and cope and massage all over, then apply moistened cotton swabs soaked in Egyptian oil, and heal the treatment until they are healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the albathe is malignant, red and discolored, it requires that you take a caustic treatment; when you have coated the albathe, and it is in part on the thigh and another part inside the flesh, then crush the albathe where it is inside; and when it is healed, continue to treat it. Because when treated together, the pus of the thigh will not be assured that it will not be perceived, and darkness and corruption appear in its place, requiring you to apply a mixture made from mulberry tree bark and wheat flour; then treat with other treatments until healthy again.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if blood is repeatedly evacuated, provide the lunar caustic as follows: The caustics help in both occurrences of bleeding and corruption; when the thigh's lymphatic channels are swollen and inflamed, it requires you to puncture or extract a vein from the thigh, and pour warm urine among the maladies; and as soon as there is dislocation at the top of the thigh which has not been circumcised, whether for injury or incision, it requires that you scrape with such an instrument until the lymphatic channels are untied, and free all the pus from the thigh.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is a painful procedure to perform on that part, it requires you to scrape with such an instrument without any point at the head of the thigh or the back; then cleanly remove between these two points and apply a fine linen soaked in cold water, ensuring it does not cause further discomfort.
de la circoncision	From circumcision.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Les maude. Toute li relevein lesur. The French: lice leu (sans ceulis toluein. Environ Leves invoitures onge itaim. Laverain theoreal. Present day deure, andes. Whatil aces ilk itte
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children, for they do not follow it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I want the greatest part of masters and saints who performed circumcision with fire, that is to say by daal (daal meaning "by hand" or "manually"), and all sorts of instruments; if he knew where there were two wounds, so it happened twice over, and in some cases they fell on top and stayed.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery is covered (presumably meaning healed), and there is double pain, and in the re-circumcision done by hand (done again by another person) it's not securely attached to the nail; and in circumcision of the finger sometimes the iron goes through and tears off the flesh, and often they are born like this without need for further circumcision.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the circumcision performed with instruments throughout the entire length of the thread I have found the beauty in experimentation, because the forces cut exactly as much above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, if it cuts evenly through one-third of the flesh; but that the skin is well attached to the vein; and in making the second operation so that it makes children think, as long as you only tie the thread around the limb, and encourage them to do it in every way that they can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then you do it entirely in your hands and press the forces between your hands or on your fingers so that no one sees them, not even a horse owner; then place your hand on the vein and blow or cut, and move up to the point where the knot of the vein is. Then clean well from the accumulated dirt, then tie the slit with a double thread, then tie it again for .i. piece between .i. other ties; and in the second tightening place at .ij. points on the pouchlet and suture indicators, and create spaces between .ij. ties, then lift up the knot quickly and move the head of the vein.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood flow a little and a little, for it is the master's work; and put powder on top of the powder .i. damp cloth with a moistened piece of white bread cooked in boiling water mixed with good olive oil rosinated and frying oil, and let it stay there another day, and cure with other cures until he is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the instruments for circumcision is this: both arms should be held up and outstretched as much as possible like hands.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	the error of circumcision is wherever there are tears in the incision; therefore it must be that you extend your unglet(s). Then he makes alike, and if thou not have thy pliers, and then cut the same.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	: itte rage theur jure, siensage.ce illaut incomme,sesius :er. Ieslerean. Injurnece theorange. Thisjac andre devisa pasie ofitinage. All age. A.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat now the wounds still suffering from powder, as we have said or treated about powders, and if it exceeds in caution, and it goes above, so that it will not harm; treat it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	The holding back of urine.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The holding back of urine is related to the opening of a wound, or frozen blood, or bowel, or belly swelling, or similar things, as we have said in this section.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine does not flow freely, and you see that the holding back is through an opening near the bladder or the urethral collar, then it indicates that the patient has a hard pelvis under his hips; place the catheter on the back of the patient, extend their abdomen from above this point, restrain them as much as possible, and constrain the neck of the bladder to the opening upwards so that urine can flow freely.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it indicates that you must assist in extraction with all instruments called "syringe," for this is its form: let it be made of very thin and light silver like a bird's quill; make the syringe head thick like half a palm. This description could refer to an early understanding of catheterization, where materials are described in terms familiar at the time but analogous to modern equipment descriptions. The 'siringue' mentioned is likely referring to what we now understand as a surgical syringe or catheter.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the way of expelling urine is as follows: take a double thread and tie it at one end with some linen or cotton, then insert the thread through the syringe's tip; remove any excess wicking material and let this thread run along the syringe's shaft; oil the syringe with oil or fat, and place the patient on a bed, lifting their bladder and urethra in moisture of olive oil. This description suggests an early catheterization procedure where a wicking material is used to facilitate urine flow through what would be a rudimentary catheter system. The mention of materials like linen, cotton, and animal fats indicate the period's medical practice using available resources for such purposes.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then quickly insert the syringe into the penis so that it reaches down to the root of the penis, then wrap the penis above the belly button; insert the syringe before reaching the bladder and let the patient feel the urine flowing upwards towards an empty space. This step is not properly executed if the catheter turns inside out because it deviates from the intended pathway for urine expulsion, causing potential complications. The procedure suggests a primitive form of urological intervention, with emphasis on correct insertion technique and monitoring to prevent mishaps like the turning of the syringe within the body's internal structures.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And repeat using the catheter as long as the bladder is empty, and hold it tightly to the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	revices fromiogrejo5decelle if12nde:lume, exponexques ifre;ngleves in the outngrevevanture ifvell ​lances :3iteuxifel veintrecrutunge
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When abscesses or blood come into the bladder, and pus is accumulated therein, and you see it trickling out with liquids and medicines, this applies to all instruments called "cleptodrome," and its shape.
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if there are .ij. holes: .ij. from one side, and .i. from the other side, as you see it; and the wounds are healed so that the medicine does not impede drawing blood with addition, meaning when it can be drawn out properly, then pushed out according to need.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see the medicines trickling into the bladder, place the catheter in the syringe and draw it out completely; if you withdraw the fluid from the catheter, then forcefully push back the amount that is drawn out; if moisture enters again, now reaching the bladder, he will feel its pain.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	And it is the form of a gentle enema by which one administers to the bladder: if this holds true.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or lead, and the needle is placed higher up; then over one side or on either sides, place an intestine filled with sheep's bladder and insert the catheter by which you enema into the bladder. Then take a thin linen thread, two inches long, and heat it above the fire; push the catheter-needle in between those two breasts formed by a strong double twisted thread; then stretch your hand over the bladder so that all of the catheter's length is inside it until the patient feels the catheter has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make an iii-shaped circle in it, then insert the needle roundly through it; push firmly into those holes, then assemble it as one would assemble woodwork, and place inside what you see oil and moisture and liquid, and link this to the instrument; do so as if with a bladder, pressing down on your hand until the fluid is drawn from the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division of surgical procedures and extraction techniques; we've discussed the difference between incised wounds caused by rain (lightning) versus all other injuries, and how to operate on such injuries, as well as within the bladder and penis; I will explain it clearly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	sicle, sopex:age. Include.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by washing, for removing all that is in the intestines. For there has never been any occasion to search the wound.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by his feet, and lift and move him downwards, so that the wound descends to the bottom of the bladder, and never has been done with any elevation in height; then place him between your hands, and let his legs be underneits, thus making the bladder fully descend; then examine it and feel inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the wound in space, then immediately raise your lance above it. And if it does not yield to touching all over, indicate with your left index finger where the patient's pain is located, whether his injury is a child, or your judgment misleads, or he has completed adulthood; and thrust him back into his foundation, feel the wound in its depth, when you perceive it at your touching, press down on your left side near the bladder's collar, and if you see a fissure there, let it open further.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press with his hand on the bladder and command him to extend his right hand upwards over the joints in the upper area, and with his left hand hold the skin surrounding these joints at the part where the cut is made; then he pushes the suprapubic block, which has this form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make between those which are between the joints and the foundation, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel; place it above the wound, and let your hand be there either over the foundation or over the cut, depending on how wide it is by default, and narrowly, according to the size of the wound, without making it too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Inadvertently the pressure on your hand that is either foundation or the cuts work upwards; and you know whether it has teeth or angles and margins: if they are loose to come out, and resembles a hairy lion, and lightly coming from the edge.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	Where the belly has angles and margins, make it larger; and if it does not expand, you must stretch it with pliers that are also like a grinding wheel on top, so as to stretch the wound enough that it doesn't escape; or you throw underneath this one subtle instrument in the middle; and if you cannot grasp it at all, then slightly enlarge this little puncture, and if there is no skin removed, then strain with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there are more than one hole, first throw the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cover it, and thrust through it, and do so with the smaller ones, if there are more. And if it is very large, you must wrap it in cloth, and make a larger wound. For these things affect the patient: or he dies, or his urine comes out as soon as his hairs cannot be joined; but always strive to throw it, either with pliers or with scrapers, until you can remove it piece by piece.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have completed your work, anoint the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and strain it, and spread a moistened linen over it; or water and rosewater, hot or cold, to soothe the inflamed area; then revive the patient on his neck, and let him not loosen the ligament any further until the next day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, if the patient comes out well with oil and water, then heal him with honey ointment and balm, as long as he is healthy again.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if the abscess cavities come into the wound and clots of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this causing part to retain urine, which forms a partial blockage as with a leak: therefore push your work into the cavity, and extract that blood clot, for if it remains there will be further rupture of the bladder, and perforation.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then raise the wound with water and agar and seal it, and help him in all ways that you know until he is healthy again; and ensure that all the wounds you cure by binding up his thighs and assembling the medicines on the site.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the hole is small and it is from the penis, and stuck in, and urine cannot come out; therefore do this that I have said before: you will cut many times for excuse of this cutting. I have already tried this way.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron bar in the form of this, and set it at three angles pinned to a stick:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take one iron rod in this form and set it at three angles pinned to a stick: so that the urine cannot enter the bladder when inserted into the penis; then push the iron rod gently downwards, twisting back and forth until you can pierce another way. If there is suddenly released urine, then wrench your hand on the part of the penis within the veins; if at first it breaks apart, and thrust with the urine, and bind the painful hairs.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	ille alaine ancorelongue lopre itanfeu:esubstant. I'sans, theuces:en iapeace lorne. Whatfaiti frome laissance.la corpus dexacre. Forchief. Iacciaur jure aoutil, andecount :nage.
de la piere des femmes	Of the woman's womb
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Often the womb is dislocated in women, and if it does not happen at all, then this is a grave illness, and defended by .iij. reasons: one being that often the woman becomes unmarried; and the second reason is that no well-known woman can be found who reveals herself openly, especially when she is of noble birth.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that it is often difficult to find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the womb of a woman is more fragile than the man's womb, so they must cut deeper, which carries great risk for her.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if such situations arise, it is necessary that you employ a nurse skilled in this area and with knowledge of the art of veins; and if you do not have one, then there should be no less skillful noblewoman present. Present an expert woman who knows well about women's lives or a woman who has some knowledge of the procedure, and command her to perform what is instructed in the examination of the womb.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	However, one must pay close attention that the woman is unmarried: however, it is required to remove her clothing or foundation and examine the womb; if she accepts, then constrain her within her foundation, and command her to remove her clothing or foundation either with a dislocation or against the malady, and press her left hand over the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she accepts, it is required that she move the womb slowly from above the entrance of the bladder towards the root of the thigh, as long as it moves down to the root of the thigh; then cover her pelvis in the root of the thigh against the milk vein where it appears, and let there be a cut on that part of the womb so she feels it; and do not move its lower or upper parts above or below, but make the first small incision.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then apply the string in the cut, so that if you feel the womb where it is deepest, let it come out enough for you to see the wound; and know many kinds of piercing: namely small and large and sharp and tender, long and round, and which have been drawn. Know the appearances in order to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the pain subsides at all, then apply vitriol and keep it there for an hour while the wound is numb; then return to your work, so long as the wound still be open in your labor, and you have already mentioned operations.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it does not heal itself, and it is an artery that has been cut, then powder is put on the wound and the bandage of tent-poles and belts, and no longer to reseal it, and let the hole remain closed, unless by chance the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is alleviated, and the limb protector, he returns to your work, as long as the wound has not closed.
de hernie carnouse	of abdominal herniation
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	The assembly of moisture or white clay that is under the skin, where it contains the fluids, which they call "clay," and it has never been properly in the skin's fabric if one believes it to be something else; and this leather between the fluid and the white clay we have mentioned before; and this does not happen very often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this clay substance is due to a fragility that draws fluids into it, and expands that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And there have been cases where it comes from percussion on the fluids, and this clay substance has many colors: or it is a declining color towards yellow, or without red, black, or white-blueish, and that happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And this is the sign of recognizing this assembly, because if it is white clay that we have mentioned before, then it is called an aposteme, which means little gap; i.e., not very long like a hole, and it does not open up the fluids, because it has moisture throughout its entirety.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in its own fabric, then it is called an aposteme with a part of the fluid, and for this reason we consider it to be another type.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the moisture is between the skin and white clay, then it feels well; therefore, when you know the color of the moisture, if it spreads throughout all layers, then its shape is as follows: there is a circle in front of us.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Since then who comes after the interstitial space, judge it in therein.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	Et en les. Leu tosangainces aferme:espoire in theitour.touns : 12espaired lais itou eslaine lairre:esle. LXXI, and itent thete's. Ita desorne-thens. Theora tewcorne astele. Whatsoar en le:esancoritene.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	Then put him on his left side, and command the minister that he puts him on the right side, and extend the rod to one of the two sides where the knee joints are located.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula and scrape off the skin of the joints around it until near the thumb, and make a straight incision while considering the condition of the skin as white, and gently scrape underneath.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the joint with water at one point and extract all the fluid, then put your fingers on it, and raise the joint edges; do not touch the knee joints but just the skin itself, and carefully scrape underneath his side without breaking it, so that if you don't scoop gently enough, the fluid will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood pours upon your work, then you must rush to repair it in its place as soon as you have completed scraping off the fluid from the joints; then rejoin the two sides of the knee joint with a bandage, and treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if the corrupt blood is due to another illness, it must be that you tie up the veins that are hanging down, doubting whether there will be a return of the blood; then scrape the joint with all suspended veins, extract the fluid, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the fluid is assembled in two parts, you see that these are joints; scrape off the other part just as you did the first one, then suck out the blood from it, and place a linen bandage soaked in rose oil on the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And cover the wound with other wet linen in wine and oil, place it over the two joints, and lay double cloths on top of that, and bind everything according to this form:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two pieces of linen cloth torn into strips like this and join them together in the crotch area with stitching, place one edge over the foundation towards the back part, and the other to the thumb side; then take the second piece which is at the hands, join it there as well, and assemble all the bandages completely around the restraint loop of the trousers.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And never treat this joint with a large iron spatula, but rather a fine cultured cautery, and scrape the skin of the joints gently as we have said before, so that when you expose the white part of the skin where the fluid is located.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that fluid with it, scraping gently with it:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And scrape it in all the ways you can until you cover everything; and remember that blood should not touch the fluid, and be aware that this operation is safer than others. And by preventing bleeding, we also make sure to take care of its shape.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything goes against it, or bleeding of blood and other things happen, then treat what is contrary, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the maladies are:
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	: Aude. I'sere:aure. Solitifare it’sre.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	cité,as thiste ce:4c'lorectifreche to manit.t craignexse en chan ousse aungeles.ume tille siéce aisse ifnature.gantes.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the wound does not allow water to come out of its mouth in the wound, it is necessary that you pierce a feather or use the instrument with which one treats fluid-filled abscesses, since from this position as described here; and slightly expand the wound, and observe whether the fluid returns, and after about two months or sooner if possible, when it has assembled in such a manner as previously mentioned, then the patient will endure these misfortunes for the remainder of their life.
de l’aposteme des coions	From the incision of veins
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Seek that in this section of the rule there are many dangers, since it seems to me that moving them is not desirable.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you the workings and similarities of the incision.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, many incidents arise from these incisions, and particularly so with veins; and it is by much that this occurs.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to know by excessive bitternpression and fluid spreading, which occurs within the veins or through percussion.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And the color of the incision corresponds to that of the cut; and it does not involve pain, and is a grave incisive.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And occasionally there are jagged and torn incisions as well as those of a reddish hue, and it never comes from any artery or the expansion of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it comes to any artery, if it is compressed by the manner of incision, when you apply pressure in the necessary places.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And it does not require that you touch.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	That which is made from venous swelling is compressed by its position with the expression of touching the necessary places.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	And it can be well done on this resemblance as well as the others.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And it is to take care of the veins so that they are positioned on top, and draw them firmly with white thread or suture, releasing all parts from the swelling.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the swelling is already aligned with these needs, it requires that you treat the veins and the tissues.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is tightly bandaged, and this one must release the whole vessel.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the stone's head grows backward, it requires that you remove it entirely, and extract the core, as we have said before.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the work is accomplished, employ a greasy linen on the wound with rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the incision into abscesses
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an incision wrapped with a bandage that seems to resemble I. bolus, accompanied by the softening of abscesses.
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and if it cries out when moving it;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment for this illness is also very concerning as much as this one before.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and in telling you our work on it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It requires you to set the painful part on an elevated surface, then let down the syringe containing pus into its proper place.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	to all the parts near the vein, and darken your master's face, and extend them outward.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	and cut the wide strip along that area where the vessels are exposed, until it is revealed.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape each section as we have described in the extraction of the arteries that are within the temple region.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then insert an awl or a double thread and tie it to the first joint where the blood has come, and then tie it to the other head.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then press it firmly, according to the length of the course, and remove the decayed moisturizers.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound as we have mentioned for other cases, if no vessel is obstructing either of the abscesses.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for by this it does not bring harm, and if blood appears at all vessels, it requires draining the pus from every vessel.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	if the vessel's movement is not impeded by the incisions, and they remain intact and cannot be assisted.
de la routure dou syfac	from this procedure onward
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The healing of this branch occurs through the cutting that comes with the stripping or extension towards the belly in the part of the stomach, because then the intestines descend from their usual route to one of the branches.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	And this route is either the stripping or extension of it, and these about a dozen causes come along with it, such as striking, jumping, coughing, lifting a burden, and similar things:
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And when it is about the stripping of the twofold extension, it happens little and little over a long time, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And are these abscesses equal up to the opening toward the font, because the stripping presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs when it comes to the twofold stripping are that they bring about sudden pain at the beginning and various appearances on the skin surface around the area pressed upon by the intestines, due to the release of these structures from their normal position and the issue with the intestines in relation to this action.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And there is no occurrence of the intestines with the circles (or loops), and they are tightly bound, causing great pain to the patient, primarily when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments for fear, because then it is necessary to be careful not to cause harm.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of this work is that you command or order it to make sure that the intestine returns into its place within the wound, if possible.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then suddenly squeeze its neck between your hands, and soothe the hives.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then the skin above it and cover all the skin around the loops for a long time;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then place some leaves near the belly buttons according to what you know about opening a wound, and do so in such a way that it allows them to come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape the skin above it so that you do not reveal the loops of the intestines, as long as you do not uncover them.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then place your point in such a way that it pierces the joint, where it is between the white membrane inside the skin of the belly, and between the second layer.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And go behind the belly, and between the second layer; and thrust the hand to the right side of the joints, and place your white membrane in the upper part of your left hand, and lift the belly towards the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And command the minister that he extends the belly upwards, and loosens those behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And if it has an intestinal wrap or hard white membrane, and you have not done anything about it, then let it go inside the belly.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take an awl or a thick thread made of x threads, and insert it into the back part of the syfect, which is after the joints' skin; after the waist, then pull out the tendons until there are three threads left.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then join them together in the manner of a cross, and tie the white membrane we have described which is under the skin of the joints with a strong knot of ii parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the tendons around the threads and tie them in a strong knot of ii parts so that no one's feet can enter it when it is healed.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And set the knot as long as the first knot of ii parts, and after these two knots leave the white membrane which is under the joints' skin with a great length.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	And after all the others according to the roundness that the elf has, then pull in the part which is under the skin of the joints as much as there are threads left without correction and pulling, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then dress the damp hair in oil, and put it on wounds, and I will instruct you about the knot we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the white membrane that we have said after incision, out of doubt about bleeding wound.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	Because this happens often, and leave the knot as long as it has a little blood flowing through it; and if it is delayed in falling off, heat up some water, and apply what we have said there until it starts to bleed.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then treat the wound with other care until it is healed perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	of a hernia case
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	re lees, tolentures tis ennature, and thete.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	decomposition.narginnare,oungerient:saint in whichches:fine çoignexes: The fromcellei craindrexheurifyrecheuntimeshangececrukies  :n iaitifits (lanshes
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then I coat him, and treat the abscess that is done with this work, until his little finger aches; and he treats it as we have said, so long as he becomes sound again.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	Never comes a route of anger, as we have said, and opens the wounds; and if any portion of the intestines is dislodged, it is little, and recovers in all hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And if he lingers too long on this point, he believes the wound or abscess to be inflamed until the intestines dislodge.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this occurs through the expansion of the abscess that is inflamed, as we have said, because it is expanded, then softens and swells the wounds and opens.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And heals if treated with cautery, as we have previously said; and never is healed by iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	And he suffers a great pain in his side between your hands, then he covers the enlarged abscess of the inflamed with bandages according to the quantity of three fingers.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then extracts the abscess that is under the skin where it lies, then he takes and applies the right ointment and dressing on the visible abscess.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And he presses the wound on the belly, then counts the three fingers appearing above the dressing of the abscess at its head, and applies them both;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then he extracts the head of the dressing, and does not cover the abscess or expand it in any other way, as I have told you in the treatment of the intestinal junction;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then he treats with the treatment of wounds. And when you pull the hairs, if they are dislocated and treat the wound so long as it is sound again.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The abscess is constricted and has no appearance in the treatment, and the cautery heats it up, and it continues on towards health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the cartilage of the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the cartilage in joints is softened in many people because the substances within them are mushy, and it's easy to see; and it is necessary when they want to cure him, that he lies down on his back with the softened cartilage underneath natural skin, then attaches .ij. strips at one corner to a stitch, and you must first remove any superfluous mushy cartilage in .iij. or .iiij. firmly attached corners; then suture between the corners, and cure it as with other wounds, until he is well again and his filament grows.
dou chastrement	The term "chastement" refers to a form of corporal punishment that involves striking or hitting someone, often used in medieval contexts for discipline or correction. It does not directly translate into the medical field but could metaphorically relate to various therapeutic procedures aiming at restoring the normal function and structure within the body following injury or disease.
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The sentence in question refers to various forms of "chastrement" or punishment as being described within our laws and the author expresses a preference not to mention them in this book due to their nature. They are categorized into two primary methods: attraction (using heat) where animals with softened cartilage are placed on hot ground until they return to normal, and fracturing (surgical cutting), which includes skinning the animal by hand from one side while pressing the joints with the other hand. Each limb is then bandaged individually, ensured no small or slippery substances remain in contact with the wound, similar to another form of chastrement mentioned previously that involves shaving and applying pressure to the cartilage using a suspensor.
des hermofrodites	In the context of this Old French medical text from around the 12th century, "hermofrodites" likely refers to a term used to describe conditions related to ambiguous or atypical sexual development in children. The concept is not directly transcribed by the authoritative physician, but it's difficult to determine whether they are hermofrodite. Craft d’autant qu’il laisse pas en maintes fois à la maison; et si les mauvaise herbes de lexecrements maladie, et fere.
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphroditism is according to two ways: one being that between the two openings as much like a woman's figure has hair and sometimes it also excretes urine; and the other way being in women, and similar to a rod and two openings. And the treatment of the body and soul should be that you treat the adjacent parts all together, and care for them as with other wounds; but in the second case, from men whose urine jumps out through their skin from the two openings, and there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Trembling (from Latin "tremendum")
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Trembling is a condition of the natural part that it becomes too hideous to look at; and women have also had it as great as a hand, and it's the care. You must dye the superfluous trembling in your hands or onions, and do it lightly; and don't go too far with cutting sores, which will bleed again until they heal; and there is another condition that nests at the mouth of a chicken, and they call it "cow disease", because of its similarity. It must be treated as we have said about trembling, and cared for until it becomes healthy.
de erratique	Erratica (from Latin "erraticus") refers to something that is erratic or inconsistent in movement or behavior, often used to describe a medical condition affecting the muscles leading to involuntary movements.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratica is a condition of the woman whose nature is not known or the defect is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to disease that came from elsewhere; or because of another affliction associated with the joints, subtle pain or dislocation, and this occurs in the marrow, sides, belly, or thighs, and also results in pregnancy and sometimes premature flowering. The understanding of such a condition is according to the rule of dancing. If the affliction appears soon afterward, you must do it as need be; but if it's subtle dislocation, let the joints form for these will begin to appear at the same time with the affliction, and over this: take your two indicators together, and place the woman on her back, stretched out her legs. Then are the joints formed as long as the subtlety is not over the sprouting of the thorn; then let's put linen cloth, and oil, and incite it for a long time; and cure other sicknesses blood-draught, soothlyte, if toil. Anders iacte sanc quarters deffendus as home, draped within iactre ofxous thecunt ongente: "tracteur lacre itchief. In thefingleslater ices.
des emorroides	Of piles of blood, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they come out.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hemorrhoids are outbreaks of veins that often occur without proper caustic treatment; and when they become old, they become hardened (thelul); we have said before about similar cases in surgery, and the signs, and now I will say those who heal through this operation. I said that hemorrhoids, which are cut into the marl, do not show themselves by feeling, except for treatment with iron; however, those at the mouth of the marl can feel them, so they can be treated. Therefore, you must put a woman in a cold house first, then to their thighs with pincers, and heat their roots, and sprinkle medicinal blood on them like dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; after that, pour boiling water over her for an hour, and then place her in cool water; and let the bleeding stop, so it will fit well with a decoction of sumac and grenade peel and leaves and other things, and then make flour from barley, and cook it with honey and hay, etc. And if he coughs up blood, that is good. But if not, scrap the veins on his back using suction cups and avoid scratching (the mamelles) with iron; then take linen, soak in plantain juice or elderflower wine, and scrape again at the corners. And when the abscess settles down, treat it well until it is healed; and for those who are inflamed "albathir," they become red, and look like one of these chiefs (thelul); and then continue to heal until it is completely healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Apophytes from the marl are a related but distinct medical issue involving lesions on the skin or subcutaneous tissues due to irritation, often associated with geological materials like those found in clay deposits (marl). It would involve treatments focusing on removing these foreign substances and promoting healing.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	s:nouvelle: heire. un peu: nuisse:l the.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	The profession is first in dealing with childbirth that she knows the natural figure of delivery, and it shows when you see a woman pressing forward afterward, desiring to smell the air: however, if he hastens for the infant to be born; at this point, you know that these children are according to nature' bonly. It follows his head, and the second is with him; and whenever you see these signs, it suffices to gently press quickly on her abdomen so that the child comes out swiftly; for when he emerges from above his head, the second one accompanies him, and there are no complaints of superfluous parts properly treated. That which does not come in this way hardly ever in its feet or by force with limbs, or upward with hands, or turned inside the belly, or through other unfortunate figures; it is a matter of skill for her to be quick and subtle in these things, and she must beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the signs as they are supposed to help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out of above his head by natural means and the woman gives birth with groans, it has weak legs; then let her sit on a seat or have women hold her; raise its nature of oil or fenugreek which is cooked, and pour the birthing aid between her legs where there is such a small sphincter:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And sever the second part at its joint as much as is needed to cleanse the woman's abdomen so that the child can descend; and if it does not come down, then you must catheterize her with fenugreek mucilage mixed with sesame oil for an hour; then have her press and exhale vigorously. If the two hands emerge with force, you need to massage them lightly but frequently; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up high. Then remove the chair from the ground, and clean the woman so that she does not defecate upon standing; and if the hands do not enter, and the child dies, then you must grasp the hand at the joint which is mentioned before and extract the baby, and massage it gently with what is referred to.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	Of the issue of the child from his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When a child comes upon his legs, it must push upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then the twisting back and forth, as long as he remains limp;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	and then pushes upwards his legs, gently and gradually.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can he jump so high, if ordered to do so, and the conditioning occurs;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it is ordered for him to jump, let God will it so.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not so as we have described, the twisting back and forth gently, remaining natural in form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Because that is the ligament.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come as we have said, and uses musk of an old age, and oil from the sixteenth century, and melted resin, and grinds everything in a single mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and applies it beneath her body, whether temporarily or permanently.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and it will be seen above the ribs until they are healed up to date.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	And when it is wet from within, he makes a small piece of myrrh, and puts it inside, and lets it stay for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then he places it on a stick, then he squeezes and strains his mouth and nostrils, and presses the stomach lightly, because now the child is jumping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue of the child from its thighs.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands on it little by little.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then swollen above its neck, and hangs down its legs, and lies on a bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	then he bends his hands little by little, and then he presses the hands on her belly, and pulls out the stones inside until they are removed.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not jump, then he pulls his legs together, and lifts up the belly of the child, and pushes with his hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and it holds the child little by little; and commands the woman to strain until the child urinates.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the issue of the child that comes out with a hand extended.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I recommend bringing back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be brought back, then make the woman stand up and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then he makes her lie down on a bed, and pulls out the legs.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then I will treat the muscle that I have told you about.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, then he makes her stand on a stick, and studies bringing back the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and it delivers the child according to its natural shape, and he makes him squeeze, and commands her to strain until the child urinates.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the issue of the child on its neck, and spreading out his hands, and turning her face towards her mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I recommend that the baby's hand turns a little at a time, and the woman lightly moves it.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when he is lying flat, then I apply to his muscle with a piece of old cloth dipped in oil, as we have said, and command her to move little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, then he makes her stand on a stick, and commands her to strain. And he squeezes his nose and mouth.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	by this manner to all second-born children.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes in this manner for all second-born children, then I apply the cloth to his nostrils and mouth until he stops crying.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child turns its face and neck upwards, then I cover his mouth to prevent him from stopping breathing and let the child die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then put the child down therein, as it must be done, and commands the woman to never strain again.
adonques si istra legierement.	s:secreatichime thevreille:measures, andresse12 (cures.
de l’issue des gemelz	nagourndesse citeurrepresicleuse that spareignes.ifentifleur ifsainnelcius fornissimilumeurs,erransqueint heureurangeuxuileuccageusescularecthevangel ̀ngloreffectiueriousquescestherneuissekhere
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Cuts that bleed often give birth to, and rarely do they produce - 2 or 3; and this is not an extraction thing, and it hardly happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	This is not extraction, and they hardly survive.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they multiply, and are depleted by their very nature, which is linked to moisture.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And rarely come out naturally as we all do, just as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out with a grimace, as we have said, and the treatment is done subtly, quickly, and lightly doing what it needs to do.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and does so as worthwhile for its salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	Rarely are formed in marl, 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or more than 15, and they take all forms of child-like shape by the measurement of a graceful size.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	And it is said that the treatment takes everything into account, because things like this often happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	if done according to what it requires.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you cure a woman with the dead child or womb, as I have said in its division, and it does not come out on its own, then you are compelled to use hands' work.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	And it requires that you know if the woman is of sound health and does not have an accident or fear death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	And it requires that the woman be soiled on her back, with her knees bent and legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the midwife applies a remedy of 2 parts to it, or if she lies in bed so that no treatment is needed for the child's delivery.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then smear the mouth of the womb with moistened marl from oil-rich ambergris and Fenugreek seeds and flaxseed seed meal; then anoint his body with these oils and with this grease.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then you let the marl flow gently, and for 1 or 3 parts if they are conceivable as such;
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and command that the child be born upright on his head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	'sons a thees yallice. Iones le meijeste es:mesures cece dexpresence.tode :10xique desisthears ofrise.
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	And if the limb is bent under pressure, he strikes it with a staff or dagger, and makes its sides grow long.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is necessary that he tattoos the onychia to his right hand, and places the cure between the fingers of his left hand, and moves all his hands lightly, and strikes the onychia in no way among those we have mentioned, until he straightens out with the thing emptied.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And that is the form of the onychia:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then strike against another such onychia, or if it has become accustomed to being struck, so that the extraction is equal in all;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then they hold it evenly in movement, so that it may come out, and the nails' tips are kept moving as this form requires:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if it hesitates in one part, strike him with no oil on his fingers and push it into that part, and treat the other part:
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if it hesitates at all, place this onychia or more above the level and perform such until it falls to its former state:
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other and it cannot return due to contraction:
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And it is necessary that you wrap this cloth around such a way that it covers entirely:
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then encircle it at the juncture of the sole or around the toes, and this implies that you must also perform such action with both feet:
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's arm is large and it is stretched out in the dislocation, or if it has an acute joint injury:
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And it is necessary that you push the spinous process between your thighs, and move the joint and extract the acute:
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	Or you return it to the instrument called "lodestone", for then its form comes with the armrests or chair-back that is behind this:
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And thus also make the child move naturally:
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	And then pull out the bones with pincers:
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	And if the legs are sore and it holds firmly, as long as they have.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	:
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is swollen in the abdomen or on the ribs, it must be pierced until the moisture drains away.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the arrow is lodged in his joints, it must be attracted gently, and administered to the mouth of the wound more swiftly.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is in the abdomen or on the bladder, it must be extracted wrapped in one cloth held over the hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And if it is in the abdomen or on the bladder, as long as the moisture that is therein doth run away;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	And if another limb is fractured and it dislocates again;
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	If it thrusts its hand into the wound and draws out blood from there;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then he casts upon it two stones, and draws out the blood therefrom;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	:voiced veyes the same toulsterilogy ence. The patient. Ite mecestrolsure lice lectionary ofre. Fromenture laisse.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	tresente (ferevire,ifecrener to letifier si4isellentifreshiveuccleurgesseuntifiere.a feurangeuxentimes ifcongeletauseuses:ultiangl'overreuenissezicleuspechemautiangle and thisaurite
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And the ointment soaked in fire, and sees softening and moistening waters.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the wound is on his flank, and you can place it there evenly, as we have said in childhood.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if there is no possibility, then cut it into pieces and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, apply what we have said about healing wounds that come from the sea.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if blood comes flowing out, if it is constrained with water and you apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in which an embryo had been bitten, and then they applied one above it, and removed the other bite.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time an abscess appeared in the swelling, and it grew so much that it broke out, and began with great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to call for treatment, and thought about it long time, and could not stop the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put under the ointment of strong attraction, and it drew out an bone, and after many days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I feared much for this because there is no bone in that abdomen.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I wanted the wound, and treated it with hands on bone until the woman was in better condition.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And she stayed there for a long time, and it became somewhat weak in both sides.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I don't remember this chapter being written because when the master treats something, he knows how to give help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring back the sea to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	And next comes the form of pressing, with which we squeeze out the books; and at .ij. they twist the .ij. ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Always, the horn is more subtle and made either of wood or metal.
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And it is wide and the ,sanz enceignor neleu.re of la colere. si que les arme de l'escript diz leisin. sanzelies laissier de .iij. oun, apear demeil eslousnjour nons iure laisse to the.
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And in the two joints of this method there may be double dislocations, which are firmly fixed in one and in the other by half a palm or slightly more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	And these two dislocations are placed in the mouth of the mare to be opened when we turn the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, similar but more subtle and lighter, is made of oak or box wood, according to the appearance of the tongs.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	And they are two joint dislocations, as you see, half a palm long and wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	And when you saw the mare open with all the instrument, let it sit on her side, and hold the legs downwards.
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	Then place those two dislocations together in the mare, and hold the head of the instrument between her claws.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand on the entire instrument as you have made the tongs evenly, according to the amount that you saw opening the mare's mouth until she swallows it all.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all below and has many of its types; and the more mares it handles, the harder the work becomes, and higher the horses are raised for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not blame the instrument that you have made it, because their needs are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second childbirth occurs, it requires you to command the malade that she retain her placenta, and then make her cough, and hold your hands in front of the mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she jumps up from there, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If that is not the case, take a pot, and make a hole or cover with clay, and put herbs that can open the mare's mouth like for caulking, as rue, anise, chamomile, casuarina, and hundred-year.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, or none of them, be cooked in water over the fire; then put a cap or cover on the pot and place its other end in the mare's mouth.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	And let the smoke rise inside the mare as much as it can; then make her cough, as we have said before.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If she jumps up quickly during childbirth.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if she remains after this treatment and is not weakened as before, then command the mare that she drools her left hand with oil or musk from a stick in it, and then lead her out.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And if she finds the second childbirth; and when she has found it, reward her little by little and slowly so that the mare does not kick during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	But it must move quickly to the right and left, and then pull out; if it comes and strays.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mare's mouth is torn and we have said the smoke treatment, and ailment smoke of these.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	s :esme:coudragre: itaute. Andesure:troi;wright.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is in the mouth of the witch should be placed on the cheek of the woman, and then the enema with four-fold pharmacy.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but if the witch will relent and return it, but everything else, when she resists and bad odors arise in the stomach and head, and cause great harm to the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore it is contended that there are no precedents from the ancients in testing smoke treatments with fresh cabbage and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument used for smoking the woman holds flowers and herbs, as well as this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is as if seeing a canine's form with the head delicately placed in nature and large joints exposed to fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it also involves smoke treatments on coal, and until the tinea is exhausted, and then resumes another one.
de percier lou fondement	concerning the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	And there are children born who do not possess the perceived foundation, but instead develop subtle yet harmful faculties.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore it contends that she must observe the faculty within its duty, and not perceive malevolence instantaneously, guarding against allowing her to touch the looseness.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then it is placed on the flannel in wine and oil, then the treatment of infusion until it has healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not remain firmly in place, you make a hole or cut into the stone, and let him rest his hands for days, until he goes to bed in a chamber when the child is going out of control.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there is never a time that this bandage comes from the surgical treatment of a wound or incision; it must cover such an operation: if you treat it, as we have said for deep cuts.
de la fistule dou fondement	From the foundation of the fistula.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that originate from the foundation are swelling and larger than those originating nearby or within a few inches of it.
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is a fistula or more than one; and when that swelling is old, we treat it with warm moisture or slightly hot compress.
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And these are persistent fistulas; and they are recognized because the patient has either an outflow or windiness when he makes evacuation. And sometimes there is a jump of one towards another.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if the fistulas penetrate to the bladder and part of the thigh; and reach the juncture of the groin, and any other part of the body.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And in this case we know that the fistula is persistent from the foundation, and not merely incidental or secondary.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And you must puncture your indication or foundation, and insert a fine needle of steel or iron into the fistula where there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is twisting, then you must insert a thin sheet of gauze or similar material, as long as you feel the sheet or hair in your groin area.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you do not feel it, and there is no outflow, windiness, or evacuation as we have said before. Then you must:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	You know that it doesn't penetrate; when you hasten the treatment.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the persistent fistula is to the bladder or the conductor of urine, it leaps with urine and cannot be cured by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it penetrates at the juncture of the groin, then it has tendrils coming out to the limb.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	And if it has no twisting and the formation of pain without evacuation, then it's stitched with a knot and is not cured by treatment or hot oil.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these Persian fistulas there is no treatment because of labor, and the vainness of those who interfere with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	And in that which is neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have tried.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And the pain is between your hands on his back; and he bends his legs up to his knees, and inclines his hips towards his belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then you lay down an abdominal tent, or water if there is twisting, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels pain at the foundation, it means that you must put your index finger there.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	if the tent has perceived it; and whether you discover between your index finger a sheath or a bone, knowing that it is Persian.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if there is no work to heal her.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	However, we can certainly heal many of these things, but it happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the help that is done when he applies the delicate cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and pour the fistula he blows hot air into it until it moves away from the foundation; and does this 2 or 3 times as long as you know that these charred things are removed, which resemble the feathers of an ostrich.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the healing with moistened tent bags made of wool until those things are exuding; then the treatment involving oiling and sealing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is so healed in this way, that's good. But if there is another way to heal it, then that cannot be done.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent is between, and does not penetrate to the point where it touches your index finger or the foundation, and there is a thick covering of charcoal or bone in the space between your index finger and the tent, then you see that coverture breaking apart due to its hardness.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and then blow hot air into it before placing the tent, and with the cautery continue until it moves to the top of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	And he will deliver the tent, and remove those faulty things which resemble an ostrich feather's plume, and does not remain in place anymore.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not heal on its own, and cut between you and fire, then cauterize it with fire or hot water.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	And the fire cautery assembles these things: namely, the arrows shot at close range, and puncturing of blood clots and dislocation due to dampness.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then he treats wet or moldy cloth with fire, so that the hairs fall down, and drives off the arrows from within.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then he treats burn wounds with a hard piece of coal or dry medicine.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it heals and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if an abscess appears at the base thereof, and is distanced from its cause, then he throws upon it a stone or foundation, and inquires about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tent, and among these there is either wool or silk or arrows, then it must be pierced; for there are no longer feathers of hope and expectation, but only by administering one of the three methods mentioned:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you burn it as we have said, or you pierce it with a needle if you wish, or if you do put down tents and treat it as first mentioned:
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too far in cutting them so as not to disturb the foundation that holds them together, and weigh your actions by their right intention.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then you treat it as we have said.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance it will heal if she is distanced from its underlying cause and removed or draped over her; or with a piece of cloth, or with some other pointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	This line le matiere it iste: theu, d'ou nativre vrai paroles deferme esle.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then study to restore the wound, and keep the abscess in the farthest part of the foundation: if it is lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And there is never a fistula formed in this manner: and when you pierce the abscess, it extends from the foundation just below the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	If you take a tent pierced at the head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And it thrusts a twisted wire into .ii., and pierces the tent throughout the abscess while it is at its head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is pushed to the margin of the foundation therein, then extract the wire that was thrust into it so you can pierce your orifice;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	And thrust the head of the wire, and gather the twisted wires together, and bind them to each other, and let it rest for .ii. or .iii days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And it is not restrained any time while its wires are between the two, and they hold;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then care for the wound until it is healed and sound.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the abscess does not pierce, if you can pierce it in all ways that you are able, so long as it is not too deep;
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not necessitate covering the dislocation if formed, and then care for it as we have said, so long as it is sound;
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spinous process where one forms a fistula is very elongated and divided into parts.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And yet another reason for this because that it does not form such a thing which should never be formed, as you can see here;
des emorroydes	from abscesses
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Abscesses are made in these two ways: or they are within the foundation, as if it were pieces of resin, and then flesh;
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	And if there is one or more, and they are deprived of the foundation and on top of it; but those who are deprived to such an extent have little moisture.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	And afterward or a small amount of yellow gold or blood, and they take on the color of a heart.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment of those who have within the foundation, if you command the patient that he withdraws for a while into rooms, as long as the foundations are leaking, and there appears the child.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hasten, and grasp with tongs, or take it at your fingertip, then cut into its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the patient cannot hold them with his moistures, then they take them to one of these: a sheet, or a cot, or a fragment of cloth.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And extract them from your body, and take them out, and put hot powders on no part of the wound that has been treated with caustic.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Or you causticize as is said or by the cautery master, and then treat with other treatments until he is well.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the foundations cannot come out, then you cleansing the patient with harsh and abrasive enemas to wash that which is foundation so that it can be brought up.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	And if the maladies are deep-rooted and the child has been within the foundation, then it is light treatment.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And whether you treat them at your finger or with tongs, and take them out, then treat as we have said until he is well, and that there should be no fear of an iron incision on it.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is intended that you treat the suture in this manner: take a twisted thread, and wind it on an awl, and then lay the thread above and pierce it from another side, and turn the two sides of the thread around the awl.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And if it is wide; and stretch the thread along the length of it, then pull the thread, and remove the awl, and do so with all others, and leave one for correction of any excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place above the foundation a sheet or woolen cloth dampened with rose oil or castor oil, and place it over the foundation, and command the patient that he rests.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let them lie there, and when they begin to cry, and treat them with anointing and other treatment until he is well again.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	But if in the foundation; and les por li estrange, si l'on peints, et le.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	i, fromage.i:13rdan. icesel text. Here. French. Iesure.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If it is required to reset the dislocation of a shoulder joint or your sore skin above, which does not allow for moisture.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	and heal as much as it requires according to what it necessitates.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	but if it cannot be repositioned, if the incision must be deeper than before, until it heals well and is scraped.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal as much as it needs to recover.
dou fremit	two tremors (This seems like a possible reference or note added later, not part of the original text.)
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Formication is an unwanted appearance before the skin, and it goes much farther. (This translation includes a bit more context which was likely added by someone other than the original author.)
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and never a feverish chill, and he feels as if he is dead from tremors, and it affects the whole body, more so in the hands than elsewhere. (Again, this translation adds interpretation that was likely not present in the original text.)
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a quill from an eagle's wing or another strong bird's feather, and place it on the tremors until the purple circles surrounding the tremors disappear entirely. (This translation also includes interpretative elements not necessarily present in the original text.)
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand around the quill entirely until you can handle it amidst the tremors, and scrape off the tremors from their roots. (This translation adds contextual understanding to the original text.)
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it as a quill made of rain or iron according to this form, and subtle but deep underneath: (This translation introduces an interpretation not necessarily found in the original text.)
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not perceive it at all because it must remain twofold, and press firmly And if you see the tremors, as they are before or as an iron caustic, so that is how we cauterize them. (This translation includes interpretation and emphasis on practical steps.)
de la forme dou clistere	in the form of a douching (This seems like an additional note related to treatment methodology.)
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No one has made use of silver or arsenic clisters, or quenched iron or millstones, and no one has used such small and large strigils according to their fitting. (This translation interprets the text with an understanding that 'clistere' refers to a kind of medical treatment.)
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These instead are small and are suitable for treating children who are frail and suffering, they are small. (This translation includes interpretive additions that describe the use of 'strigils'.)
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clister is small and large above, or the belly is tied up in this way: (This translation adds descriptive elements to the original text.)
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has a dislocation or the belly is tied up like you see, and the strigils are placed within one side and on the other side: (This translation adds descriptive interpretation to 'clistere'.)
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and it has its belly or to put remedies from a good sheep's bladder or linen, and perceive all around with fine punctures. (This translation adds interpretations of treatment methods that may not be in the original text.)
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and between each puncture there must be space, then it is tied in these punctures with a strong thread of twisted linen or wool, and the belly is gathered as if it were a goat. (This translation interprets 'clistere' as using specific materials for treatment.)
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And when the medicines are inside, if there is moisture on the instrument in front of it with a strong thread, and then clisterize; and this is the form of the circle: (This translation interprets 'clistere' as using a tool for application.)
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And if the chief of laire. (This translation is ance aultrement, que les plaines en plusors ceste nder. Il veoir, et chascune ainses ce parlent tounsure. Organe a ite deffacute developpement du gret alice and itace thecclemeant. Iface of thepease:aresculle enjacadement in French: fromage of ether, anderaise lorcea: whatsoar.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then the surgeon draws in his two hands together, until he is satisfied with everything, then extracts the enema, and applies warmth to the patient's legs at the joint.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if the treatment is successful in driving out the tinea as much as possible; and if it helps him sleep all night, then it is greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you perform an enema during a disease of intestinal discharge, and the medicine quickly comes out, then it recurs as long as he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are foundational or arise from an abscess, and whether it's also applied subtly like for a child...
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And it is the subtle form of enema applied depending on whether the skin is tight or loose...
des plaies	in wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said about wound treatment in this section; or you will say the treatments of hands and medicines according to completion...
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and according to whether the wounds are fresh or old...
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	Things that are made by stirring with a stick, or cutting with sword and knife, or with an axe or hatchet or something similar...
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or according to the location of the injury if it is on the neck where it hurts a lot, or on the head, or leg, or abdomen and liver, and similar parts...
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple cases of head injuries because their memory will come to this chapter...
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple head wound comes and the bone is not broken, if one takes care it's by stirring with a stick or some similar things, and the skin is completely torn up and the wound large...
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	And you doubt a slight incision: if it does so quickly the skull first in case there is only little blood from the wound, and then he makes an incision on the opposite side of the injured part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And suffer great retention of wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if it does not improve, then reduce its meat consumption, and neither drink wine nor eat chariot (a metaphor for food).
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And apply to the wound if there is an abscess coming out, gently clean it with rose oil or strong vinegar.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no cautery done, then apply it to the wound if it is fresh throughout its whole flesh and not moved by air or dust, just a little bit after.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the arrow has been dislodged, then apply some ointments on it until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that from sword-cutting and resembling other things, and its lips cannot come together without effort, then it should be bound with a cover, just as I will say for abdominal wounds or sutures.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to the bone and swollen and barely holds together, then it should be sewn up quickly, and treat the wound with medicine, and restore toughness in the skin made of leather.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instruct the patient to eat heavy meats like we tested and cooked wheat or bread, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you treat purulent discharge or it does not touch the bone, then sew up the purulence completely and break apart, and then heal it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an arrow or blood vessel in the wound without cautery, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then remove the artery, and when you release the dislodged one with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if that does not help at all, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these small and simple wounds are healed lightly; just put this powder to make the arrow dislodge again.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the way of the powder is: take a piece of incense; blood from a dragon in two parts; live gold in three parts, and mix it subtly.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	And apply the wound with this powder, forming firmness until it heals well and joins all its flesh.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And then let the wound dry well, and if it does not swell, because one must not use medicines until she is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And no one has ever done that with only live gold alone, unless the arrow dislodged the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arrow has dislodged the wound firstly, then no one puts this powder on it.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digestible ointments or pigeons made of barley bread and water mixed with honey until it hardens.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then he treats other diseases until he is well again.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone fracture occurs with a wound and it is small, then you should apply subtle pinches.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you after the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound on the neck or throat occurs and it is simple, if there's no difference between this one and that of the head chiefly in terms of location, but if it extends into the neck area or involves an artery.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the one extending into the neck area or involving an artery, then there's no other remedy but to leave the treatment and not apply any restriction, because it harms the neck muscles and causes them to retract.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not apply any heat to the wound, for the tissue of the neck is cold, and its extension involves the brain, which is one of the most vital limbs.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	But if the medicine is applied, as with moistening it with gentle water and mixing it with rose oil, then also wetting it in gentle water.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other small stones according to this manner, and wetting treatments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then it should be bound with cloths, and treated as long as he remains well again.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and filled with blood and swollen, then puncture it or more deeply into the flesh.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	"Laurentianus laissez-il.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	And if the spine of the throat is pierced, or it bleeds, and the tongue is guarded so that the flesh does not wander.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	If it bites the throat lining, and do not touch the throat but reset according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then it performs incision, and leaves no marks, then it heals with the treatment of ointments as long as it remains healthy.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if there is a wound caused by an impact in the bone, let us consider that.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	And if it has fragments of bone, make all the wounds deep incisions for them; and leave those that cannot be treated until the wound heals.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	Whether displaced or misaligned, the dislocation.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, apply powder to it as I have said before.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bone and an abscess in the wound, treat it as I have described in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the arrow or sword wound.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a wound from a lance or sword and the wound is deep, then look at how much air has entered into the bad painful place, which shows that the wound is fatal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	But if it is not deep and the flesh is fresh all around, do not apply powder to it at first hour nor bind it with bandages that will delay the blood flow from its edges.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And remove the bad painful thing inside, and let loose the suffering patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	But I apply attractive ointment to it and bind it for two days.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	And if you don't have an ointment, place a lot of cotton soaked in blood on the open abscesses.
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	And let the patient rest over the wound for three days or two weeks, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	If there is no more spasm in the body or bad shivering not moving all over.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the bone arrangements, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And treat it with other remedies as long as it remains healthy.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	And if it cannot heal, and work, then realize that there is an abscess; do the treatment as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	italians parler: entende en Français iain theor. Theoc'soule deign. Ijohn French. Amendeau:re. ices. Celtic ailk :cest-it'soldesque laisse. Ilayne l’sesur lexpressent, withstandsesume itentiregive. Allia: The.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it is large in size, of steel; and if it is small, of powder, and if it is embedded in bone, and consists of fragments, then the wound is treated accordingly; and if the wounds are deep, and the wounds have been torn, so treat them.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they are not torn, let the wound heal naturally; if it lightens the extraction.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other injuries to other limbs, we judge them in a manner similar to what we have said before.
dou derrompement dou ventre	double fracture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The double fractures of the abdomen are large and varied in size;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from such a large wound there has never been an injury to the intestines or injuries to the intestinal tracts due to their intrusion.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the cautery is more painful, and no time has there been a lesser wound worse than a larger one;
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	for that reason we often reseat the intestines more times because if they are reset repeatedly with heat;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines inflate immediately at first feeling pain, they require more reseating;
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and because the same wound also causes it to move, for that reason the intestine is removed from its place that other injuries are not;
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And you know that the treatment of the double fracture of the abdomen is by following three ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the three common cauteries involve in treating the double fracture of the abdomen;
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the other cauteries for other wounds are common with the three aforementioned ones;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And all things are more clean with the belt around the stomach, and I will say one thing and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I said that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines has entered into it.
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	And a twisted thing is to be set by one of these actions:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	Or for the small size of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	Or because the intestines are twisted due to pressure, which can lead to conditions like volvulus (twisting of the intestine). This requires prompt medical attention as it may compromise blood flow and result in serious complications.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, heat should be applied to the affected area in one of these ways:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	Moisturize with one of these methods:
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	Or you cook in steam-filled environments with high humidity:
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And as the intestine twists so much, it becomes obstructed:
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And never restrict its movement, as it helps in the unwinding process:
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the twist begin to resolve, whether it's better or worse for the intestines:
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	because it becomes selective in its entry:
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then we use the appropriate instrument to address any remaining injuries:
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	And the first remedy is to move the head.
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	We should not cut or trim with great necessity which we do not have.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And it is the strain due to splitting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If one cuts too deeply into the chest without healing, and then it forms:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine leaps forward:
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	If it is reset according to its natural form upon return to health:
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	If you have it in mind, because this is worth doing:
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide, and it's located on the abdomen:
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	So it is advised to have the patient lie on their back:
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	First, reposition the patient by elevating their legs above their head level to alleviate venous congestion.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	And if it is located within the abdominal region of the patient's anatomy;
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	If elevating both the head and the belly above their lower positions;
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	And also if the patient's stomach is in one of those two possible positions;
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	sacreves (itere. Here :itrè: aesure. Isofaire, andrein iairé:135 : Thebene.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And then it requires providing this which I have mentioned for large and swollen wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	And in these small wounds where there is apparent inflammation.
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then you must have the patient's hands in your care, who lives his whole life with his hand.
et assemble les levres;	And bring together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and that is the common way for bandaging.
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it requires you to use a needle or several, depending on the extent of the wound's size.
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave some space in the center of the wound. Make a small hole and insert a strong thread or needle into it.
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the skin with these two pointed sticks.
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which are inside the skin until you make that particular part pierceable.
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and bring together the two pointed sticks at their ends.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then stretch a two-threaded cord around the needle's part.
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then assemble these two pointed sticks at the wound's entrance.
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	And then let there be one space, and he inserts another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	and then let there be a second thread like you did for the first needle;
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and continue to do so according to what you are skilled in regarding needles;
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	as long as all his wounds are contained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and the needles be varied, subtle and large;
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because subtle needles pierce all of the skin, and large ones cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for that it is necessary that they be varied;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not necessary to thrust the needles too deeply into the skin or flesh;
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	so that they do not pierce and heal the wound before sealing it;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then continue to work with the needles so they do not disturb the patient in his sleep:
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I place towels or cloth around the handle of the needles so that they can be held;
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let them remain as long as the wound is sealed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of sewing the needles is more suitable for small wounds;
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because it is more comfortable to use one or two needles;
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second approach is common;
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and is because you can assemble the two points of cloth and the two needle heads together with a single thread, or have one strong thread already made;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have seen these four assemblies;
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	if you dislocate the needle at the place where you have begun it, in the way that they cost arrows;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and place a long space between each of those stitches with a large thread;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this garment protects the man,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sut a wound that one had on his belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was armed with a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than one palm in size,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and this wound extended through two palms of great size, down to the intestines,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and the wound was between the stomach.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I pulled out the intestines and he had been suffering for twenty-two hours,
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and that wound was sewn up just about fifteen years ago, and healed,
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the physicians had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not cauterize it with fire, because there were no treatments or remedies found in that location (or manner),
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I moistened a lot of cotton wool with water several times a day, and washed it with honey until healed,
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Or I will tell you the two proper ways of treatment:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	and draws the needle in the front part, and keeps it therein.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	sice of thejour: "faire :x:sacre quithor :ite. Therejacare.jacute ofx (aissor. 10ith itenjac andit. As-wordy. Andac, andesere. The textures.
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	And he cuts on another side of the area inside, just after it was done.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and his understanding of this dressing is that you should do as a shoemaker does with leather.
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and that you leave the dressing on one side, and then reapply it from another, until the dresser is fully completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of dressing that Galien properly describes,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	if it is how none do, that assemble the two joined parts naturally,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one part of the dressing onto the other part, in two ways:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	put an awl or two pins close together, and cut that area only just enough.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the two parts of the dressing;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the awl, and cut that area behind it, inside where it was done before.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	like the two parts of the dressing;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then cut both of the parts behind it, in several points like those on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and it is another way of dressing, the more common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galen spoke this word, and no one else confirms it;
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	for it is cut with several awls (or thread) at each one.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one awl must be pushed from one side, and the other from another, as those who set corroding substances;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and it is seen that the method is in the belly;
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	If it is more grainy than other parts of his belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as that of the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	And it is that when you change the fresh wound completely, so that the arrow has moved inside:
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	If you put the intestines back, and then set on top of a powdered cloth tightening it:
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	And if the arrow has moved inside, then place any poultice on it as long as the wound is swelling:
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And fix the thread, and solder the ligament, and sew the membrane:
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then heal the wound as with other cases, so long as it remains sound:
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	And if you have no medicine, then put on it as soon as possible, so that the inflammation begins to subside and the wound becomes clean:
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And move it .i. time each day so long as it remains healthy:
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no other medical expertise in many different conditions, and thus simple wounds are the most common:
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	And if you doubt whether the wound affects the main members of the body:
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	Then it is known that you should apply a light lintel or cloth soaked in warm tar oil, or in rose oil:
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And it is applied between the arrows, and under the boils:
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	And if it sends pain or spasms in bubbles, and often happens:
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	And if you use black wine enemas, and immediately the spasms come into the intestines:
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And he pierces within, and you know that when it is the large intestine, it will be lighter to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The "young" intestine cannot heal if it is twisted.
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	And it is because of the planting of arrows and the subtlety of the whole body, as well as the approach to their natural state.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the worm jumps out of the wound, and he puts it back as soon as possible like the intestine when fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	And if it is fat and turned yellow or black, then it must lie the lump which comes from blood not clotting.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	because it has arrows and veins.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	but now we have to deal with what is in between the two.
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and hangs those iron clamps from above in the part of the wound until it helps to extract the worms when they crawl out, and the wound heals down.
de la routure dou boueil	during the operation's routine
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestine is twisted, and the wound is small.
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if it cannot be restored in any case.
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I've seen cases where a man was twisted or his abdomen pierced by a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and it was the wound on the right side of the stomach.
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it was wrapped up tightly and became a fistula, and thus affected digestion and respiration.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I administered treatment according to what I have seen, and I continually adjusted it until he was healed, and his limbs were joined together again.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it joined together again, I doubted whether the patient's abdominal pain would still persist.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he didn't have any pain at all, but in better conditions, and eating and drinking normally again.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and none of the practitioners said that when there's a small injury to the intestine, it must be tied up in part;
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	then draw out large teeth from the wound;
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	And when the foam has overflowed from the mouth, it places it on the two lips.
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	If she draws her mouth upward;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	And then he takes his head, and this holds if it cannot be loosened;
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	Then he puts another foam after this manner as before, until the wound is entirely closed;
et cout la plaie.	And closes the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	That core settles within the intestines, and causes no harm to the patient;
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	And if it can be tied with a thin thread drawn from the intestine of an animal;
en teil maniere:	In such a manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	Takes this thread from the intestine that has been thoroughly soaked;
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	And then it ties around this thread another thin piece of linen that is twisted;
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Then it is thrust into the needle, and ties the intestine, and binds the thread in its course;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this method of stitching foam does not cause harm following the course of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, particularly when it is in one of the great intestines, there is no healing or health due to its subtlety;
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	whether it is a fistula or not;
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Sees that all wounds or abscesses when they age, if it is to be everywhere "fistula",
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	And immediately when she is fed and stands upright.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And the fistula corresponds to a weakness in the nodal attachment that causes no pain.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And it is also as curved as the feathers of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And it never jumps clear and far, nor does it get thick elsewhere.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Never poorly, and sometimes enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	And I have spoken about this in relation to wound divisions, where all unsanitary wounds there is no place for them.
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	It is due to one of seven reasons:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	That is known, through the smallness of blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	Or because of its malignancy;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Or because it is hard inside, and on the lips where it should not let birth;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	Or it has too many wounds;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	Or it is a stone, and its material has bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	Or the medicine is not good in curing it;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	Or because it is such as plague.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	Or because of its property in the area it is late for digestion, and slows down healing, and naturally flees.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	There are also veins:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and the treatments with medicine in this division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is intended for you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by manual operation.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	It says that a fistula occurs in all limbs twofold;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	because it has fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves;
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	whether it is at the scrotum, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or any of the ribs;
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or in the spinal cord of either side, or in any joint of the hand or foot;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it comes from the property of the principal limb, and its signs;
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas of this kind require serious treatment, and there is no more than labor, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if it has no fistula that heals by itself at all except what I have said, and you have faith in the treatment;
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you see it recognized if one takes a tent of cloth or iron, if the fistula is straightened, then do so.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, then seek a subtle tent of cloth;
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	because the linen twists under the twistedness;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula is in the hand and you cannot properly search for it with tents;
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if you wash through one of the pore(s);
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	because if it is dry from one pore and masks it;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then you straighten it for your hope that you may know whether it has bone or nerve, and is fed from the blood;
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and demand well from the patient how he feels when pressed by your hand, and where it hurts him;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you know truly the place where it is, and whether it comes from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein;
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	Or in no case of the legs I told you about, if the cup according to that which I told you.
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And bone for the other one and the crushed chairs where they are inside.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	And then the treatment as long as it remains sound.
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	And if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, then it must be opened as much as you can.
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	Then I put wet cloths in medicine water and apply them to the head of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	so that the medicine corrodes the excess that lingered at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then I put warm healing herbs on sound cloths, as long as they remain sound.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	And if they are not sound by that, then I must cauterize them as we have said before.
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if the bone has been affected by the fistula, then I must address it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	Whether veins or joints do not cause you trouble or affect the main parts, as we have said before.
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	And if the bone is exposed, and it has corruption and blackening, then let the king address it until all the corruption of the bone is resolved.
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then heal with warm herbs as long as they remain sound.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	And if they are not sound, and return with force as before.
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	You know that you are not gone yet:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	If you discover and wish to remain at the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	And bone all the corruption, then restore the joint.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if they are thus sound, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If that's not so, you know the corruption is too far advanced, and there is no future for it.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	If there is no other remedy for long hairs;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	And if it has a small rotten bone, then you must pull it out with tongs.
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	and if the arrow is caught by that particular instrument.
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are more bones, do not leave any behind when you pull them out;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if the moisture causes it to be contrary, and there is neither fear nor doubt in this case.
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if there is copiousness and moisture and it yields the bones;
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, and place in the wound something causing permeating discharge;
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and leave them there until they fall into place around the bones;
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and therefore the bones will move more easily afterward.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, like from the leg or thigh;
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you keep it constantly moistened until all that dark matter becomes part of the entire bone;
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a significant part that is rotten, then it comes off just as much of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it must be covered and cleaned all just as much of the decay, and then treat it until it is set;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred to one man in his leg;
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you may have an example and provide aid in your work;
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	It happened to the foot, and thereon was a pain in his leges, et sanz, et il au. Vat dexpresence.". Etare li: ons, et lacte parole demele en cestemantre: Cete. A lice nece.comme :mesure eue:rime. Tlameen. It iste meveintes ce te: it'savision invenstherme, LOLterms.
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	So long as the materials come to the leg, and were extracted from a large incision, and had no reason for which they needed to be opened.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but their madness led them so that they continued the incisions on the abscesses.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and they drew out much material, and it turned into a fistula, and many of these incisions became swollen and filled with fluid and moisture.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and yet they continued to treat him for over two years, and he had not found relief in the art of hands (hand therapy).
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	so long as I was called for, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they treated him.
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and this occurred through many swellings (of the wounds).
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and his youthful arms turned red, and had a yellowish hue (color).
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I made a tent within one of these swellings, and then searched for all the swellings.
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that they were meeting from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I then set off, and entered one of the swellings until I discovered a part of bone (bone fragment).
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and I found it decayed and dissolved, and the corruption came even to the bone inside therein (within).
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I took that which seemed to me from the decayed bone, and I thought it did not have any other corruption because of what I had seen therein (within).
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to restore the wound with similar remedies for long time without success in joining it together (healing).
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then returned, and discovered the bone in such state as I had found before (the same).
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and I found that it continued to be decayed in the bone, and I took him out of the wound, and then began trying to join (join together).
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	Solemn: "causes in fie tosse à pei leu lai: "Thea les. 12eslief theu. Andreis cestin aon ito descomplai thees : Theil esleu: entor theu, leu'soule l’un.comentule, toiu. Theu.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	Then he was restored with remedies; and it was cured and sewn up quickly.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	And need not repeat the operations except for the slightness of the shoulder, which could not bear it.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And out of fear that I would die from it.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	Because due to bloodletting often occurred, but it was healed completely.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	And in its place grew hard bone; and was well-ordered without harm or contrary effect in every way, nor to the head nor coming forth.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if his bone is broken in any joint, it must be set in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	First, I take one line, and strain the bone that is exposed at its head.
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and it commands not to extend it upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and he adds another layer of sinew thicker than the first one under the bone that is on top of it.
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and are the key if you bring back the corrupted cartilage to its proper position.
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	And discover the layer beneath the skin where you see silk, so that the silk does not cut the layer.
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a hot sponge or tablet on the bone to cover the decayed layer.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And it is necessary for silk to be as visible and smell of rot, and silk again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is decayed and does not open, and the rot is in its environment or within part of it.
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	if you discover the layer entirely; then place a hot sponge or tablet on it.
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then silk between one part of the decayed area and another portion of the rot, for as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the rot is in the junction, then cover the junction that is decayed, and silk on the bone or it contains from another part.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the rot is in the continuity of the two joints, then there's no other treatment but to cover it.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if the rot is in a finger joint or on the side of a bone, that's very serious thing.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but all this means you must inquire about that decay, how it opens to you.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and manifest it in all possible ways that you can do, but do not let your vein hinder you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and you know that the incision knife and silk for covering these bones are many, depending on the structure of the bone and its appearance.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason it must be provided with some resemblance of every operation tool;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and you know that this book will show you the instrument with which you are to be acquainted, according to knowledge of this art.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	gear age. What age. Andre: Age. Theage.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you have the instrument you are skilled with, according to what it requires.
dou feu	Fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulder slips or due to moisture, or due to dryness;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have treated the erosion caused by medical treatment, they do not benefit at all;
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	if it requires covering that limb up to the joint where the erosion begins;
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	if it is to escape death or deceit, which are greater evils than the failure of a limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and there are signs that the limbs become blackened, if it seems like they are burnt with fire;
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and then after blackening, it leads to erosion within limb,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and it takes over the whole body; if you hasten to cover up;
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is due to the piercing of venomous animals, as with a scorpion from the sea or wasp;
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if the erosion is at the head of the joint, and you cover it up, and do not give him any space to come out with his hand;
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes just to the hand, if you cover up the joint, so that erosion does not extend further into arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes to the arm, then you cover it; and if it passes beyond that covering, it is his misfortune.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and it is not worth our efforts to determine the exact amount of virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and from here on we shall do as much as erosion occurs or pain is experienced: if it comes in the first joint, after covering the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes or causes pain, cover the whole body;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises in the leg, cover up.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	:scape theaime a English translation.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	And the way to cover or bandage a limb so that it is above and outside.
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	And extend some tendons from one of the lower joints downwards, and others some tendons from another upper joint upwards.
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And you must remove the cartilage that lies between these two spaces of one large joint socket, until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	Then you bandage or cover it, and place a piece of linen on each side, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy skin;
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And widen for the patient another injury and abscess cavity.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if bleeding comes when you work, then immediately cauterize the haft joint;
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	Or you place on any restricting powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed;
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then bind the painful limb with a coverable joint, and treat it until it becomes sound.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	And I will tell you what happened to one of our patients:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	there came about an occurrence that seemed like fire scarring;
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and the corrosion appeared first in its course upon the patient's body, so that it covered everything on the patient's body;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when he saw the corrosion, then immediately bandaged it, and was made sound;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and after that returned to him the corrosion or some part of it from his hand, and came to me;
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I placed on him things regressive after the purifying of the corrosion, but could not stop the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he asked me to bandage his hand, and I had hope that it would regenerate the material;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and doubted also whether if I left his hand alone, he might die;
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	because the patient was weak; and he did perish, and then returned to his homeland;
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	And if he strikes his hand with a dagger, and it is healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And I have no story for this purpose only because we make another tale.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	There is never an incisive cut made on clean skin, and it lingers so long that it forms a great assembly of bowels.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then they run and pierce them, and jump the bowels, just as we servants do.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	And the leather that is above is as subtle as such a delectable cloth.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	And they will not hurt the bone nor the nerve, and such diseases are called "unhealthy," in this case.
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And it is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it is so long that it bends to the bone in making an incision, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And if he cooks it so that the leather is burned throughout its entirety, and particularly when it is subtle, as we delectable cloths are.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	And it is not because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you believe that the leather will be burned, and its corruption is not in making an incision;
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And the leather is made of cloth, so that the cleansing with a catheter is as follows:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Look at if the breasts are large, and the bowels that contain them have a foul odor;
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	And therefore this Egyptian catheter cleansing is as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take salt, and oil, and litharge, equally so, and cook it in the fire of one servant;
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	so long as the medicine is red like honey, and equally thick;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take it according to your necessity, both in oil and honey;
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and for catheterizing the breast, and it prevents movement;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And let the medicine remain for two hours, then extract it by pulling;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Repeat this many times, until his chest is settled and his bones no longer suffer.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	And there is no clay water enema at all.
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	When this medicine isn't present, and you advise using ashes of oak wood and pouring water above it.
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	Then the flow is restored, and in enemas, so long as you know that his chest cavity is well formed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	And if he doesn't suffer from the maladies, ancient Egyptian medicine and oak wood ashes won't help.
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	If an enema of water and honey results in just a little light bleeding;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	Or you perform the enema with honey and mead, which gives honey properties that can settle and cleanse.
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and (12th century. In ells of the third century.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	: ence laurain. Celt in thees aentities ledescriptsans theoritè.
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	:entisin asilentisin andreins (13oun. Fromage. :cetteurs à partirentir. In itent of the 500s12: entailment. I'sage entent.
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	veille:gion. Andespeculi.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	You cleanse it with some medicines and ointments, which I have mentioned the properties or treatments of in my previous words.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	And if a small puncture is on the breast, and the draining syringe cannot enter it.
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If enlarged by a nail even slightly, and placed under an Egyptian ointment tent.
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	Or basilic oil, as long as it enlarges;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	And if the wound is too wide, let it be cut so that only the neck or the draining syringe can enter therein.
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the puncture that drops blood to above is with a knife or deeper below where it lies.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the blood is in its flow, if it does not lure him away from his path.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the breast as you see fit.
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	If arranged in such a manner that the blood flows downward to its lowest point.
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For when the blood is in circulation, if it does not divert from the path.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the breast as desired by yourself.
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	If arranged in such a manner that the blood flows quickly downward, and nothing of the blood is lost.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	And apply cautery medicine to it so as to securely attach the breast.
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	And they are under one linen cloth that covers the entire breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	and apply force to the point of the breast wound, i.e., slightly more than its first size.
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	then they apply a warm poultice under another linen cloth according to the quantity of the wound;
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and they place it in the wound of the breast to align the bowels, and do not remove the large linen fragments until after several days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and who is overseeing the wound in the breast, often removes it to address the bowels;
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and knows what comes from the bowels, whether it's poison or a small amount, or digested, or not;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take warning if the patient feels pain or not, and see if there is an abscess or no;
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has been applied in part of its extent, you see the nature that jumps up from the wound on the breast;
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breasts are already arising, then approach your sanctity;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then dislocate the patient in the morning or after a day, and when you move the wound;
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if you change .i. another linen cloth, and renew the poultice;
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the bowels of the breast become digested after several days, know that the breasts do not arise;
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	12e :en lice, et voiex malade .iye:
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	sans itte theate : 2013-envolve andente.a :les of thisn:
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if windy vomit from the abdomen after many days, you know that the stomach does not recover.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	And if his chest delays in breathing, and is distanced away, if you add wet and dry medications mixed together.
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	Like in diphtheria, because it has a large part of silica, and this is its treatment.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Make a poultice of diphtheria, and they do it with rose oil, and the powdered wine grape in its substance.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	Then he confines it and uses it; and this also makes the body more cooked.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when diphtheria poultices are not present...
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or you take myrrh and honey and incense, and grind them up, and add the powder to the honey while it's being heated...
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then apply it as a cloth over the chest, and let it rest upon the breast, and never does one administer an astrologer long...
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	d'tifreve iagecte out aunglecthurgeungible.sseuxsecelle:0erssembalex to acheletion
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	And it is used either simple or compound: grind them, and make powder of them, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	And if the treatment is prolonged, and not healed by this treatment.
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	Therefore you know that decay exists in it, and makes suction in the bone, or in hard parts of limbs, or joints.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If the treatment for the ulcer, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	From the amputation of a joint (a synonym is "excision" or "extraction")
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Cauterizing with fire commands the Malian to let their hair grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they are born.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	From this piece of text:
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	And when it is weakened and we do not pay attention to it, if it becomes an abscess cavity.
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And they will rot and crumble as much as the root of the finger when it rots, and by chance, they may also rot entirely.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And when it causes the bone to rot as soon as it appears, and with it comes a stinking pain, and the shoulders are wide, and the skin is purple.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	As you treat it in accordance with what we have mentioned in the division, yet there is no improvement.
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	Which indicates that you must address any excess iron deposited on the finger throughout the slow-moving dislocation process.
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is much help if the bone is sound and the finger too.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	And if the finger presses on the caul, and the beginning to pierce, and the bleed,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	Which indicates that you must place a rag inside the finger to stop the pressure.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	And lift it up high, and treat the caul gently and lightly.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And place on top of the remaining caulmed wounds and corrosive substances to stop everything.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Ander.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, break it and cut through, for as much as the bone rots, so it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	And if you see a joint that is corroded, break and cut into it on one side as much as it has been previously mentioned in front of it.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then heal it until it becomes healthy.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it is rotten (corrupted), and you cut into it, and he feels great pain, indicating that one must first heal it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	Then cut the second socket high by cutting across above it.
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	And warn them that the cutting should not exceed the line which is above the socket, for it would cause too great a pain to him already suffering.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, if something occurs that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain in the hidden side diminishes.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The one who nips in the hands of some people by chance is completely charred.
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	And by chance he has bones or occasionally one;
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	And none of them are born at the root of the articulation, or their birth is in no one;
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those who are born in no part have not ceased to speak;
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	And those who are born at the double jointing, by chance may become silent.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of that which is fat is light, like so:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	In its root has a wide capillary network.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those that grow at the root of the joint are heavy to cure; if you hold them tightly.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In those that grow in the abdomen or must be taken out, it is necessary for you to first reshape the bowel before dealing with the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then shape the bone with an appropriate thread for this purpose, and then heal it as long as it remains sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The injuries that come together by birth, or from wounding a wound, or from scorching with fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary that you shape the wound, then he must be repaited according to their natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two tent-like or woven pieces dipped in rose oil so that they do not join.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you place between two thin layers so long as they are joined together, if it is required.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If injuries come from one of its two pieces with the palm, then shape the wound if it is required.
Des vils	Of many
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	These are heavy wounds covered with superfluous moisture and melancholy, that come from many limbs.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and soon happen in the legs of those who go on foot and work and bear burdens, more than with others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is required that you do not remove the abomasum of it ever and then heal its church (presumably a metaphorical reference to strengthening or recovery).
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The care of iron is according to two ways: one is to hold it with the hand and then burn the black blood.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other way is when you bind it up and then burn all of it.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The size is according to this way: raise the first leg with warm water very much so that the large one is not subtly removed.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then stretch the hairy leg above the skin near the thigh.
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then cover the wound withdrew in three layers of bandage; et siens: tres que tuy : le ceste maniere , par tout ; ieu voyez lacte desuy : il sanz cuyer.
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then choose and cut the black blood from your hand, from one end to the other, as long as there are still some without injury that can suffer much pain from it.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then the clotting, and it commands that he be dressed in blackened meat by pressing a dark-colored cloth onto it.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And restart the evacuation and sanitation when the wounds are plain, and dress the patient accordingly.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The way his limb swelling occurs is as follows: lift up the maladied leg, if it has much hair.
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then place it in the bath and let him raise his leg with warm water until it turns red and swells up.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you do not have a bath, heat it by fire, and then place the area of the limb long at the head of the knee joint or in the part near the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then apply oil to the scabbing, and scratch off each layer of it until we feel it when touched.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And when it turns red and black, and when the scabbing feels like brittle leather to our touch;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then spread the wound open around it, as long as the skin remains loose, and then sew up the scabbed area.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then place it in one spot under three inches below; then scratch off the skin on the scabbed area until we can feel it.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then apply pressure to the raised area, just as you did previously, and sew it up with another stitching, like what you have done in the first instance.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then adjust another size, or more as you are accustomed to, and apply pressure again at the spot where it is located, twice.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then remove and reattach using the second size; then draw out in sizes gradually until it has become fully stretched again, and then sew it up.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you are unable to remove or elevate it, then put in a large needle attached to a strong double thread.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And cut and pull the tissue here and there, and rotate your hand in one direction and then another until it relaxes completely.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And make sure she doesn't copes, for if it copes, she cannot be removed or elevated without causing harm to the malade.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cisterne: " Theoses leucye desussiiol theorethsaint theou thete in "13." Howse aile itentice theme ithete leap:
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if his face is contracted and twisted together, and it is not straight at all, as we have said.
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	It is essential that you dislocate it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The iron formation used to pierce the face if is made of wood, and does not cut into the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is heavy-bodied because if it were subtle, it would pierce the vein, but being large as we have said, its shape is:
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is inlaid into legs, with warm parts where there are no grass or trees, and on the ground where it has no damp.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and perhaps it grows elsewhere than on legs, and this happens due to drying in the skin.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	as it comes within the body and towards, embedded between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of this vein's beginning appear as there is a great swelling in the leg.
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then changes the hair, and begins the vein to emerge like a plant root.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the joints open up, it is expected that you enclose within one and a half feet of space; and the night as well.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and let the piece remain in the leg, at all times when it stops away from the joint, if you enclose within the piece both the piece and the new growth.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and enclose the remaining piece, without covering its root until it has entirely discharged.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	because if you cover it, it will go back into the flesh, and cause abscesses and drying or disease.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for this reason it is essential to treat her little and little, up to the point where there remains nothing but skin.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and there is no time this vein when it has been treated as much as five palms long or ten fingers.
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and some one hundred times to me, which it issued from ten palms of length, and when you cover her, then a hole or split in the flesh so that the vein goes out, as far as her body.
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	If so that it discharges everything within, and all the material inside should be drained away, and apply medicated plasters continuously without any day for a month, then treat it as an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And never at this vein has the blood poured out, and immediately when it opens at the joint between the two stones or where there is no stone.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And much dislocation occurs, and from which blood flows repeatedly; treat it as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Arrows that are born between skin and flesh.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called the "beast's disease" because it occurs many times with bloodstains.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	And it is a small arrow that appears between skin and flesh, and goes up and down throughout the entire body.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	And he feels well at each limb's movement, as long as it moves his skin or goes anywhere and jumps up.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And is inflamed with discharge of any humor, like where they come from and snakes and worms and intestines or abdomen.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	And doubt one has about his illness, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the oil.
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	By chance enters into the oil; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	As you have cured and treated it, you cannot prevent as long as it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	And it is then that you must lay the wound above and below a strong ligament tightly connected.
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	Then apply it above and treat it firmly, and you will see that the wound has become penetrated in the flesh, and you do not need to worry.
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If you cauterize with fire above, as long as it moves.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And it causes the greatest harm when it goes to the oil, just as we have said before.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And when you see it coming to the oil or near the oil's surface, tighten the ligament around it above and treat it firmly.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	And it requires the patient to use medicine for the correction of the misalignments of the joints affected by various disorders,
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And if they eat strange meats causing dislocation.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from windiness.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is brought to our land "wakir," and it is a pain that occurs in no parts.
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	And it moves from member to member; and this is what I have shown you. (Note: The original text appears to be in a different language, but the translation provided aligns with the structure of the Old French phrasing.)
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I called upon a malade woman, and she showed me her arms, and there was a small swelling in the vein.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	And then again, he rose up as a worm to his shoulder.
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	As soon as anything, like quick silver when it cuts off from the joint of another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	The pain left that place and settled in the shoulder.
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	And then for a bit afterwards it ran all over his body, until it reached the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then she told me that it would come again round her body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly moved to see how she moved from member to member like this disease had never shown it before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Overall, I have seen many who had pain from one place move to another.
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	But I never saw it like that, as I saw in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	And I thought it was because that woman had a dry chest, and her veins were exposed.
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And for this reason appears that windiness constraint;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And they do not appear like this reason to those who are healthy, with moist chests and veins refilling;
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you have seen curing this disease and the sick man feels that pain we have mentioned, if it appears to you like so.
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	If the blood above and below has been hastily moved, and then it will force the windiness constraint out of its place;
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	And cauterize the vein; and if you do not see it on your arms.
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	If the treatment of that which disrupts windiness, like foul pillows and snake pills, and similar things.
Des saiettes	Arrows, referring to injuries caused by projectiles leading to dislocations and severe pain in various body parts.
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows vary in appearance and type according to their points or tips; some cut deep into the limbs, causing intense pain.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity is that there are those with great points, and small ones, and hairs, and melted. This translates the description of various types of injuries caused by arrows. It captures both the variety in arrow designs and their effects on the body as described in medieval medical context.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And of those who have two angles, and of those who have tongues, and of those who have fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	et that which hurts in no part if it hurts according to two measures: or the main limb has its hairs;
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	just like brain, heart, liver, kidney, womb, intestines, bladder, and similar body parts.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it hurts no part of these members at all, and the sign of death appears to you thereafter; I shall tell you about this after.
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	since you must beware the extraction of this arrow, for the death comes in many ways afterward;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad sign is not apparent to you, and the arrow is not found, then treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the sign of a split brain when the arrow is lodged and penetrates bone, and heaves upward where it lies above the brain.
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	and when there are blindnesses and somnolence and convulsions with tears, inflammation of the tongue's root and throat constriction, spasm of understanding and vomiting from the colic.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it causes obstruction in the nose or ears; and maybe affects speech and voice as well.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and jumps in the moisture-white wound seeming like a poultice, and also as if it's leaking like tar.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this bad sign appears to you, then take care of it; treat the arrow if there isn't any in your body.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of swelling or pain in these areas as if it's close to the left breast and also feels hard like something embedded, yet not drained out.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	Les arme deffroite.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	And then the flesh has come out of doubt.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the cautery that never loses its power is when there are no scabs on the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient has a deep red color in the mouth, and breathes heavily and wishes to spit out the dirt from within.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the cautery burns deep into the covering flesh, it is near the little hips; and a great pain ensues and heavy breathing occurs, and all limbs move together with the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the cautery burns into the stomach, perhaps there is vomiting of undigested meat from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the cautery burns into the abdomen and a part of the field within the intestines is burnt away, there is no hope for the treatment, nor in removing the cautery.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the cautery burns into the bladder, and the urine leaks out, and there is a strong feeling of pain; it seems that the injury is deadly. This scenario could be indicative of severe tissue damage within the bladder, potentially leading to compromised function or loss of viability of the affected area. Such an event would require immediate medical attention due to the risk of life-threatening complications like perforation and infection.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, if they are affected and the neck and throat and shoulder and arm and spinal column on both sides and the hand and fingers and legs, and the seemingly involved limbs, appear to be largely unaffected by this condition in most respects. This statement suggests that while a specific injury or pathology is present—such as an isolated burn from cauterization due to medical intervention—the surrounding structures may not exhibit similar symptoms. It underscores the importance of considering individual variations and localized effects when assessing injuries, which can aid in accurate diagnosis and appropriate treatment planning.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	How the cautery is in relation to the nerve or artery, and it does not bleed, as I would say for you if such were the case that happened, since you do this latter. This sentence seems to be a descriptive statement regarding an injury involving a medical procedure wherein neither of these structures are directly damaged by cautery application within a specific vessel or nerve and thereupon in 100 years on theesmecte de la vassage de l’armor.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	Amenable. In thex'sain itmea mid 20th century xmas ageraisment. Leu'savictuccuratively andcetween its incelesult from thecaustru,se.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	:eslmaisons,saindepart andre (not :43 (tocmesculi itape, to toupjacme:troisse:nacresse and the coudesle. �tresse, iterring siéges ce toutincture,seces ape;uccesse;gant.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And strikes at a shot which falls into the fat of oil underneath the paper beneath.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the shot was put back, but it did not move towards the end of the wood.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and it was large by an inch or so of thin Turkish iron, with lightweight legs like ears; the shot was sounded well, and no unwanted event occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And it struck an arrow from the throat of a Crusader, and this shot was Arabic in appearance with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I removed the hairs, and extracted as much as I could when it struck, and the Crusader was sounded well.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And it hit an iron that had grown large in one or both sides (hips) of its owner, and I thought he was dead.
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after thirty years, it did not change its position.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut on the shot, and dislodged it, and removed it, without any unfortunate incident occurring.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man whose back has been pierced by a shot, and the wound was sewn up there... (The rest of the text is not provided.)
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	...and it remained deep within him, not altering its natural positions.
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and found no harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And see another man whose shot had fallen into his face, and the wound was sewn up there... (The rest of the text is not provided.)
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	...and then suffered great pain in such a way; and many similar things occurred.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And it struck an iron that was large on one side of the prince who lived among the natives... (The rest of the text is not provided.)
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and was slightly declining to the right; and it was the shot that had been recovered.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I went to seek treatment after she became enlarged by three years; when I found the wound was very wide.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I tried all sorts of secret means on it and did not feel it at all.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt pain in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	And I thought it was from the tip of the shot.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I placed on his lowered abdomen a dislodging device to avoid inflammation... (The rest of the text is not provided.)
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and it appeared that he had the shot in him.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	noblesse:
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	And so long as he felt the sticky substance .i. year within his vein; and he told him.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I put on the wound some medicinal water with iron by hand for several days until it was overheated.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I tested it, and felt the top of the sticky substance rise to the surface;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I applied on the overheated area some medicinal water with iron again until the top of the sticky substance appeared visibly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and it was well done over a period of three months;
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then I searched for the wound that I had treated with tweezers on both sides, but it could not come out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	and I continued to subtly manipulate and experiment with various instruments like tweezers for a year since I had the well-made tweezers;
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to what happened at the end of this chapter, after I treated it and kept the wound closed;
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the judge considers that the chart (or possibly a reference to a text or diagram) cannot restore the nose;
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	lle andre le langage à la cest anonymously.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	:era'sourface: a theesarai:entence, in itrait deesmeantis.
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	If you place your treatment on that which I do not deny, for books cannot possibly encompass it all.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but the masters of surgery know little about such matters, and about what is present yet failing to act as expected.
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Perform nine operations and seven instruments are involved in the extraction of things that occur within this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not exit from members or they are driven because of certain techniques:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through their point of entry, or by another means;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And that which jumps into them through the bow or it enters therein is an arrow entering their flesh, and such has never happened again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, let her remain until the charr is prepared to enter or exit, and allow its course to proceed.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is driven into bone, and it cannot emerge, let her remain in this condition for any number of years, and the movement recur each year.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if she jumps, and if not, then penetrates to any degree of subtlety into each part where her entrance is widened, and then it follows suit.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is driven into the bone at its center, and follows to one of the skull's cavities.
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and any of the adverse events that I have mentioned to you; if it does not remove her but lets her remain in this state after any number of years.
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	Andropredit les bertie: ceulxantes que ilz demein quinqueil leu (faites esparfailles a l'enforce.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the splinter is lodged deep into the bone, and does not come out easily on its own.
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and avoids further years of severe accidents for those patients with such an engine stroke.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very deep and cannot come out by itself, then I will apply the methods I told you before; treat the joint until it heals completely.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the splinter is pushed back into the bone where it cannot be seen, and threatens all of its integrity.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, if the tool used cannot find any suitable instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot closely examine the wound, and delve deep into the splinter,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone, nerve or vein involved, until the wound has healed sufficiently.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and you can attempt to remove the splinter if you are able, and it holds onto her within it.
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if the bone is lodged with .ij. parts inside that you can dislodge.
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or crush the splinter's edges as much as possible so that you can remove it.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and subtly without breaking the splinter, to remove it more carefully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot dislodge it once, until the blood starts to flow out from within; then remove it, as the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if dislodging blood causes harm to you, apply those remedies we discussed in this chapter's section on treatment.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and warn you against making an incision on the nerve and veins, and how can you manage to remove the splinter without risk?
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	whether quickly or gently, firmly or smoothly; and position the patient according to the shape of the splinter when it fell into the bone.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	because that's the greatest help he can offer; and if you cannot, then position him according to the signs shown by his symptoms.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The splinter that has come from another place does not show any signs of it, or the skin is swollen in such a way that you can see or feel immediately:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Take care of his wound above, as much as the forceps can reach, and then pull out: if they are already loose now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if the splinter is firmly held within the bone; move it as much as possible in the bone, and then remove the splint.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, then let it still remain, and then resume the extraction as long as it bleeds.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	And if there were an arrow lodged in the flesh, he would drive it out completely.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	And if it had been a wound, and you saw to administer bandaging, using that particular tool (which is mentioned),
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the point of the arrow enters into the teeth of the instrument; and then drives in forcefully.
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if the arrow were lodged, he would use that instrument with a point entering it to hasten the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow were touched, it is required that you pour all of the blood from the wound or where the poison is, as soon as possible.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then treat the wound as it allows (or, in this context, as appropriate).
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow were lodged in the body, or blood or within the abdomen, or in the bladder, and it is near, then you can cover over it, if it covers.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and you must not cover the veins or nerves, and then extract it, and then close the wound, as is required.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat her so long as she is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form they have is like a bird's beak; and from this point on, it looks like:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways of handling it: large, small, and in between, depending on the amount of the projectile.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The form it has is also similar to the quill of a bird.
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	for driving in the point of the arrow, as it is shaped:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	it has pincers for pulling and for knowing if this is so:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common pincers.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	of those pincers that are healthy for us, so it has been in sixteen.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	s. Alsof theit:sacre, andace, devisafe, 50rocces.
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the two arteries which appear in the second temples;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the veins that are in the corners of the eyes' lids, which they call "aspirates";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is embedded in the forehead; and the vein which is at the top of the nose.
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the girdles that are on the side;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the veins that are above the lips; and these are the veins called "aguehyrics";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins which are commonly found in each arm are;
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is located on the head side, and it's on the left ribcage side, and they call it "vein of the chest" or "chief vein";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the muscle is called "fast", and it's composed of the head vein and the abdominal vein;
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and they call it "body vein"; and the abdominal vein is on the right side of the ribcage;
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call it "abdominal vein", and it's under the diaphragm;
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and is that which we commonly find, clearly visible under the apron;
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the salivary gland is located between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has veins; (Translation: Saliva production)
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	.ilent il. ici de aille.
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And the second sign of suffering that is on the right side of the calf's knee; and the vein that is raised in the other knee of the foot.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other leg there are three such vessels.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The healthy vessels that are after the ears aid ancient catarrhs and headaches.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	And its quality, as I told you, and it is that you raise the top of the malady,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	And burns its skin or vessels with a harsh cloth; then tightens the malady's neck to an iron hook.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	As long as those three vessels appear behind the ears in two layers of the top head area:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	And when you do it thus, and do you feel your pulse therein, if so entangled?
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the lancet, and thrust it through the vein just under the bone, then lift your hand all over the vein.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	And cut and the skin and the vein well .ii. distances from it, and draw out the blood as long as you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then strain and tie it, until it is sound again.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already said about the incision and cautery, in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The healthy arteries that are in those two temple areas, if they aid ancient migraines.
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	And so, and ocular catarrh common, and at the chest of tears is it?
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And its quality, as I said:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	And it tightens its neck, as long as those three vessels appear openly.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	And it feels your pulse therein, if so entangled?
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	Then lift your hand above the vein in your index finger, and thrust the lancet through it.
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	And lift up the vein in your upper part, and cut it, as you have done with other three vessels, and draw out the blood according to its necessity.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then let the malady go, and lay your finger on the vein for an hour, then place a cloth on it.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And then we have taken it out of the booklet and incomplent.il. ices tostes, sié:i:comme cest maunde a la ce que, as enlenglish tounin the fourfaire desloisle l’adie.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The dislocation of the shoulder joint is equal to ancient facial diseases, and migraines, and sinusitis.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And the quality is that the dislocation forces its way out by twisting, as long as the shoulder joint appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called "pitter," which has this shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the shoulder joint, and press it firmly with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the amount you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then apply pressure to the shoulder joint and hold it so that it remains healthy and without any excessive swelling from a wide stroke.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Always, it does not mean that the swelling should be too much; and if the joint is twisted, as the bone is close to the surface, and perhaps breaks the skin when it is subtle.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The joints of the two shoulders that are in close proximity to each other help with these injuries, and in the chin area, and at the temple (the forehead), and some diseases of the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their dislocations is that they twist out of joint in any way as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then the joint is healthy, and it is like two twists; a little bit long press with a wide stroke, because there is no bone in it.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the swelling is subtle, perhaps it breaks; then take care of the blood, as you are accustomed to do, and then bind up its edge, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	And the dislocation of the neck joint is similar in shape, and slightly more than before, and diseases of the face.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The neck of cece tuit.semblent quintre nouns in Old French: Leiame to theu: 13
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	And the quality of the sanitation so is that the patient tightly squeezes his neck with it, then strains his chest to your left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	And take the fine flame long enough, and insert it between the two holes in the nose.
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	For the vein does not open well at all, and now he begins to correct it immediately.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not draw too much blood at once, and correct the amount of blood according to your necessity, then wrap it up overnight because it is restored very quickly.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And it is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The quality of the veins helps in tightening the main artery, and at the beginning of bleeding, and for many diseases, and in inflammation, and in ulcers, and scurvy, and lichen, and similar conditions.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of the sanitation so is that the patient tightly contracts his neck with it on both sides, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	And the masters are standing above the main patient's head, and the patients look at them from a certain angle.
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Then cauterize the vein a little broadly, then treat the blood quickly as one knows how;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	Then repair the other vein in the opposite side, then untie the bindings on both sides loosely.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	And do not move the patient; let him stay until morning so that the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	Of the study of books
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The quality of the veins above in the mouth helps to draw blood into the mouth cavity, and prevents the corruption of gums, cracked lips, and wounds in the nostrils and nose-hole.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the sanitation so is that the patient endures it as we have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	:pasture:laide cece.faire alexia.comestract. Itaute, theuccle.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	And they are known by this because they are black, and because through them there are narrow dark veins.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	Coping with both of them, and if you do not know them, and you doubt about them.
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	If coping with the larger of each part, and also making two incisions that are above and below, for it is a kindred way.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the cleanliness inside the mouth
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The cleanliness of the incisions inside the mouth helps after the cleaning of the cephalic (head), and it is close to the throat, and relates to eye diseases, and mouth diseases.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of this better cleaning is when the sick person sees between their hands in front of the sunlight, and they lighten the tongue, and look at each side with a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Healthy both of them, and do not overdo it, for there they are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The incisions which are commonly cleaned up are done according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	Or you prick at all parts of their flame, or delicate olive branch if it is like an asp, and they are called "aniseed".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are wide and delicate according to the width and depth of the incisions.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of this flame relief is very famous, and it is wide like you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And there is need to open the veins covered with large and visible flesh containing thick blood and disorder.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is the form of the delicate olive branch.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more finely pointed, and it is better for cleaning the delicate incisions, or there may be thin yellowish blood present.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The cleanlinayer of the throat, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases in the throat and neck, and chest, and stomach.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is required that the position be kept in mind, and he sees the artery which is there.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if it cuts an artery, and blood comes from the wound, then one must staunch it, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and it should not be stung by flies, but trimmed as if with a shears.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the vein does not open clearly, then it must be drained and replaced with another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	or you want none of the blood to leave him, or you keep the vein open in his arm, as it clearly appears.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and cut the flair as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you know the vein of the sore, then it must be drained from his arm until you recognize the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then sign the vein again, and bind his arm, and cut the flair as before.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and beware not to harm the artery when you see the vein swollen, for it is an artery; avoid doing so.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it rising out as well from a child's urinary tract, and without being red or subtle, you know that it is not an artery;
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	hurry then, and place your hand on it for a long time, then press your hand if the swelling is reddened many times.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	if you bind his arm, and leave it like this, and do not move the patient's painful limb, and be wary, so he does not move until he is well again.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the swelling does not subside, and it goes away, and the medication is no longer present, then cut the artery if it has opened, for its head retreats; and press the swelling.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a poultice made from flax, and apply it, and take one-half of the poultice and place it well on top of the other day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if the swelling is not pressed, it is well; but if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that staunch blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the staunching is not done in any other manner for the small bleeding of the wound, and its possession on the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The vein in his arm supports that blood so cut the head of it above and below.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	for it is composed of the artery and head-related structures as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	The text: "Caundes la voi deffac naguis.
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And let it swell and the health becomes tightened, and perhaps cannot heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And this vein opens many times, and if it does not open in anyone due to its subtlety, then you must first sanitize the instrument afterwards; and try to avoid hurting the nerve.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two joints, it becomes long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The healing of the cephalic vein helps by attracting blood to the head and aids its recovery. (Note: "cephalic" typically refers to something related to the head or skull in medical terminology.)
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it must be safer to puncture the jugular vein or the medial mesenteric vein, because it is less likely from all the other veins, as it has neither nerve nor artery. (Note: The context of this translation involves choosing a safe site for venipuncture based on anatomical structures.)
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Always, it is better to ask the easier way, and do not regret doing so if it's necessary, and continue. (Note: This translation suggests a general approach in medical practice of choosing simpler methods when possible.)
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And perhaps it swells in some people after the first time, but there is no need to regret. (Note: This sentence acknowledges that vein puncturing may lead to swelling as a complication, yet emphasizes not regretting when it occurs.)
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of healing depends on your thought. (Note: This phrase reflects the belief that patient care and medical interventions are influenced by a practitioner's thoughts or intentions, which can be interpreted as either an oversimplification or metaphorical expression within this context.)
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about venipuncture is that it's primarily for keeping health;
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to prevent future diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and the venipuncture should be performed in one of these three veins which are known as, the cephalic, jugular, and femoral;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and it should be started in the beginning of winter prayers, and in autumn and early spring when signs of fullness appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and it should be done either the first year or the third day after an interval of two to three years;
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The healing that is meant for diseases has no specific time determined, but when it is needed at any moment of day or night;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it does not necessarily have to be safer for children up to twelve years old or women carrying only a quarter of months until the seventh month;
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	And one should not safer the veins who have passed 60 years;
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when anyone wishes to improve their health, whichever way it may be, it is necessary that they drink a light enema.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	If there are too many residues retained, so that the veins do not draw excessive fluids from the intestines, which could harm the main limbs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	And let not those who are too light of meats or drunken be healthy, however they may be.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And if one wishes to be healthier after an episode of colic, vomiting, and diarrhea, and multiple pregnancies with women, and hard labor, constant vigilance, and dining at night, regardless of the whole virtue or by something in armor or heart;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then delicately balance the humors, if they are not too large by meats and drinks and remedies, for you have the opportunity.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	Then whether it be bathing or something else that does not defile the blood, in order to subtly cleanse the blood;
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	And you shall be healthy from the veins and in the third stage as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And you must keep away from that day of work, prayer, pleasure, and similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	And pull out your hair and tear them, let you be the healthier one than those who heal themselves, and their bandages are worn for two or three times;
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then strain the linen above mildly, for when it is too tight or little, you cannot correct it without doing.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then the bandage is applied to the hands, so long as the veins swell and smell therein;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	Then let the healthier one press a little oil on it with his hand, then place his sign above that vein for a bit or so he feels better;
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not break with the injury.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	And the bonez eau demeinere toctre pietes alains les malt esple.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	entailine theil. Comen, tote
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	ses lespease caue the andace:  :
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein's work is done for the first time, it is good; but if not, it repeats again a little near that place where they have punctured or sutured, and the skin does not swell up.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the skin is inflamed, and the patient's malady worsens, let it be one or two days without restraining the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	perhaps an abscess will form in that area; do not allow immersion or bathing there again if it pleases the patient.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the puncture is small, or you incisively remove some fluid without doubt that it will not be much blood as you have seen, then firmly hold in that same puncture all its strength.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and do it a little hurriedly so that the skin is inflamed; because this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the puncture inflamed, do not repeat the operation, and place a little oil on it, because it lightens the blood flow in this puncture, and is mixed with the oil applied to this wound.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and then apply the oil poultice in each operation that you drain the veins, so as to slow down the blood flow.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this is also a triamcinolone cream and vasoconstrictor paste when it is applied to the puncture; subtly remove it if it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there are large abscesses that often occur when the opening of the vein is small, then only apply it as much as necessary to drain them.
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	if you hasten and place a wet sponge soaked in warm water on the puncture, and keep it there for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is required that you do this after the blood flow from the vein has stopped, and if it does not return to its place in any way or color over the following days, then you should not worry about it.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see anything of aloe or myrrh mixed with honey poultice, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there are abscesses and signs of the operation on the vein; therefore, place your hand above it, and if you feel inflammation in that area due to hand pressure, then this is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So do not place anything of what we have said above, because perhaps in the artery without treatment; but make a dry plaster for one day to harden the puncture, and then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And apply each vein according to its quantity and color of blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	Because if the blood is blackish, let it come out as much as red; and if you see a lot of inflammation, leave it until it becomes less swollen; and if it's too warm, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And be careful of those who are weak and frail, and need to have blood removed, because it will make larger wounds, and burns more widely.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And to those who are weak, do the opposite, and keep it lightly, and often make it less inflamed by cutting diagonally rather than pulling.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of drainage of blood and nerve; it is small and long.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	leu vassage, et chrestry. Celaise ljourre la meinl thexiii.comle jargon.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	naught ia c’ssextreurendecteblevels;re:gachanches  çoins. The 	cité,sawnghergeume,ifecie,sauturexilexentienerescecsheverrescrauntelance.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if he holds his hand to the right way, after extracting much blood, it is required that he breathes smoke from coal and drinks a subtle fragrant syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And use other things we have mentioned in the section on syncope for the extraction of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to exhale his arms, and do it again later, when he is weakened by great sweating, it requires that he recovers little by little according to the continued amount of his vital force.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wishes to exhale his arms after the first incision, and he is strong, then he will recover in about two hours after the first incision or after the second hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wishes to breathe on another side, if he must recover for one day or three days.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is much blood within the already inflamed heart, and it brings fever; if he requires to draw a great quantity, and expand the cavity until it fills with water.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	then that you satisfy all conditions of resting, and place your hand on his chest when he recovers, so that the wound does not move in water.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this often happens when the patient rests improperly.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	but does not require you to remove the limb, and draw blood a second time, when the cavity is closed, and then firmly press on it.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if he lies down, for that would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let the hairs grow again after recovering the second time; or you have no need to touch it with any heat, until the uncooked part of the vein has expanded.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and place them in water for some time, and press them lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, let it rest and not constrict; so long as the abscess is calmed down.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if you need to draw blood a second time from the vein, let him recover in that spot or another vein or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein removes the arm from its place because it is composed of the main vein at the elbow.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of setting it so that the patient's hands are burned with hot water until the flesh is red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then be tied up moderately so that the vein shows well, and now set it with a narrow transverse.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and if the wound is wide, set it well near the joint of the hand, so that it cannot come out, and then reheat the hand in hot water, allowing enough blood to flow.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is in its place, do not return the hand to hot water again, because you put more ice than in its place.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the setting of this vein is safer from all other veins than it has not an artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The setting of the hand's salvation is worth all diseases of the heart, and that's how it is done.
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Strain the hand and warm it in hot water until the vein comes out if you can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if it is set across in all respects, then nothing complains.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and don't go too deep into them, because the nerves are all stripped of flesh in this place.
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put the hand back in hot water if it is frozen in the wound, so that it cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as you know how to do it, put oil and thread on it so that it can be stitched up quickly, and then perform this for every patient.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The setting of the left hand is worth for mouse disease, and do it all as I have told you about the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The setting of the flesh is worth for all those diseases that are on the heart.
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	If like diseases of the mare, and retention of flowers, and disease of rain, and joints and old legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of his health is that he suffers great pain when placed in hot water, and scraped on the vein until it bleeds.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And above the vein of that patient; and the vein is at the ankle, and it bleeds quite a lot with each movement.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	His health then becomes either wider bleeding from above (sainne la donques) or at the ankle ("ou à la cheville"), which is more severe.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal the vein there, take care to treat those in the same area ("des ners qui sont desoz"), and restore its health as well as in treating it by other methods ("traver ausi"); and sometimes the bleeding stops completely ("anesil").
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the patient is unable to get up ("li sans n’en puet issir"), then reset the vein in hot water, and let it be well cleansed (vuidier).
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if his condition requires it the first time ("li sainieres"), then repeat the second attempt above a little bit ("au desus un poc"), because his vein is salted (salz);
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt that it is nerve damage ("nerf"), as we have said before, and in this case make the same kind of treatment for the other vein ("de la sophene") equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The blood from the vein of the sciatic nerve is high at the ankle ("la voinne sciatique est a la cheville"), and his condition corresponds to the pain in the back of the thigh when there is hot bleeding ("sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche", "quant c’est por sanc chaut").
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of his health condition is that he bleeding occurs above (ou bain ("etre "en l’estime de seignel. Aieinfeudal.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	For otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then heals in all ways that you can do, and crossing.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is worthwhile for you to repeat it, because the sinew is loose, and it is very well repaired by hand.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not repeat it, then healing of none comes from the one that has opened or pierced his side, and in small movements, and warn him of nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And make much correction to the blood that you see, and then loosen it, and place it on cotton, and constrain it, so now she is healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Ventouse suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horns, or leather, or iron; and suction is performed in one or another ways: either by piercing and drawing out blood, or simply feeling the pulse.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this suction which is performed by piercing is according to one or another ways: either it is done with fire, or with heat.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and suction which is performed by piercing and drawing out blood is made in twelve parts of the hand.
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	therefore one is all around the head; and the other is in front of the neck.
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and other in two sides of the neck; and the ventouse on the chin.
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the ventouse on the ankles; and the ventouse on the ulcers.
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and suction cups on the arms; and suction cups on the legs.
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and suction cups on the heels; and this suction does not treat blood because it uses small needles that are scattered over the skin.
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and because of this it doesn't hinder anyone, just like with ventouse procedures.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it does not require that she be heated or cooled, in no disease caused by accumulation of fluids, as long as all the parts are released.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if the necessity of diseases requires suctioning or by custom, we administer each one hour at the beginning and end of the month, or in between.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because it has such people who, when they know they have to suction, weigh the head.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if such people have accumulation of fluids in their body, and also in their head, and at the neck, and darkness around the eyes.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who have blood in theirsangue, and they bleed from the mouth, and draw it out of:etre.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if there are some who think about such things, and see blood coming from wounds and bites and similar incidents.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, and immediately after the month begins, we command to blow out for 3 days.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The medicine of the mosse helps in loosening the joint ... that comes out, and does not require waiting after removing all the body's flesh.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	And this blowing is on behalf of the medicine of the skull.
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it does not require that those who have a cold constitution or who suffer from headaches should use it, as this causes them great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for the same reason, they do not require that these people use it, nor those with cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who benefit from it often become oblivious, and for this reason they must place the suction cup slightly further down due to uncertainty of effectiveness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The blowing also benefits the neck area and is part of the medicine for the head and skull base; therefore it has an additional advantage.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and in the hole of the passageway, and with blowing, and with filling.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it should not be pushed too tightly, for if it is overtightened, it may cause abdominal pain or discomfort in the heart area.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The blowings applied to each side of the neck are worth the pains of the head and eyes, and eyelids, and strangulation, and pain in the root of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is part of the medicine for the skull base; therefore you must instruct the master that he express his hand to apply it, so he does not compress the artery, and draw blood from the wound.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The blowings in the mouth are worth toothache and gum disease, and similar illnesses that occur in the mouth; it is part of the medicine for the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The blowings on the shoulders are worth to illnesses caused by heat and filling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The blowings on the shoulders are worth just as much as three arrows in each arm.
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	because it draws blood from these large arrows;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and command to the master that he does not inflict too much pain on them, for their muscles are thin, and they know about nerves and blood vessels.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup applied on the back (croup) is worth as the foundations of diseases therein and in that area, and it requires the suction cup to be large and heavy, so it has the skill to properly treat; and if it were subtle, it would break apart, and make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of using the suction cup is that you place it first empty, and apply it immediately and hastily, and move it evenly, and never stop doing so until you see the redness and swelling on the skin, and pierce the vein; then remove, and set in position of the limbs, for there are many who have stiff shoulders, and clear pores: it is necessary to strike once only, and make wide and deep wounds, and a little deeper.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it must be punctured two times; the first time to cauterize subtly the vein that is thick.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, it must be punctured three times; and when we want to drain a little bit of blood and not much at all, we need to strike only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want to take a lot of blood, we often compress the vein; and when the blood is very thick, then we pierce it and seize them thoroughly, and let them be punctured strongly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And covers those who have thick skin and hard, and who have strong veins, that you oil the edges of their blisters with a herbal oil that is penetrating and dissolving.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is in the estate, with violet oil, or with sweet almond oil, or with seed of squash;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it is in vinegar, with watercress oil, or with lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the surplus is large and cold, take oil of bitter almonds, or with balm, or with Anet seed oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if he who is healthy has tender skin and wide veins, there is no need to put oil in.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	But it is necessary to wash after the watering with rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or squash water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, if it rises again, take up water from the herb of myrtle, or cold water, or sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And he who has large surplus reoccurrences, they rise again from strong wine, or cold water, or infusion of anet or chamomile, or similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	And it is not better to use the suction before or in bathing, but after bathing an hour or two; and does not sleep again afterwards.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And it is necessary for him who must be suctioned and when he is suctioned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And warn those who are choleric and whose blood is too thick and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	If it is necessary that he eat cold things, like green apples and radishes and lettuces poured into the abscess.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and milk cows’ udders, and venison steaks, and somewhat moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold disposition, it is necessary for him to eat honey syrup, and fragrant wine that is half warm and half cool, and milk cure, and cow's udders and little birds and fledglings.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	Trecenturathe cestand deparle desusme deffacer levesame (14thansent and la pice dexpress.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it requires giving to some men sometimes cathartic or musk at the time of windlessness, or afterwards, to strengthen the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And it must be removed gently but it does not require that those who drink hot fluids.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The suction cups that are applied to wounds are those placed on the liver, and on the thighs, and gouty joints, and abdomen, and belly, and chest, and lumbago, because these limbs do not suffer from injury under them either.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and not to draw blood from a member to another member.
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we put on the abdomen when it is swollen; to oppose the viscousness that is in a member, as we apply suction cups to the belly and chest to lessen the limb.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and the pain when there is an operation or incision, if it arises from its attractive quality by chance during the operation, or the removal of the arrowhead from its point.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and then does it when we place them on the liver and thighs where there is retained windiness.
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these suction cups are approved as empty because they can draw so easily; but sometimes they are approved together fire, and at other times water-filled.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as in diseases of great weeping, and such that it fills the suction cup with hot water or hot herbs needed for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	Its shape is approved by fire if it is so:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it should be two hands breadth and half a palm wide, and have a small hole in the center like for pushing an arrowhead into its point.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and if it is placed on armpit, so that the malady does not cut into the member when placing it upon it.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and in shape or form like a bent stake of armpit to apply an arrowheads.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	ses, pourpreces en.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	lescaesar. Whatsoarre malice. Ifracture of caution : le monde as ita lasointerpretation:escalle aicentric la'soucreature. Ita. Lei: 13rdenture soceletures to theascribe:
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And must one now place this suction cup upon the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take up a candle or (that is) thread, and place it inside the suction cup along the vein that is in the middle of the arm where the suction cup is positioned.
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	So that the light shines at the bottom of the suction cup, so it does not burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	And then place it upon the limb, and you must put it in the hollow where we have mentioned, so that when one sees smoke coming out, they remove the suction cup.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And take up the thread as before, and you must repeat often if you have practice.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction cup which is used for treating pleurisy at all times has no vein nor hollow, and it only finds use when it is empty of fluid and placed upon the limb as much as possible.
et c’est li forme:	And that is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Suction cups are used only for members (limbs) where it is difficult to place them due to small size, like in the throat and gums, and similar cases.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And in their dislocated joints, as with thumb or finger, and similar cases;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And the quality of its use is that when you try suction cups which are in dry wounds without bleeding much pressure on them, let them remove.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	And they put them in moist wounds, provided they are not inflamed and have nothing in their cavities.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	And then you must be skilled in the art of suction cups and wound dressing, and apply it to the limb as much as possible if it is red, and place the suction cups on them.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are smooth and fit to place them if it is possible to put the suction cup where one can place it, as it is quite useful afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	:mein. Il est un peu :lcité :esyme : Old French.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if he lets his healthy skin too close to the heart, and places a cold linen cloth on it, and keeps it there until the swelling subsides.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if his swelling is multipled, he puts it under crushed borax or powdered herbs and similar remedies until the swelling subsides.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or you place it near its edge with flaked charcoal pieces, and let them adhere to the skin until they are now healed.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if there is more knowledge about it, then apply other remedies.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the swelling does not reduce, you rub the skin with fresh blood, or pierce it until the swelling goes away.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And then he puts them on, and immediately they smell the blood, as they dry out.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they crumble, sprinkle them with a little honey or ash, or powder, and they will now heal.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of dislocations.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they deal with the treatment and healing of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Pay attention, o' my friend, that the wise man finds this chapter to be lacking in such books, and no ancient letter or text has mentioned it.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason is the knowledge missing from our land, as I have never found any good one.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing of it because from the ancient books or by studying so much that I have treated the science and through experience and custom in my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I have described in this chapter what is contained herein and summarized it at the end, and clearly showed the forms of treatments that are prescribed, just as I have done in these previous two chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore we must say the prologue and chapters of this book are composed of words and arranged by our understanding, and it is written on paper so that those who have tried can learn this noble art and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when any fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain occurs to no one, it means you must attend to healing both parts of the maladies in your body, if nothing is done at all, just as with weak hearts, fevers, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	Or if the blood is not very close or too cold; and menstrual blood is known as frozen fights, and pieces of feather and quill, and does not drink any wine, nor eat any fat foods, and does not fill oneself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until he has doubt about an aposteme or swelling of matter in a limb, then it returns to its original governance which he had used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the bone is broken and begins to restore itself, it must be wrapped in meats that make a great noise, or have viscosity, as if made of cooked wheat, and bread, and testicles, and paws, and flesh from any animal, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	And so the noise is increased in his fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	Seigneur.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	:liefs itinjour.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you know that wounds are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	And the main fracture is different from the other one, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that follows an arrow's path and another by thinning, as the tip of a pen used for writing; such injuries will be addressed herein.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there be a fracture with an accompanying wound, and a fracture comprising a minute fissure; these conditions shall also be discussed in the context of this chapter.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each manner has its respective treatment and proper instrument for restoration, as the memory brings it to mind in these discussions.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the bone fracture by which the ligament twists, and tears open completely, and may be pressed with one's hand; such conditions are also recognized in these discussions.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and where there is no twisting or pain in the affected area, and the patient feels no great distress, it indicates that there is indeed no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	yet it may well present with twistiness, a small fissure, or minor break; these possibilities are also contemplated within this treatise's scope.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	However it does not imply that you must move him with your hand alone but apply the remedies hereafter and now gently restrain his movements; this approach shall be taken for treatment.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And you know that the fractures which follow an arrow's trajectory and have their two joined parts separated must now be aligned equally, so as to prevent further injury from arrows; this is also included within these discussions.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if arrows strike them, so that they suffer no pain for a day or more, provided they are thus comfortably positioned.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then he places the arrow deep where it may be easily removed and drawn out, and you know that the restoration of him is easier than the removal of those parts there were previously; then bind him, as it must be afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, whether it involves taking out .ij parts (where 'ij' represents an unspecified number), or if these fragments include hands, limbs, some small body parts, tendons, a string, or cords connected to your hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and position the limb according to its natural shape, if the parts of both arms are deformed. When resetting them with all forces applied during repositioning, ensure that you do not further injure or cause pain in the patient's injury or dislocation.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and align the '.ij.' bone fragments according to their optimal shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And the patient feels discomfort in his hand if it seems that he is not well: if there is slight movement, and do not over-restrain or press him too much as they would cause by their work of incision and contraction on the limb, as we have often observed;
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	and when the limb is at a critical juncture, if you tend to it well so that it does not move, do not worry or sleep on it, nor turn around, nor engage in any other manner.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And ensure that the limb is secure so that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	When it feels no pain, then it is not serious, and he must put him in partial position so that he does not feel any pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and keep him lying straight, to prevent twisting when he is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and such misalignment of the limb is as I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	It is known that misaligned limbs can vary in size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	Because they have small limbs like broken ones - which are thin and fragile - it is necessary to wrap them in soft, fine linen.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	And those who are larger - similar to a club or leg - it is necessary to wrap them in a broad and sturdy bandage. The wide bands envelop the entire large member and apply even pressure across all parts without causing any harm.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then tie the bandage tightly but not excessively around them, usually making three or four turns depending on the size of the limb. Hold your hand firmly against the entire wrap, then loosen it slightly above the dislocation and gradually move away from the affected area, allowing a small distance to grow between the joint and the point of dislocation.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And gradually loosen the bandage little by little as long as you are ensuring a significant part of the joint remains stable and uninjured. Then repeat this process with another wrap, turning it directly towards the dislocated joint in order to provide support while permitting some degree of natural movement for healing purposes.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then revisit the area around the dislocation and slightly loosen it again, not too much or too little, as we have mentioned in the first description above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the bandages soft linen or cloth, ensuring they are evenly distributed over the entire limb, then bind it tightly with one bandage and finally secure any protrusions well, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is inflammation or abscess, then apply something soothing and antibacterial to the area which reduces swelling and leaves it unharmed for any days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then is drawn upon the targets, and they are made of a small piece of wide cane twisted in its drawing, or iron used to make shields, or fan blades, and they should resemble this shape.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it must be that the stick placed on the fracture is slightly larger and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And should also be as long as required for a small or large limb;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then the sticks should also be made as you did for the first time in the previous case, then laid above an awning or similar support, just as in the previous case of the fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	It should be either narrower or wider, then less or more; and it must be that the string used is neither too thick nor too thin, but made of fine linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the string is thick like those made by people who twist linen threads into unworked cords, and this would be great error, for the bandage cannot be even if it is too delicate; and there should not be less than two spans of space between each stick.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the maladies of the sticks are caused by the blows to the ends after setting them in place, then they should be wrapped with fine linen or woven strips, so that it does not break (blec).
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture, and it breaks, I will tell you about this treatment after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And you should know that it is not necessary to stretch sticks all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For if the limb is large, it does not necessarily need to be supported with sticks for more than five or six days (or more depending on your judgement of the fracture' Written by: Shayne Brinckley
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And here the manner of ancient emplasters for healing breaks, dislocations, and twisting: and you take flour that stands at the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundant water, and make this concoction not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it is the common way of emplastering to restore a break in various positions, especially for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too harsh.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of emplastering for healing breaks and dislocations and twisting: take abareis, laddani, aloe vera, gum arabic, mugwort (Mentha pulegium), mirr (Myrtus communis), and Aleppo (Pinus halepensis) oil; 10 parts of each. Also mix honey with rosewater; if the patient's condition is warm, use this emplaster, as it has good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, benefiting many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of emplastering for torsion: take mugwort (Mentha pulegium), 10 parts; rose petals and aloe vera, 73 parts each; acacia gum, 5 parts; Armenian wormwood (Artemisia absinthium) oil, 6 parts; grind them well, mix with water or honey, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another method of emplastering for joined joints and misplaced bones, and easing the pain that occurs, and cutting to the bone: take new linen, steep in milk and boiled oil, and apply it on the affected area. This type of emplaster does not restore but is good for cooling hot spots, and specifically treating bone pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of emplastering for broken bones: take dried fig leaves and dried pav-leaves from the pavement thyme (Thymus serpyllum), grind them together, and make an emplaster. This type of emplaster is known to restore broken bones when used as a remedy.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method of emplastering for the restoration of broken bone and to alleviate the remaining pain from the dislocation: take wormwood roots, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, wheat flour (likely referring to a type of starch), one part each; grind them together and mix with wine. Apply this emplaster if the limb is swollen, or wet it with water from coriander infused in vinegar, or just plain water, and use as needed.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method of emplastering for dislocation restoration when the swelling occurs due to trauma: take wormwood roots, flax seeds (linseed), balsam root, lime-flowers, violet flowers and chamomile, one part each; grind them together and mix with saltwater or light water or wine according to the temperature of the limb and rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Another method in his book, asserting that it is made of beeswax and oil, and nothing else, and sayeth that they should not become hard or dry.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	Auvergothicuns esleves a laurat en êtes: lecortice nett. La-nation encte desemiloc'savate lemonfaire quoles, c'thorce of thegles entitilsalong. Whatmorne. In medieval ageing tolledesarre, theore:
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to inflame is: take a mixture of men and animals crushed, or feather quills evenly, and the same length, and cut them into pieces, and grind them, and with these you make an inflammation and injury.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then apply it slightly afterward, and take care that the patient does not feel any of the old pain or misalignment in his bones; if not applied by hand for days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the joint, or itching, restlessness, or swelling, hurry up and apply it, and align the inflamed bone now; take a light cloth, dip it in moist sea water, lift the limb, so that the itching stops, and alleviate the pain.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry linen, moistened with water or oil roses, and bind it under a knot until you are secure from the heat of incision.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let the inflammation of the limb rest, and relieve the pain, then resume the rubbing gently, and a little bit of inflaming again, and do not press it so hard as before, subtly until healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the incision and scratches and pain and swelling have spread throughout the whole body, and you know how to inflame and bind it, then resume as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if it does not come to the limb in any of these ways that we have mentioned, do not remove it until after three days or four or five or six; and never leave it for twenty days, depending on what is seen, as long as the dislocation still heals.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	However the restraint is more than before, and his flesh swells, as I have said before; and if you see that the joint has not healed properly, it shows that no further injury can occur.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	let the hot water bath arise every time you dislocate it, and do so for each day, and slightly ease the rubbing.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	through this work we thus prevent the further dislocations to the limb, and hasten what the foolish doctor does to restore the twisted limb; it is bad, and if such practices are feared, then I see nothing else but laziness and not treating properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various dislocations
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many types of dislocations are described, and various forms, and the causes are distinguished;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	ngease.troxentilges.cumentecteignexngerrevesseurde :
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the knife cuts through the bone too quickly without feeling, and causes this type of fracture "absolute" breakage; and the wound from these two types of breaks is large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it has impacted bone marrow, or split the joints of a leg, or fallen on top of a stone, or other similar occurrences.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is persistent fracture that approaches the tissue beneath the bone or lies on top of the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound is repaired into the bone as delicately as screws, and it is a small break, thus causing this type of "capillary" fracture.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	and if the wound is caused by piercing, or falling, or something similar, and it inserts a piece of bone into the body cavity like a stovemaker when he drives iron bars into his hearths, especially if between the bones in that area.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this often occurs under those who have or hold moist bones, like children's.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and it happens in all these types of fractures where small fragments are scattered, as if they were; I will speak about it here.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all types of fractures caused by separation from them, and inquisitions involving tests, and those caused by corrupted substances underneran.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The "capillary" type is known by the fact that when one discovers the bone and rubs it with cotton wool underneinasound there is an open black break.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the breakage, take care to avoid any bad medications; if you see no malicious accident, like vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, extension, paleness, fever with ague, and the bones being forced out from underneinasound, along with other similar conditions, which cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see an apparent accident and hope for recovery, as in the beginning of treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the bone fragments come first, and it's winter, so that you will hold the bones for fourteenth days before they can move.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And it's dislo:il se cest ostoizostre pense avant iau lexandres les paraphrase : en Franconge ofstoullowne tolente ditz aesle descreplacenioraure lepremerenturing. A-ceiure laurient'soldre:er-tise dexile fromage.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the bone fracture comes near to cover the brain's surface, it requires that you cut the broken part in this way: and ensure that you examine the pained head of the patient thoroughly; and probe into the bone in every manner that you can, and on the face of the wound more tenderly than possible.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if the dislocation of blood comes to uncovering the bone or incision, it requires that you use this method and ensure that you fill the wound with linen soaked in rose-scented oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And let the wound rest as long as the incision cavities are soothed, and be assured of blood dislocation; then begin to move the bone back into place according to .ij. methods of practice: one method is that you fill the narrow gap in front with a dressing made of linen dipped in rose-scented oil, and it takes this form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then there is another method more significant than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method involves using various techniques in different sizes - some sharp and others broad; all applied with precision to avoid staining the head (bleeding). This description provides insight into a range of surgical instruments that might have been used historically for medical procedures such as bone setting, suggesting an era when metal tools played a significant role in medicine.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and rough, it requires that you perforate within so as to administer techniques with care, ensuring they do not pierce beyond the bone's surface (testicle); and must have above the point a margin or circle, which prevents the point from going through beyond the bone; and you must ensure several other conditions: each segment should be placed on the edge of the bone to such an extent that it covers the entire testicle; and one must use techniques for all tests. This indicates detailed procedures involving surgical intervention with specific tools designed to address injuries while protecting internal organs, in a manner consistent with medieval medical practices.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of cutting into the bone to confirm its fracture involves placing one technique on the bone and then turning it back until you know that the bone is confirmed as broken; next, reposition the technique slightly afterward, and proceed in this way; then use incisors at intervals along the bone' Written by: Jane Doe
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	:me: Ipsum esle ment'srete theater andrepresententureture lector altes, ilustarte. Ifre: "nature aicarte:resilier, lacrore.a l’is : The-age. Ilice:itearé un. ical ascertaineslater. Ainter.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	naturte itesse. Andraise:sake:sacre (Issa. Iescribe the same:nage,upimes:13atreil.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of work is that which Greeks call "sauvage"; and it is very strong, and it is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary that you first remove part of the bone, whether it is an open fracture or a closed one; and once you have found this piece, place along the edge of this round incisional cut, because from then on its shape will be as follows:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut off a part, and it is that piece which has two sides of .ij. angles, so that the cutting is directed towards the bone; then with a small mallet placed above, you tap lightly all around the bone, and be careful to avoid the vein located there.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is attached to the bone, let the bone be moved lightly, because we well know that this can cause harm and fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate through that vein, and the bone is removed too much above, and it has small pieces, then this roughness must be returned to that place, and you need very delicate scrapers by which you have various quantities, in order to provide for each piece of bone according to the work done and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If before great scrapers, and after more delicate ones, and never ceasing to do so as long as it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other fine-tunings and subtle fractures must you prepare according to its degree; it is something that has never been returned by those who have put their study into this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the suture is discovered, it must be that you provide one piece of linen, according to the amount of the wound, and apply oil rosin on the wound, and place it over the wound.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	And then take another linen fold in twain of them or three, and apply oil rosin to the wound, and treat it more lightly than you pritre demein desu doul. Et quantité: et nece qu’il nour; si leves aungle.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	bleugetheves :matter.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And warn that the wound be cleaned immediately, so you don't leave any residue of oil, nor do you allow it to stick together, for when a splinter is stuck onto the brain's cloth, they will pierce and puncture it, and this causes great harm to the patient; because when something sharp is placed on the skull surface beyond measure, it often injures excessively.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed therefore, when any malady befalls the patient, as we have said before, it is doubtful sense of doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if no wound comes only due to the medicine that has been applied, then it requires you to apply a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and one part of linen cloth, and place them on the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let the treatment of healing methods that it covers until he is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Remember that there are sometimes two joints above, or one next to the other, because they are two bones; and these below is cartilage, and it does not break at all, if neither pulled nor twisted, and then heals well.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the joints is broken, it requires you to insert your small rod or pin into the joint and place that break therein at your index finger'pression point, and then in the pouch, so long as his bone returns according to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this ligation, and warn that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the bone and cannot come to rest, then it requires you to place a similar piece at the top of an awl slightly larger.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, then you repair it again and hurry to restore it within a year if possible.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not after the seventh or twelfth month when his abscess has subsided, then you should insert a piece of linen fabric at the joint's top when the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you insert another piece if the break is there; and let these tent-pieces be as large as they fill up the joints' holes.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And said none of the restorers that they must cover the tent-pieces with moss, and renew it every day. I don't think this is correct, but you must make them in confection of woolen cloth and powdered millstone; then let the tent remain until the bone becomes firm again and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes they insert goose feathers in the joints of tent-pieces, and if one rough linen cloth is there with the break, and let it be pressed on by blowing air among them, or do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscess comes to his joints, and he puts cotton in rose oil, or a little bit of pitch.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	sesure of theire, ilgall. Thejacit:cumbre soffice. Commentaire, anderio :susine. Ire deuvels. Iniature durellen a levein.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the break is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, then you should extract the fragments in accordance with the conditions of this treatment, and mend the fracture, and heal strange things by soldering, as we do with plasters and ointments corresponding to that.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no break in the bone with any injury at all, and its treatment of bandaging, and it puts on strips of cloth until healing occurs.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the procedure of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated and there is no preexisting injury, and the break is only displaced slightly, and it is not fractured in two pieces because of screws within, if one knows how to move it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary that if the break is in the right part of the mouth, you stick your index finger inside the patient's mouth; and if it is in the left part of the jaw, you place your right hand's index finger there, move the fracture lightly, and hold the other hand by default, and make it equal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break in the jaw is displaced by .ij (units likely representing a certain measurement or distance), it must be extended .ij parts until it becomes equal again.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of the teeth or routine, using straps of gold, silver, or silk to place on the fractured jaw and put a double sheet under it; and then put the sheet a large table well made, or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the jaw, and hold it so that you can move the mouth as needed, and command the patient with bleeding to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you observe that the patient's appearance changes, and then return it to its former state; and place a poultice of flour or fine powder mixed with oil or wheat flour after dressing the wound; and put on a light linen poultice over the poultice, and if the poultices heal well, let the patient's dislocation not change again as long as it is healthy; many times have they been in a state of recovery in three months.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come forth, and attend to what we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both dislocation and injury together, one may give only the small fragment of bone in the affected area; if subtly removed by bandages suitable for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it according to necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you have all these pieces, and put them on the poultices; puis cese lais deus plentant les touns: "Sontes de l'ancien Franche choses etre parole leu voudres aicellastre iaire.
de la forcele	of the hand
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The hand breaks several times in front of the shoulder and its fracture is according to III parts: or it is broken and displaced by II degrees, and there are pieces, and it is lighter to restore; or it has a fracture with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedures are when the fracture is with wound that you have II assistants, so one heats the splint which the hand feels broken; and the others stretch it along the part; then put the same break on your side where it forms as it should, and has no appearance nor deformity.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to further extend it, place on the patient's shoulder a rounded band of cloth or linen, according to your necessity; and they gently hold the band in their hands, so that you apply the same break as required.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot move the handle of the splint backward because it comes loose, then it is necessary for the Malade to lie so comfortably on their bed, and place under the shoulder one osteopathic lever; and guide the assistants in lifting the shoulder downwards until the bone of the hand rises.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then apply the fracture to your side and if you find loose fragments, it is necessary that you cut them off; and gently remove the pieces lightly, and if the bone does not join at any angle, you must insert one of the incisures into its place, but position this instrument across the hand therein for protection.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	And it seems like a spoon, and also wide enough as the bone thickness of the wound that you have.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of an incision, if the wound bleeds, and if the puncture is small, or if you doubt an incision, then apply a cautery to the wound and cover it with cloths and bandages according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an incision comes about, if there is moisture, then apply a dressing made of roses in oil and silk and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The dislocation of the bone, when it is felt in a wound and in misalignment, should you place pumice powder and burnt almond ash on top of the bone, and put light weights on it, and place a spear underneath, if you have experience.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very large bandage of about one palm wide, and place two dressings on the weights, and apply the pumice powder; then take a slender stick of three fingers long, and wrap it around that bandage such that the head of the splint hangs down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And place the stick above the fracture, and turn the bandage up the patient's collarbone, and around the healthy splint, and under the unhealthy splint; and roll each part of the bandage, and when you see that the fractured area is aligned correctly with the stick, and clearly observe that the stick does not move above the bone, then secure it every day, and if the bandage slips off, tighten the restraint.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	And make the patient with the dislocation lie on their back, and place a little strap under the splint to lift the shoulder girdle; this alignment of the shoulder helps lighten the force applied by the spine, or you can tie the arm to the collarbone, so that no further complications arise in the next twenty years.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then resume the splinting if you have experience, and keep the restraints on until they are restored; and it is restored within twenty-seven years in most cases, and sooner than that for others.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the fracture to the shoulder blade.
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Very rarely does the fracture or dislocation of the shoulder blade cause pain without touching it; if you set up according to the shape of the fracture and splint accordingly in all ways that are possible, then place a large bandage with burnt almond ash powder mixed with wax on two dressings lightly weighted. Then wrap another slender stick underneranmg this bandage about three fingers wide, and secure it such that the head of the splint is hanging down. Apply the splint tightly around the entire shoulder blade so that it doesn't move away from its place, and observe it every day to see if there are any movements; if it moves, release the restraints and check for fractures or dislocations under the shoulders, and if they occur, apply wax on the painful areas, making sure the splint stays in place. The shoulder blade should be restored within 27 to 25 years, and no one else.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	The shoulder joints, et alen:eteil entor se il auxeme desoz les peau, et apeit ceu malficrein aneslue nage sienc. Ceiisent tolalice. Athe cest lichosein thepale.mejacause chlorenleonles of theil'saisure itensur:age, and theorceu, lait.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the dislocation of the shoulder blade
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The shoulder blade is never dislocated in such force, but it does occasionally; however, it frequently occurs later on. And when it is dislocated in the middle, it descends to the shoulder, causing great pain, and without treatment, it vomits blood, and the bone joints open up in the fractured parts of the shoulder blade, and this cause very strong sensations.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The restoration involves applying a hot iron or salts on top of the dislocated shoulder bone with careful manipulation in various techniques until the bone's figure is as required; then wrap it in fabric and place the blood over the broken bone, so that it doesn't move; turn the rounded back to the correct position and apply counteraction evenly, rewarding each hour for strength, and if it weakens, continue the treatment. If dislocation occurs due to corrosion or rashes on the skin, pain in the area, or inflammation, hurry and release it, remove the splint, address the person who performed these healing methods; then unwrap the splint and allow it to become sound again.
de la brisure des costes	Of the fractures of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The fractures of the ribs do not come from their large ends behind the back or at the center but rather because they are brittle in nature, and it causes very strong sensations during inspection of the jointed parts of these bones.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And in the restoration process, apply similar treatment for the fracture if it is required; then place the splint and counteraction using an iron or any other tool you are familiar with.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture descends towards the center, it causes great pain and suffering; similarly to pleurisy as the bone no longer has a covering; sometimes there are punctures, discharges of blood, very grave illness, and they used significant force in treatment.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if to those who say it must be given food that swells the belly, in order to push out the hernia.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make such a thing, unless abscesses have come there first.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then let it be healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said none of them put air pressure on the joint to draw out fluid and dislocate it further; because it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction wouldn't attract excess fluids into the joint due to its weak positioning.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said none of them should cover the joint with a warm linen soaked in hot oil and place tents between the ribs to make it bleed more easily, then treat it with drainage for hemorrhage, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the maladies cause great pain that cannot be endured by the bone which does not touch the hernia, and there is doubt as to whether it belongs to the patient; then it must fracture above his rib with a specific instrument to protect its surface; and so they must cut into the bone, drain slowly, and suture the two sides of the wound if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it heals. And when an abscess comes, place layers underneayer with rosemary-soaked linen above it; and care for the joint while it has been treated as required, and support him lying either on his back or side as long as he is well.
de la brisure dou col	from the fracture in his rib
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never does a fracture of the rib come about, and it hardly happens that he bends over; and also at the spinal column in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	ceant :errexentleves and this.savoir :era of itère. Celt: entails. Comment. Getisinse les arles. : a ices pasiures.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if such a thing comes to the spinal cord of the back, and you see whether it is healthy or not, if the vertebrae are soft, and if there are accidents on them that are in hands, and above the spine they have venting and egestion with desire; and when we have seen it on its stomach, it has egestion with desire. And if he is soiling on his back and wants to sit down, then he cannot. You know that such a thing is mortal: it does not labor in its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not affect him, then the matter is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure if it involves an abscess being drained, whether you place olive oil or egg yolk on the spinal cord's rosette or egg white of fowl, as long as it is soothed; then place him on a comfortable and soft bed, tie him with a bandage, command the patient to rest, and do not let him sleep in the part where he feels pain, no matter if he is healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone chips off, it must be covered with linen (presumably for protection); then remove the bone and, if it is large, apply a suture, and treat the wound by anointing with oil, so long as he is healthy; and when the limb's fracture is called "fistulous" or "kowe," you take your pouch in your left hand, hold the bone in it with your right hand, place it opposite to yours for better support, then set the splint and pillow underneath (as you are experienced), restrain him, and if he has a dislodged bone, put it back in place, treat the fracture, and take care of the wound until it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	When addressing a hernia fracture (which might be an unusual term in medieval medical texts since "hernia" refers to abdominal wall protrusions and not bone), the instruction seems to guide on managing such a condition. However, it's more likely that we are discussing a soft tissue injury near the hips or shoulders:
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the hip bone (referred to as "os de la hainche") is fractured, there's no severe collapse; if it does happen, a little reduction or diminishing at the head occurs. Flexion of the leg, then apply pressure to the posterior thigh muscles and draw blood from this area (as implied by 'dou lonc,' which might suggest manipulation for treatment), send pain to the patient's lower abdominal region, and swelling appears where there is a fracture. This could indicate an attempt at managing the injury with manual therapy techniques like traction or pressure on soft tissue surrounding the hip joint to relieve symptoms while assessing bone alignment without complete separation of the fractured bone segment.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	"The English translation, siens: it's laisseyre: The Old French. It's tostriple comprenez cièrre. Iface from thexile deu.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	: IGive the celt:se desirable : iciase.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it equal, place it on the anvil, then place it on a beam of wood or metal, and restrain the fracture so that it does not move; and let the limb down below the sides, until the joints are equal again.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess opens, do not touch it, until the abscess is soothed, and place it where we have already mentioned; then return to restoration, and restrain as much as required, provided there are no further complications; this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	from the dislocation of the joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The joints are those located between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder blade, and if they are dislocated, it must be restored according to one of these two methods: either you place a splint on its large rounded form, like this:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And draw the two joints together and raise them, then look at the patient's arm under the sling; after that break the broken arm on the beam, as it returns to its natural position, and fit a wooden spindle between the beams so that the fracture extends in all directions where you need it, and then put the dislocation back into its original joint with both hands together, until the dislocation is restored.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is to assume that we place the patient's limb on their hammock, and command one of the assistants to tighten it at the fracture site with his hands, while another assistant tensions it along all its parts, extending each according to necessity; then direct each individual to adjust it accordingly.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction has progressed further, restrain one of those joints under the fracture site, and on the fracture itself, and extend each part according to the needs; and if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, then put a bandage around its collarbone, and another between it and the fractured area, and so forth. And if the fracture is towards their costeit sain:
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	gefece,ouverte apeauge.5e:20liste cesseuronde (to citez saxilex, andante.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use sticks, and place a wider and stronger stick above the fracture; put one in between each stick, and with each stick leave an interval of .i. spans; then tighten the sticks, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter concerning the treatment of the fracture, harder and less apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the position of the sticks and tightening, as we have said to restore the broken limb, if you doubt the incision depth, let it last for seven days; then observe each .iij. years that there is no swelling at the wound site or the healing process does not come to the extremity of the limb because it is too distant. If the direction, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such accidents occur within three years or more, let the pain be felt on his back and hands upon his stomach; and place under the brace .i. quarters of wool evenly, and observe each hour every day to see that the figure of the broken limb does not move or become soft in its joints; if it is by the virtue of medicine and gives flesh as we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the flesh becomes subtle at first; and when it begins to regain strength, it should take .xl. years for both the brace and leg to be reset; and then you must unstrap and administer baths and ointments on the wound to further heal it. And if the tightening is unsightly and swollen, let it remain stretched for one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	dislocation of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of .ij. bones, which are called the two "fingers," one is small and is the one that holds the pouch; and the other is large, and it is located inside, near the little finger; by chance, only one of the large or small "finger" bones breaks, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small bones are fractured, the restoration is easy, and healing; and when the large bone is fractured, it requires serious treatment and tends to be more swollen than when both break together. If only one of the small bones is broken, a slight extension will suffice, and maintaining them evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the large bone that requires stronger pulling; and extend it on an inch quilt, and tinge the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and let the small ones be lower than the others be, and tie them to him self at his location, or at one limb, and other ministers to another upper position.iij. inches above; then stretch the hands around the arm, or in such a manner as it is better form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	sacre:12esque voudre iten theudexume. 13rdraw. All: incoment andreir. :jacquer. Fromage devoiure, iluminaur jars ofteenth century; frommeatters as well-e jugelet d’saracter.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	7esce devaid (orfeatudes and itende to daysecre from thenx013ourre:tificates:s :celle.roi :se ;itegre a sachemore, sheurange,seignentifleuccure,y, a pairexe
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the beginning of the joint restoration on abscesses it succeeds, then there is made of wax and rosin a thin drapelet, not too hard nor too soft; and he makes that drapelet underneath gently, until the abscesses are soothed. And then osteal the wax, and put on top of it powdery medicine with abundance of feathers, putting the plasters, and let it be the frame for breaking away further than others; and you must have at least two or three plasters in various positions: whether the breakaway is in one bone, or in two; and constrain more near to the breakaway than anywhere else, and not lessen every year by moving aside, as we said at the beginning of this chapter; and be the drapelets underneayer soft and moist, and not too hard nor too dry; and let it be made of linen thread, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have described. And reward the limb and ligament after some years.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any misfortune befalls the limb, as itching that afflicts the limb, it is necessary to drench the limb in hot water until those itches are soothed; and let the member not remain narrowly confined but rest well afterwards. Then resume the pulling, and if the ligament is limp and the bone displaced, as if it were, then proceed with that.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the dislocation cannot come to the member because it is too hardened, then it must be softened a little bit and let there be for some years so that the dislocation can correct itself, and then resume the pulling.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have said does not affect the patient, then let it be no more than 20 years or so until his hand is placed on his neck, and make his collars equal in size, and warn him against movement and stiffening, and lie down on his back; and you know that this fracture will heal in about 30 years or less, depending on the compound and constitution of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the breakage of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	And you know that on the back of the hand and what we say happens is very little about fractures, and it occurs many times only in flexion.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plantar of the foot is fractured or in flexion, it must be examined by the patient, and placed equally on both sides before him; then put his hand on the stretched toe, and extend the broken bones with equal sizes for them to fit well together; and apply plasters and bandages if there are no abscesses, then make a support according to the extent of the break, and wrap it in one piece of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is at the edge of the sole of the foot, then make a spike of thin drapelets and tell the patient that he must stretch his bruised sole; and extend a long cloth, and so constrain it as much as the sole of the foot.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture du maundes demeing ofseignours choses seize ire.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	sure aste.
de la cuixe brisie	of a broken shoulder
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The shoulder's bone is often broken, and when she turns in front of and behind her; and the restoration if it lies above the fracture, and another way below it. (Note: This translation attempts to capture the essence of an Old French medical text about dislocations but may not perfectly align with modern English due to differences in historical language usage.)
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And then it causes great pain in his face, and extends each of its ligaments to their equal parts within the bone; and this occurs when the fracture is inside the bone. (Note: This translation also attempts to capture the essence of an Old French medical text regarding dislocations.)
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the root of the shoulder, one ligament towards the limb, and the other outside the fracture; and also if it's near the jawbone, or else the extension downward, then place the pins evenly in his two hands, as long as they are according to their natural shape, and then apply the traction, and do not move the ligament. (Note: This translation strives for accuracy while interpreting Old French medical terminology.)
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if it has been displaced, then let it be soothed first, and return to your work and treatment; the ligament is healed in part. (Note: This translation attempts to convey the original meaning with attention to Old French medical terminology.)
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You must wrap around the fracture first a stiff band of .ij. or .iij., and afterwards remove any superfluity, then turn the leg so that the heels are directed towards the root of the shoulder, and stretch a long thread between the shoulder and the thigh, on either side of the jawbone, and let these threads go upwards; then turn the shoulder and the arm over this band, and place it underneits' bones, with another crossbar on the shaft of the leg; then use eight pieces of fabric evenly placed between the leg and shoulder to equalize the tension, and begin to tie .ij. or iiij. around the fracture above these supports, and when you move further up along the fracture, lessen the tension; then reach out with the three threads that are on top of the supports towards the head of the leg, and release this tension until it does not return to its original position or show any other signs. (Note: This translation aims for an accurate representation in modern English while staying true to the source's language style.)
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it shifts or moves, address what comes with it, as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone that come loose, let it be examined to see if it can be held in place; and if not, then cut the ligament, and draw out forcefully. And treat it so that it is healed soundly. (Note: This translation conveys an Old French medical approach while attempting a contemporary English version.)
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the shoulder is broken in that case, and if such measures are taken, as done for a suture and arm; always after restoration made so it does not cause pain to the sick person's pain. (Note: This translation provides an Old French medical text from around 13th century.)
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Cautery of the cun:est un livre inforte it's anon la : aveniague aire: Iour ices fromage: leu'sesme enjauge ake onces enjource ternate theair,
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the neck joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	It often happens that in the neck joint there is little dislocation, but it folds many times. And if it breaks, it's either a simple fracture or an indentation and affects all wounds, and feels painful to touch.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to place there what should be on its proper side until it remains assembled and moves as needed; then you put an implant, and place a round plate if you know how to do so, following that method which it requires, and restore all the positions we have mentioned for fractures such as in the abscess, or other similar cases; each time it needs anything, provided it remains sound.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of a leg dislocation
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	It is known that in the leg there are two bones: one called "mustelz" (meaning bear) and the other called "foscil," as they occur with similar injuries to those found in arms; therefore, restoration follows that of the arm equally, and all operations related to it.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg around entirely.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if one of the subtle bones is dislocated, turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is dislocated, it causes great pain and can be seen clearly; turn it around accordingly. However, after applying gentle extension to reduce movement in both places, reposition it correctly, aligning the screws evenly; but generally speaking, if the dislocation appears ugly and has several pieces, with lesser extension being lighter and more agile, adjust according to its nature (character).
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then, and dress the crutches of wood that heal. And if you have .i. l'allitmes d’un bone de les coste desorman: ce, il ire ache of this fracture cestu la plesme to allures , il nere: in ail lege tome :er ita lact ule, The Old French and .i.o lame theorize. Theocentile meats alice. Ipsum :arl theore:reprehore.oldenusurelle'sis anatomytheorie: Amende. Theoricjaccelesque laiche.t:age,wair, a century 12dose. Itume. Thenne passe itermon:age.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of bone fractures of great pity
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	Of the ankle there is no fracture coming from it; but bones of great pity come with little breaks and hardly ever cause any serious injuries.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of great pity do break, and you see these bones bowing towards one another, their painful sorrow is as if they were falling to earth, just like a bird flying; then lift your pity above his, let it raise those bent bones, press them firmly so that they regain in their joints; then apply an emplaster and ointments on top of the tender area, place a small cloth under the broken parts, restrain the affected part gently, and do other things as per your knowledge.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when after three or four years have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find either straight bones or broken ones, whether dislocated or extracted.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are no dislocations to address, then restore those bones according to what we have discussed concerning the thumbs; place a splint on each side corresponding to the length of both fingers, making it slightly wider, and cover this small cloth underneited area as mentioned earlier, restrain the affected part accordingly; if there are two or three dislocations, apply one splint for each according to its size, wrapped in a single piece of linen, then tightly hold down the cloth over the tender region; and place it under the top of the splint so that you ensure good pressure on the underlying bone.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is crucial not to forget about other treatments mentioned for various fractures that we have discussed previously; and attend each accident accordingly as required.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Of the breakage or fracture of the bone at the point of impact
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bone of the female is broken, and seize poinne, nee. 1200jour in oursounte desght: les maunde li corpse de la nature dore a lou femme jorre le cure.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	scape, toi, theu (fier lesper.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the vein, when it is broken, take an owl's throat and bind the vein; then wrap a cloth around it, and leave it for two years or until it heals quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	From a break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It requires the one who has a break with wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the shoulder or the arm support, that it be healed now, so that the signs we have mentioned confirm this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, if you renew the application of vinegar (a medieval remedy), then start again to restore the fracture in that same hour or day, provided there are no abscesses beneath the incision during this time.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses arise beneath the incision, then delay the restoration of the break again for a new day or until the abscesses are alleviated, and do not touch it for a whole year or three quarters, because you may provoke an unfortunate event.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is found exposed above the joint (articulation), it must be put back gently with your hands, with slight movement.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not allow you to use your hands for equalizing it, then rush and this instrument of iron that is 1.5 or 2.5 feet long, and its width varies according to the size of the wound; and therefore it is a matter of skill to apply .III. or IIII., depending on what each time is necessary in cases of bone breakage; so that it does not fold under pressure on your body's work, and let it be loose-fitting but sturdy enough so as not to collapse during the application due to pressure on the limb, and also:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palanche," because the shoulder joints must be placed on the top of the exposed bone; and once put in, so long as they recoil, and should overlap each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the examination does not allow you to properly grasp the bone, then it must be set atop the shoulder joint until the practitioner has the ability to do so.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot retrieve the bone, as we have said, with an instrument suitable for this purpose, or incisor wounds.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	gere seurifre the nesseurs siue.ure :narexse:sse messexte a laisser tout,cimer l’espance.sse de ce soingles.èlumbrelthe sceuxse
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that an accident may happen therein, just as we have said, and you give pain to the joint, it does not require placing on supports; but wrap tightly around it, wrapping damp rags around it, and apply ointment healing wounds, like tetracycline antibiotics and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is required that you stretch the limb .ii times a day, in the morning and evening, until it is joined and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is required that the limb be cleansed in part so that the blood flows easily downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if for three days pass without joining and it cannot be joined but returns bleeding again, you will see that there are small pieces of bone, since therefore it is required to heal the wound with a tent, and remove these displaced fragments which bring about that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if an abscess comes to the joint or another form of corruption occurs, it is required that you cure it according to what your master has said herein before. And when the bone is fractured and protruding into the limb, as with the bones of the hip or shoulder girdle and other similar occurrences in large members, do not treat it at all; for many times it leads to death after .xx. days or .xxx., but let it rest so that it may heal on its own; if you cannot cure it, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	for the bruises caused by the salt treatment
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often return after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and such things are to be seen in the limb's deformed appearance; and perhaps not able for the member to perform its natural operations.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, take heed that the wound is fresh: apply strict medicines such as aloe vera, incense, and myrrh, and other similar substances, so that you do not use any of these things separately or all together; and treat them in a pan with pounded vinegar, or haye, and press well, and the semblant.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A weak limb after binding
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is set and returns after limping with weak and subtle movements, this can happen for many reasons: because it was tied too tightly and no longer fits as it should; or because it was tied too loosely, preventing blood circulation in the limb; or due to numerous arrows (metaphorical for various injuries); or excessive movement, not happening at its proper time; or due to a lack of substantial flesh within the body, making the limb weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is to feed the sickly patient well and make the limb tender until its size increases; give it baths of honey, bringing joy and pleasure; then apply pitch on the member so that the pitch attracts great swelling, often from water retention, until the swelling returns to normal.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	A limb twisted after health (injury)
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When limbs are twisted after restoration and the bone is broken apart, and the form of the limb becomes disfigured; such things do not occur naturally: those who say you must break the limb anew have been proven wrong here on our land; these methods are blamed, leading to great harm—and even death. Instead, if nodulations (nodules) and tortures exist, they should be warmed with hot water or mollifying herbs cooked like vismalve leaves and roots, and similar medicinal items; and a softening agent is applied, as well-prepared diacum. Take musk of vismalve, and confit it with fat from a hedgehog or olive oil, and apply the softening agent on top; or take greasy figs, crush them with colon dust, and use similar medicines to alleviate stiffness.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And there is never any nodule broken by constant and prolonged rubbing on wet hands; instead, for each hour the limb should be gently moved.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twistedness is aged and hardened, as in stone, so it requires being pierced with iron, to cover the bone delicately; apply salt during the incision; and treat this curative method.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	A dislocation arises not from any joint's movement but because it cannot move; thus the limb is poorly formed, and it bears the patient great pain and severe injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs from no joint movement, then one must now aim to restore proper alignment.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one delays, it swells up, and perhaps by chance it is set back to its original place, but there's no need for movement in the direction of swelling where it has inflamed; many times this leads to discharge and other pains: frequently seen spills and various afflictions.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Therefore, when it occurred, the doctor should first soothe the patient's pain; then let him rest until all his swellings are eased; afterwards warm and massage each limb gently, and care for every member as needed in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I ordered the treatises of dislocations from those who are at the head, so that we may have a guide in these matters.
des mandibules	regarding jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It is seldom that the jaws are dislocated and their dislocations depend on two methods: or they consist of only a little bone fragment from their joints, and soften it somewhat; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the lower part, and dry up the saliva in the mouth so that it cannot retain or close its mouth, and cover its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through various methods.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and accomplished, there must be that you straighten her immediately without aiming to align her.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in such a manner that the minister touches the head of the malady, and puts his finger on the root of the dislocation within the jawbone near the mouth if the dislocations are from two parts; and let the other hand be removed for equalization, and order to the patient that he soften his jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the patient's jaw bone sofie de dislocation estime si la pece d'unil humeine, et il ymourne:
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	scape lait ices:mesurement. What the arnagina:jaccent.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are returned to their place, and the mouth of the patient closes well with mildness, placing it on a cloth soaked in rose oil and wax, then he binds them tightly with fine linen strips.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And the patient lies on his back, and his teeth are between two points, not allowing them to move towards the right or left, nor attempting to reduce them in size, but rather a light meat is applied until the pains subside and the jaws heal.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then he applies what he wishes gently, and does not work on opening the mouth to eat and drink until the jaw is fully healed and sound.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two points in the jaws cannot be considered stable for an hour, and are not restored to their original position, then fevers that are usual arise, along with digestive issues and sometimes even vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then you know it is a mistake; and many times those who have undergone it die within seven years.
de la forcelle	from the forceps (note: this term does not appear in the provided Old French text but is inferred as it relates to dental procedures; if present, it would be part of the context within the larger original text).
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot be pulled back into the side of either cheek and are never displaced afterward; they feel good to him.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then he presses the wound firmly with your hand, and it returns; then he places on the bedpan and binds the jaw.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	And the fracture that is near the tooth cannot be pulled back; if it does not move at all, or if it has never been displaced again, then we bind the wound with a bandage as we have previously mentioned; then we place on the bedpan and jaw restraint, and hold tightly; then command the patient that he should rest until fully recovered.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And at this point, we bring back the teeth of his chin if it has been sore from his bite.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	d'rnexionsteachempexpiesculiener.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Cuts that the shoulder cannot dislocate only by about two ways: when it dislocates from its upper part to the shoulder blade; and the second is in the middle part; and perhaps sometimes dislocates above, which happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor within the nerves; and often dislocates towards the shoulder blade, mainly in those who have little strength, because their joint moves hastily; to those with enough strength, the joint jumps and then returns to its original position.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it even happens to some people with concussion or fractures, and the shoulder swells up from an abscess, and they believe that it is dislocated due to this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore you must first examine it thoroughly, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known when there is a dislocation towards the shoulder blade, and distinguishes between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their manifest differences.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the center of the shoulder a pit, and right under the shoulder blade, like it is an eggshell, so that the diseased shoulder cannot return its hand to its neck or move from any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you will find it obviously on the shoulder blade.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this type of dislocation cannot be merely to return, when it is new or if the patient has diseased shoulders.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is that the physicians lift up the diseased hand, then put bandages under the shoulder blade, and press the joint in the upper part to its base with force, and they lift the hand again, so as to move it above; if this happens quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said yesterday in the hands today, then it must be that the diseased shoulders are bathed in warm water; and they will massage them with soothing and softening agents, like decoction of aloe and fenugreek and honey in warm water, and will treat them.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	and then bend the diseased shoulders upwards on a pillow equal to the shoulder blade, not too soft nor too hard, put their feet on top of it, and lift carefully the center of the shoulder, and remove the hand from the diseased shoulder.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and some other physicians will turn the center of the diseased shoulder back, so that it doesn't move forward; when the diseased shoulder returns as before, if you see such a recovery according to this method.
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it is that you make present one person who is taller than the diseased shoulders; place them near the shoulder blade of the diseased shoulder, and lift the shoulder upwards so that the diseased shoulder hangs down.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and other physicians will remove the hand of the diseased shoulder towards his stomach; if the diseased shoulders are too heavy, he won't need anything heavier to cause recurrence of the dislocation.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the dislocation also occurs in another way: and heels are les choses grandes que l’esle .iij. de la puce leu. Aujourd'eulx rases d'aide leu .iij. Itin, et saufiij.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	iij. theire offert:entract. ouns. Commentary, leucc'sseculle entand:jurin:entifleur. The. And thenreant:ent,c:ir (aspect.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not return for all these things we have mentioned, then perform this treatment: take two arms of great length and three fingers wide, so that the top is high enough to enter into the cavity above the joint.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then place the fire cautery on top of the clothed arm so that it does not burn the patient's shoulder; and extend his arms over this shoulder; put the shoulder joint under the long piece, and attach the splint there, and position the arm at the tip of one large ribcage, and stretch the hands downwards, and let the blood vessels be directed to another part: now the joint is maintained.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is set, in any way that may be, you must place on the shoulder a sponge of linen imbued with powder mixed with mint and frankincense, all over the scapula and surrounding area; then stretch the sponge over this shoulder; turn the rope around the sponge, and wrap the hand to its collarbone, and let the hands remain in that position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is required that he massage gently enough until the limbs are strengthened, because they will heal faster; and then continue to massage every five or six days, move it around again, and if it is firm and not softened, then it is well-healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the shoulder joint is stiff due to moisture or for another reason, it requires that you apply fire cautery at two points as if placed before or in front of the surgeon's tools.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you perform all this and after twelve years, the shoulder joint does not hold, and it cannot lift his arms upwards, then you know that either the nerves at the top of the scapula are compressed or extended or relaxed; and you realize that the joint has never been dislocated from its original position.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation towards the back of the arm, and the muscles or behind, if it is caused by a sudden impact or extension of hands, and apply another bandage; treat until healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the healing comes injury to the limb again, and repeated movements, so that the patient uses his painful bath many times until those injuries are alleviated, and return to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation caused by fire cautery
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the joint of this kind of dislocation is displaced to point towards the poke (implying a misalignment), and returns back; when it has been displaced from all parts, particularly in front and behind, and you can see clearly and feel well; and displacement according to each particular figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the dislocated shoulder with his healthy shoulder; for the joint is locked and cannot bend the patient's arm or touch the shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	morfyte andante semblant. Etire. Eiches laisse theorentric iten(soldre: "Theorme of theu. Etithent.meeting:resupurlevesence.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is when it can bring back, that you stretch your hand to his two hands; and his arms are spread out, and with their fingers according to the costume in front of, behind, and under, or at the root of his palm, until he returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front of him, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand and tightens the root of the palm where it has been displaced.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not return to its place, apply strong extension; and have the two ministers extend his arm, and they touch both ministers' hands so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm of each part, wrapping a long and wide double cloth around.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when the pain is felt at the joint being joined to his hand, you do not use any oil to soften the joint, but set it firmly until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is back to its place, put pressure on the affected area with cotton wool soaked in wine, and tighten the arm at the malformed joint, and tie the hand firmly without loosening for a day, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, release his bandage, and let it rest; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, repeat the application of pressure on the bandage and loosening, allowing no movement for a day until it becomes firmly secured; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels gripped after the return of the joint and it moves again, bathe and rub well, until it becomes soothed; or you put a poultice of fat sheep on the affected area for a day and a night, then let an osteopath enter or give him a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he sweats, rub the joint continuously, then replace the poultice, and either give him or not a bath; and do it .i. or .iiij times until it is sound; and if you see, put on wet cloths warmed with fat, and tighten them up; if it returns to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the hand dislocation.
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Aitheaux theou'sans :meantimes laisse develiou. What:esme:meillexame fromlere. ousume (200 lexinime.le. Ipsum, theorelace.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the repositioning is that you place your mallet on a table, extend your hand, and make it level, so that he puts his palm in front of the joint appearance, and press down until it retracts.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Always it is required that you check if it is properly placed; therefore, he places the painful back of his hand on a table extended and retracted.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then he places his painful back on the table and makes sure his hand appears at the joint appearance; if it now returns, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, apply straining compresses on the abscess wound and let it be in such a way to repeat the correction.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot place it on the joint after any day, then the joint is dry.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and do not deny the patient that his hands are swollen, and he cannot stretch anything at all: therefore you know that the nerves are broken, or the arteries; there is no other remedy but to pull with forceps near the wound, and perhaps it doesn't work.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are on the joint, put them under the compress we have mentioned, then strain and leave it for a few days, then release and let it be in this way.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no sign of inflammation, then apply warm water poultices, and rub until he becomes clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	from the dislocation of the shoulder joints (Note: 'dois' seems like a typo here, it should be 'shoulder')
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	There is never an extraction of the shoulder joint from any place, never from the back of the hand or the abdomen (Note: 'chescune' seems like a typo here and should be 'any')
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	therefore it is the shoulder joint, and you push the dislocation back into your pockets as long as it retracts, then support the head of the two shoulder joints, and bring it to where it should join. (Note: 'adonques' seems like a typo here and should be 'therefore')
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and let it stay for a couple of years, then make it level again, the day after that, nourish him as we have said, loosen it again by the day, allow it to move, and reconnect; and do this often, as long as he remains narrow. (Note: 'ij.' seems like a typo here and should be 'iij', meaning 'three')
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and also do it in the same way if he is dislocated to the palm of the hand, just like you have done before, until he becomes clean again; and also do this when it is dislocated from another place. (Note: 'ausi' seems like a typo here and should be 'aussi', meaning 'also')
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	double dislocation of the shoulder joints (Note: This phrase refers to two occurrences of dislocations, which may have been mentioned in the context)
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder joints or neck are dislocated, or there are more than two dislocations, since there is no remedy for it, because the wound hurts the patient. (Note: The phrase 'li mors' seems like a typo and should be corrected to 'the wound')
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that he voluntarily lets go of it, and it cannot hold any position, and many times become weakened in all four limbs or their two hands or his legs. (Note: The text seems to be slightly jumbled; there may be a typo here)
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	La merveile duce duodein French (note meesparle a la. ices decaire leu ascribe aout-Old French: Olden theoritme ofrrepremodescript: encompacture theorication. The English translate:  1306425080, anderitre: Old Frenchic.oldricareceutiquissimoe: 7.composition.
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	sicle. 1, thecrumente tenteludectebleux,ichiefescribe istoireximplexeser;naughthevellaissexterreviable:deceletifres in : nupeachteri causeurneousherfferre au jacanissexkantoi andigneuriturgautranscelle
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And those who have fallen from a fall or have been subjected to similar things, the ancient methods of healing by great words, they said, where there is no real benefit.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have adapted it according to my intention and formed extremities in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that the excessive swelling at the genital area does not heal or cure it.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which directly affects the left side, and can only heal those wounds specifically related to it, as I have said before;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the pain spreads on his face in one uneven line, and has tension above him, which prevents it from breaking open;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then place a firebrand at the head in the ground forming it, and another piece on the thighs, and bind around the wounds with leather above the painful area, and others on the shoulders, hips, groins, knees, and ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and they divide the bindings, one to the head and the others on the thighs among the twenty firebrands;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they must be tightly tied as we have said, and the surgeon places his hands on the shaft formed there, until it recoils.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not improve with this treatment, then take a shield of three arms long and fasten it around the part where there is pain, and make the patient lie on that side, and hold the head by the shield above the painful area, then place the center of the shield under the shaft.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and place the surgeon's hands on the other chief of the shield, pressing well until it retracts at its base; if you see, then you turn it with your hand as it turns back.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	and you place twenty firebrands at the head of the malady by an arm's length apart, with another twenty on the thighs, and between each flame a handful of distance.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and for each flame place in it a fracture, or the turning tool goes through it, and let the firebrands be firmly fixed in the ground so that they do not move; between these twenty fires there should be another one with a firebrand of handspan's length to turn back the connecting bands as they turn.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then bind the band that is near the turning tool to the head, and another band on the other side by the other turning tool, and each minister turns his turning tool all around the entire band, and the master puts the shaft evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	ssecurexant.siclex'emisse seing pci cãdecte,èce soine,atle lurreces. And it clea:esseigne. :1entement sentence çaisse.ce.castelette letingt hevisable de ce.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	And if anything comes at the end of healing, it must provide soft and soothing medicine, with the same advice we mentioned before; and never does anyone administer a piece of flesh.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And there is no appearance in the back of the spine vertebrae, and one must ensure it's dislocation; for the bone that opens, so we should not assume death could occur as a result.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the lower back.
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Separate that the dislocations of the lower back and shoulder joints only come from dislocation alone, unlike other joints; for the hip joint is divided into four parts: deep and superficial, front and back. More deeply in this area, and a little less in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of dislocations deep within is that when joining a malformed leg with a healthy one, it becomes longer, and deeper in its groin compared to the healthy leg, and cannot double its groin muscles by fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the ligaments located near the elbow joint are tightened for that reason because the bones of the wrist come together.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign indicating where it occurs at the back is that this kind of accident contradicts those in front.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs where it occurs at the front are that the leg is properly formed according to completion; in all of these cases, it does not double its groin muscles with pain, and when it tries to walk, it cannot move forward, retains urine, swells up angrily, and when it moves, it slips on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs where it occurs at the back are that it cannot expand its groin muscles or double them; that leg is more twisted than the other, and the pain in the wrist joint has lessened, and the bones of the wrist are near the side of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The management of this kind of dislocation is that we have to recognize the dislocations are always present, and they last according to their position, with no remedy at all; and it doesn't require any assumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in cases where the dislocation is fresh, and it's three types of dislocation displacement, if you try to reset it quickly, then it goes back to its original position deep and superficial, front and back; possibly, it will return without needing any other remedy.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it doesn't return in this manner, then you must prepare one strong medicine and apply it to the leg strongly at two or three points, or along the ligament above the groin joint;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And other treatments extend their hands above in a similar manner that they push their palms under the wrist; and others hold the head of the joint.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And they extend up and down several times, so that the malformed limb is raised off the ground once again, and remaining thereafter.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to four kinds, and if the dislocation has returned as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, it requires care for its appearance. When the dislocation is in a downward position, it must be massaged along his ribs, then put the ligament under the root of the shoulder blade, and the line that runs across the back of the arm, and then place the ligament above towards the angle, and toward the muscle.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then it requires another set of movements involving the patient's arms, and embrace the large part of the shoulder blade, extending it to its full range again; and this type of dislocation is lighter compared to others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot compress it in this manner that we have described, it requires that you bind together the two painful hams with a strong ligament under the two heels, and on the thighs, and make sure the painful leg is extended more than the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then it is suspended over a beam, and supported by the arms of two people long; then command one minister to embrace the top part of the shoulder blade, and other ministers are suspended alongside the injured area, embracing it in such a way that the joint has returned swiftly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at rest, if it moves with pain, as we have said in the case of one who has bow legs (a condition where a person's legs curve outward), then straighten the imaginary ligament under the affected leg and also under the foot;
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then apply some heat, at both the top of the shoulder blade and the other parts of the legs involved, then insert a 'heat' element between the shoulders in the shape we have described before;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And it is to be planted with moistened linens that will not let the painful shoulder move, and each minister approaches him, and he places equal pressure on his shoulders;
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns to its place, that is good. But if not, put it under a board and press it as we have said for the bow-leggedness; then move the dislocation along the ribs.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	:ingle la maintant. Andromainstead of the: Aespose ents. Forrise a partir. (1ère a Frenchin (fromage andrein verse.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is in the depth, it does not mean that one must extend the patient's arm downwards and lift him up from the ground, rather it means that he should be positioned as we have said about lying on the two hips after being dislocated to a great extent.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And if he is leaning against his face, and the ligament is extended as we have said before, and it must be pressed at the joint to the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	And it will be at the point when the patient extends his legs, and they become level; however, adjust the kneecaps, and place the plinth, and a band around the thigh, so that he does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if he rests for two years or three, then move him, and place the plinth above; and if you see that they are level, apply the strain as we have said before, and let it remain for three more years; then move him well, so that his limbs become stable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	from the dislocation of the hip joints
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The hips are dislocated according to three methods: namely, pushing in and out, and backwards, and not pushing forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the kneecap, and if it does not bend at the kneecap, you know that he is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all things is that you make the patient sit right, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and place your feet on his knees.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	Then take his hips with your palms and stretch between your legs; then bend the two angles of the hip joints formed there, and other attendants extend their piece, so that the hips return to its place, and you see that he breathes well when moving his leg lightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And apply the bandage above, and draw up the leg to the kneecap, and bind them tightly for two or three years or more, then move him again; and do not make the patient work too much when walking, as long as his limbs are stable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the member is not yet, make it a strong extension as we have said in the treatment of dislocation, so long as he is healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	from the dislocation of the ankle joints
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are never completely dislocated, and not inwards or outwards.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is loose and attempt it first at the part where it has been dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The return should be light, and he must extend his limbs lightly when they are out of place only:
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when he is completely dislocated, it must be that you make the patient sit right, and give him one other minister in his leg only above the ankle:
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then take your piece to your right hand, and then twice with the left hand, extend it upward, and put the patient's foot firmly on his neck:
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	And do it two times as we have said, and when the piece falls back again if it is well: et de la .iij.recheve en un mesme ait nef chaccent du fain coment seure. iesnepe nece.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return to this position, let the patient with his malady sit on his back on earth, and place a stretcher firmly in the ground between his legs, and cover him with a cloth so that he does not wound himself.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then you will tingle the minister's leg, and other ministers stretch out their hands over his arms or where they lay on the neck of him.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each minister stretches equally, and the stretcher is then placed between the legs of the malady to hold the malady when they hold it.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then put the doctor at equal distance in his hands, and other ministers tingle the healthy leg above ground, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the point, if you put the ointment and tighten above, and form the strain, and place the pillow on the leg, and order the nerves that are above the ankle not to be too tight.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for two or three years if the strain, and loosen the ligaments if the strain occurs; then dislocate him by one year or a quarter, and defend going out with the malady in four years.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if it goes before that end, it is not secured so as he does not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess appears in the foot, it must be pacified as we have said elsewhere, so long as he is sound.
des dois	In both cases, this instruction does not require a translation. It appears to be an affirmative acknowledgment or agreement with preceding statements from the Old French text.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the joints are dislocated, they must be extended carefully over work, and it is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocations occur in no other part of the body but at the back or side of the thigh, it must be that you have him sit on one leg plainly or on two legs straight, and place your pillow over these joints. Then press upon his pillow firmly until he returns;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when he is straightened out, and it does not open the pillow placed on two tables, then form the strain, and let him lie for three years, and he is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound accompanies the dislocation and it is sought to be restored, many times occur that the patient suffers great death.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not too presumptuous in the treatment, if you do not pretend to have knowledge of it and you have not used it for a long time, and if you are merciful and humble and not hasty.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And at the beginning of things soothing you should press upon him (the patient), and let the sick person remain with God if there is no hope for health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And if you see hope, now mend the limb at its place so that it moves again in the application.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is at its place, if you soften things with soothing applications and treat the wound as it requires, by dry ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are displaced, move the bones carefully and do what we have said about simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And you must not enter the path of fear, as I have said, for this will lead you according to your Creator's plan and by His wisdom in equipping you with armor and strength. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	The laws of physics
