O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, dear children, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science, its fulfillment, and have ended it through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this for you with this treatise, which is the beginning of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And since the work of hands is closely guarded in our region and is unfamiliar to all, the knowledge has decayed and become sparse, with only small descriptions in ancient books remaining about what the hands have accomplished.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this, error and vanity have arisen, and intentions are closed, and knowledge is separated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I want to revive this treatise by ordering it according to the method of exposition and explanation, and also by providing an overview; and I will bring together the forms of cauterization tools, and other instruments used in the work, with the adjustments needed for their declaration and preparation, as required.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are to be found in our time, the art of medicine has decayed.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who wishes to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, must know the judgment of the members, their shapes and connections and separations, have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins, and the number of them, and how they move and rest, and from where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And Hippocrates says that words without deeds are empty, and actions without knowledge are harmful, especially in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	In the introduction to this book, we tell you that he who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, risks falling into error and misleading others; as I have often seen happen with many of those who engage in this science without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a most wondrous sight, which infected the abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and affected the arteries of her neck; so much blood issued forth that the woman died in the woman's hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another wonder: a stone was extracted from an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; it took away with it a piece of his bladder, and he bled internally for three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to extract it, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; if it were not cut out, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another marvel that took in hand the treatment of a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the break came an injury; and the ignorant healers bound the break over the wound as if by strong ties, leaving no space for the wound to heal, and left it thus until the end; and he commanded that he should not loosen it; and so he waited until the leg was completely swollen and the pain increased and led to his loss.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	They called me to come to him, and I hastened to come and loosen the leg; and when I heard it dislocate, it was as if it had been released and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way of corruption was already confirmed in that member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until all the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another wonder: the abscess became worse, and then it was inflamed due to the evil nature of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For the ulcer, when it is free from melancholic humor, it does not suit to be touched with iron unless it is in a place where everything corrupt can be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear child, it is necessary for you to know that the art of healing is divided into two parts: that is to say, the work which has danger in many dispositions; and I will show you in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this in mind, so that the foolish gaze cannot speak ill of you. If you take up your weapons courageously and begin to confront your illnesses gently but firmly, using the best method so that by the grace of God you may attain salvation and be happy; abandon diseases that cause despair, seeking health instead; cast aside doubts about your abilities, and have faith in yourself so that you can transition from this world to the next with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in none of his warnings: "Do not take any sick condition too seriously, unless you are called a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterization and ague medicine cauterization, and it is ordered from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the tools for cauterization, and everything necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it is ordered and the forms of instruments are described.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar conditions; and it orders the use of specific tools from the neck down to the feet, and the shapes of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So, remembering the work, it is appropriate that I describe the qualities of each aid and its potential harm or benefit to each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aids and their potential harms, are the longest-winded speech and subtlest science, answering to which are the most wise, and they agreed on this; and for me, a few words suffice, as I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally for all complexes where it has matter, whether hot or dry complexes; that is to say, the hot complex with matter, and the dry complex without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In both hot and dry complexes, matter is present, some argue that cautery is great help, while others say the opposite, claiming cautery is ineffective against ailments arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with heat for a hot illness, nor through dryness; and he who says the contrary claims cautery offers great help against hot and dry ailments that come upon humans.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of a man and its moisture to the appearance from fire, you perceive the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any case, no one should attempt it except he who has tested it and knows by long practice the chapter of cautery, the variety of human complexes, the dispositions and causes of their ailments, and the outcomes and the season of time; for other complexes we have only fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all agreed and consented to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, child, that cautery brings together fire, being a secret of healing, and moreover, it is much gentler than hot medical cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not come from outside the body except to the part that is hot, and it does not harm any other member.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Hot medicines travel from one part to another by removing, and they bring diseases of great distress to the member; and perhaps the fire does not harm the patient because of its greatness and the goodness of its substance, unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And because I have found this by experience and through the long service and study that I have put into the art, and it is about the truth of things, and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of my words, since I do not wish to reveal the secret hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it heals diseases of the body, as the philosopher demonstrates; consider it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know this, my son, that there is agreement among them as to the time when cauterization should be performed and the appropriate prayers recited.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the pain-causing injury is removed by the help of cauterization; and especially cauterization is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait until a greater evil comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear child, as they do with foolish people; for the disease that is healed by cautery has no relapse; and it should be so. But they are not like those who take care, because cautery is only a medicine that alters the complexion and dries up the humors that cause pain, and acts more quickly than any other medicine, both for its own virtue and for the authority of its work.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And another powerful thing is that the disease comes back according to the complexion and place of the illness and its virtue; and excesses accumulate within it through the acquisition of foods and similar things, except when cautery is applied in places where there are few excesses and moistures, as with cautery for pain and similar conditions, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last of medicine, and that is evident; but they do not believe that cautery is useful after medicine, for when we administer remedies in any disease and they are ineffective, then we use cautery, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it becomes clear that cautery is indeed the last of medicine, not according to the opinion of wise men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that gold cautery tools are more effective than iron ones, and they only spoke of fire for the quality of gold and for its high substance; and they said that the heat of cautery does not cause corruption, but it is not true, as I have tested it, and I have found that it is useless in any case; and gold cautery tools are more effective than iron ones, as they claim.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat the gold instrument, you are not sure if it is hot enough by the color of the gold, and as soon as it cools down; and if you heat it too much, it will burn; thus there is sufficient hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use fire cautery because we have equipped ourselves with the necessary tools for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	We have organized this chapter from the beginning to the end so that the path is easier to follow.
dou cautere olivaire	olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Cyst cautery involves applying heat and cold to the brain, and it is used for various conditions caused by disease ("soda") or many humors that descend from the head to the ears, and for numerous dreams, toothache, throat pain, especially in all diseases arising from cold, such as paralysis, "soda," apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient is purged with a solvent medicine, cleansing the head III or IV, according to the strength and age and custom of the patient; and then the head is made red again by the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him lie crossed in your hands, and place his hands on some weight; after, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two fingers; and hold where your two middle fingers meet, if it bleeds, then heat the cautery called 'olive' which has this shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And mark him with the sign of ink, and make descending and pulling your hand in turns, dislocating it; then gently lower your hand alone, and re-align the bone if you see it has shifted; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I told you. After that, take a little silk, put damp and soft cotton inside, place it on the joint, and leave it for three days. Then apply moistened butter cloth, and keep it until the heat has subsided; after, dress the wound with 'tetrafarmacon' ointment while it is clean.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the elders say that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purifies itself; for this reason, it needs help to heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one should not allow the cautery to burn off any part of the bone, and then remove the burnt part from the bone, and it will heal.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another one says that one should not allow the cautery to burn for too long, and apply it so strongly that part of the bone is also burned, just as women open their wombs to let the humors flow out; and one should keep the wound open for a long time; afterwards, one should clean and dress it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me in every way, except for those who have no choice but to endure; and I think I should leave them, because the joint is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and also when the patient's joint is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery seems safer and more flexible to me, from which I derive my method accordingly.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	from the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain in the head comes on and lasts for a long time, patients should use herbs and pills known as "cough drops," and purgatives for the head and eyes, and applications; and if they try the cautery we have mentioned above, it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient's limb is of strong nature and not too frozen; then cauterize it from below, using a cautery as we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterizing each corner of the head just below the bone, as we mentioned before, and cauterizing the one called "vessel," which is where suction cups are placed, hold your hand lightly so that you do not see the bone. The patient feels much greater pain from this cautery than from others, and I will speak about it later; it is necessary that the cautery on the horns be more subtle than that of the middle part of the head, and this is its form:
dou cautere dou chief	For fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in a part of the head there is a sudden pain, and the disease extends to the oil (or possibly referring to an abscess), and the condition is purged with medicated remedies, and all other cures as mentioned in the classification of illnesses have been tried without success, then one should perform cauterization according to two methods: that is, with ague medicine and by fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with ague medicine involves pricking a dose of alder, removing the bark and applying it to the affected area, holding it in place in such a way that you can push back the pain from the alder into the flesh; then tightly bind it and leave it for 12 hours. Afterwards, unbind it and treat the wound vigorously with garlic, leaving it for 2-3 days, then apply cotton soaked in butter until the purulent discharge stops.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the cure of dressing as long as it is healed; and if you see fit to make any burning medicine as I have written in my book on the dosage treatment of burning medicines, do so.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery according to this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head has the shape of a circle with a small amount of curvature in the middle; and place it on the painful joint, hold your hand, and gently turn the hot instrument slightly, until half of the depth of the heart is burned; and then remove your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is dangerous, and let the blood flow abundantly.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton in the wound and leaving it for three days; then he moistens it with butter and tends to the wound until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with a cautery called "cultellare" (scalpel), be careful not to cut the artery in this new migraine.
de emigraine	de emigraine" translates to "of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have previously discussed in the sections on diseases, and it does not benefit from the cauterization that was mentioned as medicine, then you must heat up the scalpel (cautery) called "cultellare" until it is white; and apply it to the suffering limb, drawing a line half an inch long, and lift your hand once so as not to cut the artery and let blood flow up to the bone; and be careful to protect the jaw that moves when chewing, so that it does not become mute or cause spasms for the patient, and beware of the blood clot forming in the artery after it is cut, which can cause great fear especially for those who are ignorant and inexperienced; leave the work unfinished. But I will tell you how to retain blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is mentioned in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery is not enough to heal the illness and the patient suffers, cauterize the wound again as we have said, and treat the wound until it is clean; and if you notice, apply the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter about extracting an artery, along with a cautery having two blades; and this cautery is better and more helpful than the others.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	about the pain in the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear due to coldness, and various solutive medicines and other treatments as mentioned in the previous divisions have been applied, but the pain persists, use this cautery called "point," which has the following form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncturing the entire painful ear, or both ears if they are troubled with pain, move them slightly away from the root of the ear, once you have marked the place of the joint; and put ten points around each ear; then treat the joint until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	regarding the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture that requires cautery is limited to those that involve fluid movement, as we have mentioned in the divisions of disease; and do not perform cautery on similarities that arise from dryness and nerve pain.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this kind of pain that mutates from flux of water and purging from the head and gargarism, and it does not work, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little below the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips; and place the cautery on the part that opens to healthy tissue, burning half the heart's center, and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it resembles the cutting tool we have described above, but this one is a little more subtle, and the knife should be slightly thicker; after treating it as I have said before, make sure it remains healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When the apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauterizations: two on the temples at the back of the head, and one on the forehead, and one on the limb called 'vassel' as we have previously mentioned, and no cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	The word "de litargie" appears to be related
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large amounts of herbal medicine to clear his mind; then, after resting the head of the afflicted person, place on the back of the head the plaster made from rye, as described in the preparation of plasters, and this is the method of cauterization: if he does it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy thus, good; and if it is not, make three cauterizations from the middle of the thigh down to the colon, with a space of two fingers between each cauterization; treat it as the others, and if you see it closing up, and the patient suffering, make one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and treat until it is healthy; this cauterization is called 'olivare', as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from cold at the top
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed with earth and water as we have said before; then wash the patient's head, make a cauterization between the head and each horn, and three cauterizations on the spine of the collarbone; and if you need it, and the flesh is moist, and the patient suffers, and the illness is severe, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; leave it until the most delicate heart is burned, and be gentle with your hand; then treat it until it is healthy, and this cauterization called 'olivare' as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	From epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery unless they are fleumatic, and it is first necessary to purify the brain with years and other remedies that we have discussed in the section regarding great pain and suffering from medical treatments.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot bear the pain, make them gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meats; then place the head in a middle position, and apply cautery as we have said before, and cauterize on the veins and each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffering, apply cautery as I have said to those with paralysis and softening of the limbs, on the spine at the back and neck, and cauterize with olive oil in the manner I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is sick, make them undergo cautery gently according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When, due to melancholy, there are excessive or corrupt moisture and thick flux, then use cautery on specific parts as we have said for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if, due to melancholy, the excess moisture turns into melancholy itself and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies the mind, as it is described in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After resting the patient's head, make a small cut around it well-formed and circular, placing it back on the head; let the patient lie with their eyes crossed and firmly held from all sides; then apply the liniment, mixing in some old beard butter; warm the compress gently so that it can be endured; after emptying the circle inside the head, leave it to cool down; and repeat this procedure for the patient each week, using a different good treatment until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you need to cauterize it with more than one point at the cautery site.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization moistens the flesh increasingly; then, apply cotton soaked in butter and jelly fat upon it.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the signs of trouble in the eyes appear first, as I mentioned in the previous division, then begin and give to the patient something to drink, purifying the head, and protecting from all moisture, and encourage sweating or taking baths while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After instructing him to raise his head, he should perform cauterization across the forehead, and also cauterize both temples if the eye problem is in both together, or just one if it's in one; he should carefully avoid all veins and arteries beneath the heart, making the cauterization long according to the width of the temple; and be cautious about bloodletting, and if you see too much blood emerging, stop immediately.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and the careful incision how to prevent it; and never should one cauterize or burn the bones from behind.
dou cors des larmes	two parts of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes have been old and habitual and are in the veins, one should remove the arteries that appear from the upper part of the eye; and it is seen to be cold, phlegmatic superfluities. Then he performs the cauterization I mentioned at the beginning of this treatment, starting from below the eye, and he cauterizes twice on each temple, and twice underneath the bones from behind; and if more is needed, he cauterizes gently over the eyebrow with all small cauterizations.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Let the body shed tears through the eyes.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate it according to what we have said in the previous section, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three doses of warm olive oil cautery; after that, make two cauterizations with the cautery called "clavis" on both shoulders, a little below the hair; and be careful not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the skin is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	due to which the shape is:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that the cautery on both sides of the sore is as long as the wound is, do not remove your hand until the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that does not let the oil pass through
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time does it happen that the hair of the skin is turned to a different color, and pricks the skin, and one performs cauterization in two ways: namely, with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a healthy position; afterward, mark on the skin with a sign that is as large as a full moon, and be it the beginnings of the hair sign; then put moist cotton in egg glue and musk from a persil plant on the skin, and then heat the cauterizing iron to this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the affected area little by little, burn the surrounding skin until it is red; and the signs of the work's success are that you see the skin retreating, and the hairs standing up at the tip of the oil; then remove your hand and leave it for three days, then apply moist cotton in butter until the burning sensation is gone; after that, treat with ointment as long as it remains clean.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And after the hairs grow back, and the skin becomes softer, then repeat the cauterization on that same area as you did before; and if the hairs have turned white, cauterize it again while the skin is raised to its natural state, and they are even, and the hairs do not point towards the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medicinal fire cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment shape of the myrtle leaf; take French soap and living charcoal, each in equal parts, and grind together well; apply it gently so as not to chill, then lay it over the form made from the myrtle leaf, and place paper on top. If the illness persists for only one day, then you should operate once, and if both sides are affected, do this twice. Put cotton oil moistened with egg into the wound, and let the patient's part be in your healthy hand, showing the medicine, pressing it gently and loose every time the patient feels stinging from the medicine, for he will also feel stinging as if from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your body.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the inflammation has passed, then raise the limb from below, and watch if you see the skin lifted as it would be lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply more medicine to the limb, or the medicine will not have taken effect, as long as your work is even and your joints are aligned; then apply a moist cloth soaked in butter until the colors subside, after which treat the limb with the dressing known as 'dyafenis' and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you, guard yourself well with your work with great care so that it does not wish for the medicines on its own.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs prick in the oil, repeat the treatment on that place which has been softened by the paper, just as you have done before; then cure it until it is healed; and this is the form of the poultice with mild mirth.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the needs of men vary in size and quality, and according to your constraints; do not be misled by the right way to those who have the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have discussed regarding diseases, and your treatments do not benefit the patient, then it is necessary that you perform cautery on it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head on a healthy surface; then position his neck between your hands in such a way that it does not move and its head remains still. Afterwards, apply moist cotton or pear juice to the area. Then heat the cautery tool which is shaped like a bow: align the tip of the cautery so that it touches the neck, either from above or below, and shape it similarly to a tent; but nonetheless, whatever the position, this bending is necessary for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, open it, and drain the pus and dry it; if it closes again, repeat the process, and apply hot cautery; hold your hand over the cauterized area to prevent any damage, and place the cautery on the fatty part of the oil, and burn.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you start the cautery close to the bone, that would be better.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If no, restart the cautery again, and do so as many times as necessary, leaving it for three days; then apply moistened butter cotton, and cure the desiccated wound until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, apply a corrosive medicine while the bone remains exposed; and the remedy will depend on what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cauterizing a fistula, of which no one among the ancients spoke.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand the fistula, and locate its source; then place a thin, sharp instrument into the gap, thus taking on this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and it makes the quantity of a drop of blood; and hold your hand firmly with the instrument, so that the patient does not move at all, until the blood has finished flowing; and it is necessary to put cotton soaked in oil on the wound for its healing or otherwise: the blood drops into the fistula and heal the healthy tissue miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed through the cautery we have mentioned, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If this is not the case, it is necessary to administer cold or heat, and bring the fistula back to the body according to what is appropriate for its own place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks appear in the lips, which are called 'poil', especially on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds as we have discussed in detail, and the cure is not beneficial, then apply a small cauterizing instrument according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the hospital in these wounds until it comes to a stop; after that, treat the area with clean dressing until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms in the throat's root, or in the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it causes putrefaction and swelling and becomes a fistula; then you must treat it as we have discussed in detail, but it does not benefit. In this case, you should apply cauterization according to the size of the fistula; after that, remove the fistula's hole or opening, and hold your hand until the heat from the fire goes to the bottom of it, without touching anything else. And do this once or twice, following the cure as we have said in detail, until it is healed; and if it heals in this way, it is good. But if not, you should expose the area and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	no movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and this treatment with medicines is ineffective, then place the patient's aching jaw in your hand; afterwards, apply the hot cautery where the pain originates, in this way, placing a candle on the tooth; and hold the hot cautery firmly until the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; then release your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; afterward, have the patient fill his mouth with salt water, and keep it for an hour and let it flow out strongly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner, the tooth which was moving becomes firmly set, and the gums are softened and restrained, and the moisture is corrupt and dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of teeth comes from cold, or there is frost or chill, and the remedies of medicine are not effective, then it is necessary to use cautery according to two methods: butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery is done by soaking butter in a cold substance, wrapping it around the tip of a rod made of iron or steel, and applying it to the aching tooth with great care until it becomes cooled. Then, you repeat this process frequently until the pain subsides at the root of the tooth; if the butter becomes too moistened with the cloth and cotton wrapped around it, apply it again to the aching tooth, but place a hot iron on top as soon as the heat reaches the surface of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	He uses fire cautery if it is such that you can insert a piece of iron or steel, making it large enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth; then, after heating the cautery, its form will appear, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be gone by the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in anticipation of that cautery, and then applies the heat; this is the form of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And perform the cautery on the upper lip where you wish, according to your ability; this is the form of the instrument.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is of cold moisture, and does not obey digestion with medicines, then heat the cautery fire from this, so that it opens up to let out smoke through the cautery in another part; and place hot cautery on the abscess once, if it is necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply cautery according to its size, leaving it for three days; and then cover with moist cotton or butter until the burning is healed; afterwards treat the wound and bandage until it is clean.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture conquers the channels of the pores, especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated first with solvent medicines; afterwards, he should be cauterized at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go up to the throat, and only slightly heat with heart.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, he performs another cauterization at the joint of the collarbone with the tip of the spine, and these cauterizations that are called "clavicle" as we have shown before; and treat the limb as we have said above until it is healed.
de la toust	from the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and any illness of the lungs is due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, and if it is an old illness, make two cauterizations on strong parts of his body; and another cauterization between the two breasts; and this cauterization which is called "clavile" should be according to the shape as mentioned above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make a cauterization by pricking all the cauterization called "point" from which the shape of the illness of the ears is as mentioned above; and the points should be up to 30, or even more inside.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment, reset the limb according to what is mentioned above, and make the cauterization in three stages according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the cautery is easier, because you do it three times in turn.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	On the dislocation of the shoulder.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, remember to support the patient on their back and side; afterwards, gently press the kernel inside the swelling with your left hand; if the joint is dislocated within, apply heat to the cautery with two gentle strokes as follows:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and burn the heart as long as it feels hot, and repeat this process with four burns; for this reason, the burn is made with a three-pronged instrument, so that the six burns form a figure; and the nerve corresponds to the subtlety of a thread, and this is the shape of the burn with three prongs.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never adjust it on this nerve, for there are eight burns.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the burn, wrap with a cloth; then rest the patient, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated from above, this happens poorly, then apply cautery over the thick part of the cautery with a claw or many cauteries pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	Because the joint is closed, the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach while it is being extracted from its natural state, many catarrhs are multiplied within it, and the usual remedies do not help, then the patient should be made to lie on his back, extending his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this and afterward, make three cauterizations and remove the knife from the deepest part, in quantity as thick as a finger, cauterizing the entire wound, and two cauterizations on both sides, so that the shape of the cauterization be at three angles, and there be such space between one and another that they do not stick together while they rot; and make the cauterization so perfect that it touches both parts of the heart, and the shape of the cauterization be according to this form without adjustment.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you are to be cauterized with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form, and he who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach at one point according to the quantity that you see fit; then cauterize the entire cautery called "point.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment we have previously discussed, as long as he is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver suffers from pain due to freshness and moisture and excessive flatulence, as long as it is removed from its natural state by excesses; and the patient is treated as we have said in sections, but it does not benefit them, then it is necessary that the patient be cautious on their head. And a sign of this is to perform three cauterizations according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, expelling the humors from the liver or the gallbladder; and there should be enough space between each cauterization, the thickness of two fingers; and the cautery should be long across the body, and do not press too hard with your hand over the entire cautery; and burn only moderately half of the heart, and let the patient keep their legs straight; and if they cannot, then they should lie down, stretch out their legs, and ease their breath. And this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish, cauterize these wounds with a knife, if you are skilled and sharp in the art, but be careful not to burn the entire heart, for it would harm the whole body; and do not let them come to a boil, because the hearts are very delicate there, and only the wise can see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you need to know if it is within the liver tissue or in the peritoneum: if it is within the tissue, the patient feels moderate pain; but if it is in the peritoneum, they feel excruciating pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure involves mirrors, it is necessary that the patient be calm on his head; then he should tie the bandage across the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a needle, from which comes this form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery until the veins are burned, and the pus comes out completely; after the cure, according to the treatment of the wounds, as long as he is healthy; and it is not appropriate for this cautery to be used by anyone other than someone who has studied medicine extensively and whose hands have never failed in treating these illnesses.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can move it bravely, but I still think it is better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	The "dou cautere de pleuresin" phrase translates to "the fire cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient ones said that one should perform the pleuresin cautery with roots of the aristologe, in this way: take a long root of aristologe, the largest you can find, and dry it, making it as thick and as long as your arm; moisten it in oil, hold it over the fire, and cauterize between the ribs and the collarbone, and make small cauterizations slightly downward in the part below the beard; and cauterize between the fifth rib and the sixth, leaning slightly behind; and cauterize across the anus, and another one on the stomach, and between the shoulders, and along both sides of the lower ribs, defusing the cautery between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but hold it open as if smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they say that no old man should use fire cautery resembling a razor, and burn it and place it between the ribs, until it reaches this abscess; and there is great pain, as we have said in the case of the painful liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is great fear or the patients die now, or a fistula forms which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not benefit, then they (doctors) apply three methods of cautery, all of which are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Break the joint in such a way that you make three cauterizations, or four, according to the length of the bone, according to the figure of the cautery of the fire that we have mentioned above; and do not rush your hand over the entire cautery, let the patient be cautious on his back; another method of cauterization is to heat the cautery with two nails, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and ease the pressure where the bone is located, where the patient's pain comes from the left, and raise the elevation according to the bone, according to the length of the body, and let the cauterization be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After you have heated the two nails until the bone is pierced on the other side, then quickly apply the cautery, and thus you will have four. And if you see that the cauterization is not complete at three nails, cauterize the entire cautery with three nails.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After treatment when he has suffered for a long time, this is more effective than any of the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	It appears that the term "dystropie" is
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not effective for dystropia, except in the manner called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	If your treatment according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions is not effective, then you should perform four cauterizations around the mouth, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the anus; and the cauterizations should be close to the affected areas.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery open for a long time to allow pus to drain, do not leave the patient's care to the cautery; healing would be hastened, and the two wounds would heal together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the abdomen should be a knife as we have shown before; and for the back, olive-shaped, according to what is placed before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of stones
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When stones are swollen in someone who is uric, and they are filled with clear urine, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and gently hold your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not pierce too deeply, so as to keep the citron-colored awl outside, and perform the cauterization according to this form.
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make two cauterizations on each leg, at the tip of the cutting knife; and perform the cauterization longwise, one on the inside of the knee joint and the other outside, along the leg; leave the cauterizations to heal for a long time without cleaning, until the wound has healed; then attend to the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the fracture
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, weakening the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines, it cannot be cured by any treatment; and you see the patient enduring great suffering with powerful virtue, so apply a strong cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the stomach cautery, using careful and subtle cauteries around the anus, and two cauteries on the haunches.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see an abundance of moisture and the patient suffering greatly, apply a cautery to the wrist, and one cautery on each side, and several small cauteries on the stomach to remove the great pain, for the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	On the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are of long standing and consist of corrupt, cold, and moist humors, they are treated as we have said in the previous sections, but the treatment is not effective if cautery is performed: Make three incisions along the spine of the back, starting from below the shoulder blade, making them slightly triangular, and one incision at the base of the anus (two incisions total); If you think that the patient's stomach is cold, the meat is not cooked, and swelling is visible on the face, then make a large cautery on the stomach as mentioned above, and another on the liver, and yet another across the entire area with cautery pins; Leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, reset the joint as long as it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you deal with the fleshiness (thelul), if you feel the cautery seems too severe, then take a hot tool and apply it thoroughly to that flesh; leave it in place until the cautery is complete, from which the skin will heal; do this once or twice, and if there is much flesh, cauterize each part as we have said; afterward, treat the wounds profitably as long as they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on raw flesh, it will bring greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	from the poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we shall relate in its place, a certain illness comes about that can only be healed by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a vein becomes fistulated, inflamed, filled with pus and corrupted moisture, you must try every subtle treatment, and be sure to understand the entire effect of each one as it unfolds.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After the cautery appears to be sharp enough, insert it into the fistula according to the amount of the attempt that entered, and repeat the cautery once or twice or three times, depending on the quantity required; and be careful not to burn the nerves and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	He should probe with the fistula through the bladder and intestines, taking care of these openings, and only make fires over the fleshy parts, and think that it is not harmful; afterward, cure the opening as long as it remains healthy, and if the openings are closed and the matter has been drawn out for a long time, then know that the opening is entirely healed; and if the matter has not been drawn out, know that the opening is weak, and the bone is corrupted to the bottom; and thus, as we shall say of this in its place.
de la maladie des reins	On the disease of the kidneys.
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of a wound comes with heavy bleeding and great flatulence, and cannot be treated by women, then you must cauterize it on both sides with a hot clavicle, as we have previously mentioned; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in line, and it will bring greater help.
de la vessie	Of the bladder" in Old French translates to "de
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from pain and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you should cauterize it on the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow, both on the right and left side, making each cautery as long as a thumb; and also cauterize behind the back if necessary; and make the clavicle cauteries according to the shape previously mentioned.
de la marris	Of the joint
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the wound is cold and moist, it does not allow healing, and the flowers (scabs) are corrupted and their healing is slow; when they do heal, great pain is felt. Then it is necessary to perform three cauterizations around the wound, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back; and the cauterization should be done with a clavicle, as we have said.
de la hainche	de la hainche" translates directly to "of the spine
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends into the channel of the spine, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that one leg is longer than the other when measured together; then it is necessary to cauterize the patient above the channel of the spine with a cauterization resembling a circle, and mark in front of the joint around the channel as it rotates, so that the channel remains within the circle; and the cauterization should be like that which was done on the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present for you, perform three cauterizations with hot oil, and let the cauterization be just as effective as all the others; and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When the pain comes in the back, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured as we have said in the previous section, but the treatment is ineffective, and the illness is chronic: then you must purge the patient of the bad humors through foul pills, or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	Afterward, he applies cautery; and the manner of cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, collectively burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is performed according to many methods, of which some are: You cauterize along the ribcage in three places, making deep and broad incisions, with a space the thickness of two fingers between each cautery, and they are olive-shaped. One should never perform cautery in the middle of the chest, for there are three according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that cautery should be performed in a circular shape as we have previously mentioned regarding the dislocation of the ribcage; but do it in such a way that the circles encompasses the entire ribcage, and all the spaces around the heart are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the method used for sciatica, when pain persists in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the pain reaches the thigh and leg, apply a cautery to the affected area where the patient feels the most pain, either with a cut or by burning the thickest part of the tissue; and if the patient feels that the pain radiates up to two fingers' length from the sole of the foot or near it, cauterize there, three or four points, depending on the severity of the pain, and this cautery is called 'point'.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it happens that the pain is so severe in the knee towards the thigh, then he should do cautery with a sharp or circular instrument, and be very careful in all his cauterizations that he does not leave them until he burns the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have done cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left them until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it became pierced and corrupted all over the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal solution, he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, perform cautery on one and the other according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise say about cautery for the hinch, which is how it should be done: take a piece of iron as thick as a new coin or slightly thinner, and make it twisted and interwoven from one side to the other with a space between them equal to the size of a thumb; intertwine them across each other, and they should be as strong, and have a well-made iron point; this is its shape.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it is completely red and smells foul, then place it on the wound of the sick hinch, and turn to the healthy side; cauterize once again after the first cauterization and leave for three days; then apply a poultice of butter, and keep the wound open for a long time; treat with care until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use this cautery little due to the danger of its regard, and we see few who use it; nevertheless, these are good cauteries that the patient can endure, and where it is most suitable.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The burning cautery tools are such that you make an instrument with a descending edge along the margin of the door, either of iron or steel on a long pole. At the top, it should have a handle, and between each other, the thickness of two fingers; they should be open at both ends and joined together in this manner.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the board of the couch over the patient lying on their side, and quickly covering your hand with the board, pour between the two circles of hot ash that has been heated over fire for a little while, and leave it for an hour, allowing the patient to endure the heat and burns.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it has a true burning sensation like fire; and when the burns have subsided, gently lift your hand with the instrument and raise the affected limb with soft pressure, leaving it for three days, then apply butter until the blackening from the burn disappears; this would be the final aid after treating the wounds as long as they are healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, apply the instrument with pressure according to what you did with the limb, increasing it as needed; this is the method of hot compression, which I have written about in the treatment of fractures.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as the other, grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	If there is a small opening not blocked, let the tip of a razor enter; then place this pot into another well-sealed pot, and add alkali and lime, stirring gently until there are two layers of powder at the top, as you hold it firmly in your hand; leave it thus until all the water and impurities have settled to the bottom. Then take all that water, pour it over the lime and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And thus it is very beneficial and proven in many medical works and cautery treatments for other parts of the body, as it acts like fire, and with other medicines such as foments, honey, anacardium, and lime with soap, all these mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment that healed a noble of the pain in his back and sciatic nerve, and he says that no other cure was done, and it healed completely once this treatment was applied, and he bathed as he teaches below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says to prepare a mixture of fresh and dry verdigris, grind it finely with some fat, apply it to the back and thigh and leg where the pain is, and wrap it; leave it for three hours or according to the amount so that the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter or take a bath as long as the body is slightly heated, and make him lie down, and the pain will leave entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery with such medications unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dyascorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's milk, it provides great aid; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and grease it with old oil, and apply to the pit that is between the thumb and the toe of the foot, and also to the one called the fascicle.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking a piece of dry sheepgut, ignite it in fire until it becomes ashes, and place it on the wound, leaving it until the wound is healed; and repeat this process, ceasing only when you think by sense that the pain has ceased; and this method of cauterization is called "sheepgut cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	of the intense pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from strain or impact, or excessive evacuation, or from a similar feeling of cold, expanded matter, none of these signs warrant cauterization, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after that the patient be cleared of foul pills or other similar things, and that one make them on the back, where the pain resides, three lines marked with a signet, and in each line V cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cauterizations are made according to the cautery called "point"; and if you see fit, do III cauterizations or IV at the middle cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness often strikes small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight airway when breathing, and weakness; and you will find in the lower back a sharp pain that extends to the other parts of the back.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this, and you observe it being cured, cauterize it with the cautery iron according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	The cautery should penetrate each part of the wound equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see that the cautery penetrates around the wound with the iron, either two lines or three, and the points are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treatment, reset the limb as healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery to any numb areas that are affected by nerve damage.
de la dolor des jointes	Of the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is caused by moisture that spreads throughout each member with great intensity, and when the pain comes on suddenly, they rightly call it "podagra", and when it is due to a cold cause and medicinal cures cannot heal it, then cautery is the cure in this manner: make several cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterization be olive-colored according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary to prick on the sole of the foot, let the cauterization be made with a point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, this often occurs, so he should cauterize each knee with three or four cauterizations from each part, using olive oil cautery; and if you need more, you can do it, but don't hold your hand too tightly until the expected heat is achieved.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, apply the cauterization that we have mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make two incisions around the fingers; and if no pain remains in the thumb, make incisions on each joint and even on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the wrists or shoulders, cauterize each part, and apply proper care to the patient and take medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	Because if you provide proper care and drain the excess fluid, it will be healed by God's grace.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the dislocation occurs suddenly and the joints descend to their proper place, it is important that when you attempt to cure it, you do not manipulate it immediately; instead, use things that aid digestion so that the bowel movements descend. After that, have him lie on his back in your hands, and instruct him to hold his breath while you reset the joint, aligning them correctly and gently, and then re-locating the dislocated bone into its original position. Make a sign by drawing an image resembling half of a circle above the broken bone; then apply the hot cautery as described earlier.
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and it sheds scales.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their proper places; and have the attendants place their hands on him so that he does not move back; and open the thighs well for the patient, and place a cushion and a bolster under his thighs, and another one on his penis which holds his hands; then apply the cautery to the sign over your entire hand, and hold it straight and tight until you reach the bone, and if you do not touch the bone the first time, repeat it again until you do; and be careful that the bone does not move when you perform the cautery; do not burn him; and ensure that the patient does not die, or suffer any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know this: if you do not go close to the bone with cautery, your work is useless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to their size, and of adults as large as them; after three days, treat the wound with butter until the scorch is healed; after that, cure other wounds until they are clean, and lay the patient on his back for forty days until the wound is well sealed; and it is necessary that his movements be limited for a long time, so that the boils do not appear when he gets up to go to his room.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, a well-made bandage is applied to him and left for another forty days; and he should have good rest, working little and guarding against excessive drinking and eating, and from too much noise; and with this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will now describe the treatment for cutting in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other abdomen regions and are recognized, and you see that they do not continue to grow, hold the cautery near the affected area according to its quantity, burning it with a third of the heart's beat; after the treatment, as we have said; and no among the ancients have stated that one should cauterize at three angles in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first sign the skin with a needle and make a line across its width above the dislocation, and another one further away, and hold your hand firmly over all the cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterization is lighter and more gentle.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of great pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain arises in any limb, whether from a fall or an injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the medicinal cure is ineffective, then it should be cauterized with the cautery known as 'point', and the cauterization should be done according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness, and its tendency to twist, and considering its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healthy after the first cautery, that is well; if not, begin another cautery on that part, for often it is the adjacent limb that needs to move, so you must perform cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	It seems like there might have been a slight error in your
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	These cases are never helped by a single cautery, especially the illness that arises from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	You can treat it by cauterizing, taking care if the illness is in its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the previous division, without delay or hesitation, and you doubt that the corruption has spread throughout the patient, then make V cauterizations on the head: I on the top of the head, and the second at the end of the hair; and two on each horn, and one behind on the nape; and leave your hand so that the cauterization goes down to the bone, and as far as the skin comes out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape; and cauterize it on the tongue according to what is necessary.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the illness is widespread and manifestly severe, then it is necessary to apply these cauteries that we have mentioned above: first cauterize in the armpits, second on the spine of the neck, third on the spine of the back, fourth over the thigh and another gentle one on the shoulder blades; also two on the ribs, two on the tendons of the pisiform bone, and one each on the joints of the hands and feet, and in the fossae of the hands; be wary of the nails that are on the last toe, so as not to burn them. Never make a cautery on the bones of the wrist, or on the stomach bone, or on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more cautery is done, the greater the aid and benefit it brings, and drives away the illness; and know that the patient does not feel any pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be great or small according to the member and joints, as you will find in the ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, apply a poultice of flour, honey, and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling appears in any member and is not cured by medicine, oils, poultices, or bandages, and it remains inflamed, then perform cauterization on the member according to its size and severity; and make the cautery slightly within the depth of the flesh; then apply treatments with oil until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never should cautery be performed with the hand, foot, or back, at the point where a nerve affects the limb, and thus is cut off the swelling; nevertheless, no one should intervene unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the passages of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	It seems like you've provided a single word, "de
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is ignited, and the medical arts are of no avail, then cauterize with a hot iron to the degree necessary until the blanching is removed and the color changes; afterwards, apply a cure made from flour, peas, lentils, with rose oil, plantain leaves, collicon (a herb), and alder bark, each part separately; mix all together, wrap it in cloth, and keep it on the affected area until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of a ulcer by cautery.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When an ulcer appears at the beginning and you wish to stop it, cauterize it with a hot iron in a circular motion around the entire edge of the ulcer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	Yet wise people say that cauterization should also be done in the middle of the ulcer; however, I don't find this good, as I fear it might cause a new ulcer or corrosion, and I have never wanted to do this before; and a more correct practice is to cauterize around it, with a circular cautery, as we have said about many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	from the flesh that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has a disease called "adubelati" and they do not want to die, or because of the excessive discharge it produces, or because of the old age of the patient and his frail condition (that is, too much), and he has little blood, or because of the time; and you see him hastening to die: then cauterize him around with many small cauterizations by pricking; after which leave him alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced through entirely with cautery, make sure the cautery is as hot as this:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	Place your hand in the midst of this illness called 'adubelati' while the cautery pierces through the heart, and make sure the cautery is such that the patient feels freed in this way so that the flow of corruption is cleansed.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure, wait until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	Heal with fire using iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another kind of disease called "corrodens," which is nothing but a consumption of the limbs, for it wastes the members as fire does dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a limb that can be treated with fire cautery, then heat the cautery clamps both very small and very large, according to what is suitable for the limb or the illness; after cauterizing all parts until you eradicate all corruption, leave nothing of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and apply crushed herbs soaked in oil to the cauterized limb, until all traces of the burns from the fire are eradicated, along with all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of painful injuries.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days there is no healthy growth, it is good; and if not, the cautery should be repeated on the part that has remained stagnant and corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this mixture is sometimes cured with hot medicine instead of fire cautery; but nevertheless, the fire cautery provides greater aid, and I have already described the treatment with hot medicine in detail: take it as needed.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	from the liquids that come as pieces
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often it happens that pieces from a defect give rise to a disease called "close" according to our understanding, and it is a great wrong that hurts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is according to two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know, the cautery of fire, and the cautery of hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	For the fire cautery, take a heated cheveit (iron) as thin as a feather of a kite, and make it of good iron to pierce the nail from all sides, and have subtle margins; then place it hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; leave it thus for three days until it begins to rot; then make an ointment with wild malves ground with silk, and leave the ointment on all night, and the nail will split and be pulled out from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply the clean dressing, covering it with cloth, as long as it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are moved by heat, the body's strength is often broken and many times it happens in the hands and feet; so you must apply hot water cautery to them; and it is done like this: take a rod of iron or bronze, or a nail file, and attach the hot metal to a handle with cloth, that is to say, around the verrues; then place the rod on it so that it covers all around, then add a little hot water, and hold your hand tightly, pressing your hand while turning so that the edge of the rod reaches the base of the nail, and can find the hot water path deeply down to the root; and allow the patient to bear the sting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will come out at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	First, make one after another, until you have freed all those that are in the body, then treat the injuries that cause pain.
li cure dou trembler	It cures the shaking of the body.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone shivers from cold or quartan fever or any other ailment, it is necessary to perform four cauterizations or five on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and also one cauterization on the fish (a specific body part, possibly a nerve) and one on the stomach with an olive cautery. This will stop the trembling and hasten the healing from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	from pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never is it apparent through external defects or pus-filled blisters that come from deeply corrupt matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	if it is necessary to treat them at the first appearance that one makes a burn on each head of the pustule: a delicate burn with fir wood, from which the tip is seized by fire, or with long roots of herbs, or with a lenticular burn.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never should one cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow worse, but the excess from which they come is broken off, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times, great complications arise from the blood of an artery that is cut in the wound, or in the closure of an abscess, or in cauterization of the member, and similar things; this is a very sad thing to smell.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	However, if this happens to anyone, act quickly and place your finger on the wound in the vein, pulling it firmly until the pain is entirely gone and no more blood flows; then take several small and large hot olive oil cauterizing tools, making them completely red, and afterward, according to the size of the wound, and with a firm grip, place the cauterization over the vein where you are holding your finger, and keep the cautery there until the pain is thoroughly subdued.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if a sudden spark flies when you raise your hand above the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, quickly take another from those at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to perform this one after the other until the bleeding is stopped; and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and let no further harm come to the patient; and know that when blood collects from an artery, it cannot be well stopped, especially if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: either cauterization, or extraction when it has not been treated, or tightly tying it with thread, or applying medications that have the power to stop the bleeding; and do this carefully and meticulously.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever alleviates the pain by tightly binding narrow bandages or placing burning things, or similar objects, on it, will not benefit unless he does it properly.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to no one and he has no suitable medicine at hand, then he should place his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press firmly until the pain subsides both over the wound and the vein; and he must not move it, but moisten it with cold water often, as much as it is very cold, until the blood is congealed and thickened, and the pain subsides; and prepare inquiries in advance about what he needs for cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	We begin the second book of surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about every illness for which it is necessary to use fire cautery, or burning medicine, and about the herbs, causes, tools, and forms of cautery; I placed that chapter primarily before this one so that those who wish to find these things more easily can do so.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, before beginning this, it is necessary, by way of introduction, that you learn that this chapter involves more risk and danger than the first one on cautery; and for this reason, greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to attempt folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	Because many ways of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from such who have grown weary of their illness to the point that they die quickly due to the harshness they find in their treatment and the severity of their suffering; and for these one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who give you their trust, saying, "Wait, I am blind"; and the illness is pitiful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not grant your consent to those who come to you with such methods, but place more emphasis on your honor than on their profit, and act prudently rather than rashly regarding what you are certain of and what you can safely acquire; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your patients, so that health may be restored; and this will help you gain good repute, glory, and lasting fame.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Most precious thread, Our Lords grant you good understanding and rectitude, and if you desire the holy inspiration from His hand, so be it.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter for you, in considering by chapters, according to what is before or the chapter of cautery that I have devised from the head to the feet, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Dou chief plein d'aigue" translates to "a head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	You know that this illness comes very often in children at birth, and when the womb contracts too tightly around the child's head; and it never happens for a reason that one cannot explain.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness except in children, and to all those that I have seen, death comes swiftly; and for this reason, it seems to me that it is better to leave the work in part, rather than attempt complete cures.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose joints were filled with water, and the head swelled each day until it could not be supported; and because of so much moisture, it became infected, and this moisture was collected beneath the bone in the synovial cavity, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such that the moisture lies between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, so you must make a wide cut through the head where the moisture is located, as long as it runs. And here is the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the openings of the abscesses on each side of the head widely open, and there is a strong discharge when you press it with your hand from inside, and it does not heal, then you must make three cuts in the middle of the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture deeply.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After loosening the cracks of the drapes and powders, he applies wine and oil, leaving it for up to five days; then he removes it, treating the wound with bandages and poultices, while also gently pulling on the head until the joint is aligned and the patient is given dry meat from a pouch of moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you observe and determine the size of the abscess, and the alignment of the fluid; for it never presents itself in one place, nor behind, nor on the right, nor on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut open the abscess and drain the pus, and make an incision according to your ability; be careful not to harm the artery; then let the blood flow freely, so that the patient does not die from excessive bleeding or the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	De reume" translates to "of the
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When a person suffers from a disease called "catar" (possibly referring to cataracts), especially if it is an old illness and medicinal treatments are ineffective, the only remaining cure is cautery by cutting off both arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	When you see the patient's head covered, make him turn his head back; then rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries open, and carefully extract the patient's neck from the cloth; then observe where the vein is located, and note that the marks of the ears are on both sides, and they are properly aligned; then mark the joints with a sign, and cut one and the other with a sharp spatula, reaching down to the bone, and do this across the entire back.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, pull the spatula away from the artery and cut it above, cutting also as it should go through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, it bleeds constantly upward continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open when pressed, it is necessary to measure the quantity of space in three parts, then seal it with a knot and cut it until it reaches the bone; and one should put as much blood outside as is needed (approximately six parts), or perhaps a little more or less, depending on what the patient can endure and the filling of the artery. Then, examine the wound: if it remains above the bone without pus, cut and bind the wound and apply treatment until it heals.
de emigrainne	from migraine headache
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine headache comes with catarrh, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples, and other similar symptoms, it is treated with medical remedies, but often none of them help. So we should drain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method for extracting them is that the patient pulls out the hairs from his temples and reaches for the artery that opens in the temple, as it opens well with its beating, and is quickly covered by no one else. If it is covered, he gently squeezes some cloth over it, then rubs the place with a rough cloth until the artery becomes clearly visible; then take the spatula with which this form is:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then hold it with pincers and separate the threads that bind each part; and if the artery is thin, turn it to the tip of the hook, then cut off that part according to the quantity of two joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it will not heal without great pain.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat the abscess with six cuts, up to three; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it with two threads of strong silk, so that putrefaction does not come before the healing of the wound, and complications from the abscess; then cut off the excess between the two threads at that very moment, and then, if you see fit, cauterize the patient with a cutting instrument up to the bone while the joints are still cut; and this is the moving part, if the patient does not have fever and has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cautery is a help to finish off moisture: hence it is of greater aid with moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or for the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the wound with thick cotton and place on top well-made bandages; and when they are removed, be careful to use dried medicines that produce heat, and bandages until the wound is healed; and as soon as you see the artery exposed, act quickly with cautery, or use vitriol and press with your hand so that the wound is cleansed; and if you do not have this at hand, put ice on the wound until the bleeding stops, and gently pull out the bandage until it is removed properly; and what moves more easily and is lighter for extracting an artery is to cauterize the vein from both sides with this cautery, but the cuts should be well-spaced to maintain its heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they do not hold their heat well.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have a good amount of space between the two blades, and then once you've marked the two bones, place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and leave enough space between the two cuts as it is not well-joined by this cauterization entirely. And this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes descend into the veins that are on the face near the forehead, and medicine does not help at all, you see the face of the sick person turn red, and feel a burning sensation as if from a fever, and the skin becomes dry and moist so that the hairs on the eyelids fall out, and the eyelids become inflamed and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this cure is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it the ancient "scab cure", and this is what you do for the patient who has this condition: take the hairs on their forehead and shave them; then make three cuts on the forehead equally along its length; one cut should go all the way down to the nose, and the other two cuts should be made on either side of the forehead above the eyelids. Avoid incising the arteries that are next to the eyelids. Keep your hand away from the jawline. Each wound should be about three times as long as it is wide. Have a piece of sponge or cloth ready to absorb the blood, then use a sharp spatula with this shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is made on the temple down to the second incision; strip all the skin that is between the two slits to the entire satisfaction that is above the bone, then make another from the middle incision down to the other second one, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you insert the instrument called a "cultellaire" into the first slit, it should be very sharp on one side and soft on the other; its shape is as follows:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	and place the cutting side towards the opposite direction of the slit at the bone, and the soft side towards the bone, and push until it reaches the middle slit.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the joints until the incision is continuous to open the heart, and then make a narrow slit on the other side; and then extract the blood evenly, and press out the wound for the blood taken; then place in each slit a strip of old cotton cloth, and lay wet cloths of wine and oil and wool, and be sure that no abscess forms; and on the third day loosen the bandage, and administer a strong spray of pure water, then apply the basilicon treatment with rose oil, and other remedies to cure wounds, until he is healed.
dou reume des eulz	your joints
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When any catarrh has become habitual, and you see the eyes heavy and small, weakening sight, and the membranes burning, and the hair falling out, and a feeling of pain in the head, the patient sneezes; then know from these symptoms that these matters and this catarrh do not come from a single cause, but the moving cure it.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And instruct the patient to press their forehead, then make a deep cut between the eyebrows, and another one wide enough to fit a finger.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And from the cut on the left temple to the right temple, make an incision reaching the bone; and move your hand away from the nerve of the temples that close when you blink; and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then separate the two edges of the wound and place old cotton on it, and cover it with linen. Then put moistened cloth soaked in wine and oil on top of it, and protect from further bleeding; once the bone has healed, it is important to rub the bone gently until new growth begins, then apply drying agents that promote healing.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of rye flower and three parts of chalk, mix them to make a paste, and apply it to these wounds to draw out poison from all parts.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	from ear infection
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Anything that causes an ear infection is one of four things: grains, animals, mineral stones or similar objects; seeds like peas, beans, beans; or flowing substances such as water and mucus-like things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When something like a stone or any other object that does not fit properly in the ear enters the ear and does not grow or settle in the ear, it should be exposed to sunlight.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a stone, and it distills any little drop of red oil or oil of myrrh, then it is fit for extraction; and it causes coughing due to congestion, and stops the nostrils when coughing comes, and places pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear; and pulls the ear from above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times this treatment fails; and if it does not fail, then extractions with fine pincers are applied, of which here is the shape:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If the extraction with pincers succeeds, that is good; if not, apply an intricate wire noose of fine twine; and if it still does not succeed, make a hook of iron and squeeze the top of the hook into the ear canal or the hollow of the ear firmly, and stop up what is around the hook with soft wax so that the air current cannot enter along with the hook. Then treat it thoroughly, because often this method fails as we have said; if not in this way, then take a good amount of it, and use any sharp instrument suitable for this purpose, and place some cotton inside; then press the clot onto the stone or something similar, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not follow all these things that we have said, then hurry to pierce the ear in such a way that the abscess hardens and the spasms cease; and the manner of the piercing is such that you first make the patient from the cephalics, extract the blood according to its virtue, then place the patient between your hands and restore the ear to its original position, making a small cut at the base of the ear where the fat or tissue is attached; and let the cut be as wide as a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it with your mouth; and the cure as long as it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is trapped and swollen, then administer extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, then use a delicate spatula according to this form.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and cut out the growth of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not attempt this if you think the grain is moist due to earwax, after having made many attempts; then extract it with delicate pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case that you extract something from the ear, it is advisable for the patient to use a gentle sneeze initially and fill the ear with fine cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lay something on that same ear, whether there is wax or water.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps through fire, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If the fire is no longer hot, take many thin pieces according to the length of your little finger and warm them slightly over fire; then insert the patient into one or both holes in their ear, and try from another side, striking with another piece on the stone inside the ear; continue this process from stone to stone until all the liquid has escaped completely, and thus it will jump out completely; and if you see that it sticks, take a thin wire, and insert one end into the ear, and the other end into fire until the thinnest part is burned; then repeat with other wires until all the liquid is gone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	During the removal of an animal, if it is a small bone, like a pin or something similar, treat it as we have said in the previous discussion; but if it is a large bone that can be felt, then use forceps for its removal; and it is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When treating earworms (vers enjanrez) as we have previously discussed and addressing distillations (a term likely referring to ear infections or discharge), if the treatment is not effective, it is necessary to examine the ear in sunlight. If no worms are visible, use fine forceps to carefully remove them; observe the shape of the wax (cainne) remaining after removal.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be tight from below and wide from above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And then, more subtly, insert the bottle into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then suction along the entire chain; do this often until all the air is removed.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, then close the chain with cotton as I have said before; and if they do not protrude as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have tested for worm removal, and you will find them in the section on distillations; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear using all these tools, forming them as you see fit.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And take a piece of silver or gold wire cut to the size of the small opening, and place it above the eardrum to distill; and to press inside the distillation with a well-made brass instrument, and if you see, take a razor and wrap it around the tip very carefully; then pour your oil or juice, and what you want from your medicines in the ear, and the ear should be in the pot; then put the razor completely into the cotton and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or slightly enters the ear; and let the patient feel it within, and make the distillation very hot over the fire just as it is done in the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would be ineffective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From ear pain
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with any holes in their ears; and the same thing happens to adults due to a sudden wound or an object entering the ear, and this blockage comes completely into the ear unless one can see it; and sometimes the hole becomes closed and no one notices it.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	When the blockage comes completely into the ear, if one cannot see it, it requires careful treatment in multiple ways, and in this case, you should place the patient's affected ear towards the sun; and examine inside. If you see the wax buildup, which gives the shape of its form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And make incisions and cuts all around, front and back, so that the ear does not remain injured; if the pain is from a foreign body or the cartilage of the ear, hold it with fine pincers and gently remove it until all bones are dislodged.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	If the pain is completely in the ear, take a fine, sharp razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then apply it to the cartilage of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the pain that the patient feels in their ear is intense, make a slight perforation, and be careful not to injure the inner part of the ear; then insert into the ear a plug according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not touch the wound for as long as it is fresh, or take a cloth and wet it in rosewater, and sprinkle it with vitriol powder; and if you see an ear swollen, it is necessary that you remove the cloth and replace it with another moistened cloth made of roset oil and wax, until the swelling subsides; then treat it as long as it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other remedies to stop the flow of blood, which can be treated with distillation.
de la char des papieres	concerning the preparation of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Take all the papers that come from the eyes when they are moist and dried, it is necessary to extend them with pliers and pincers, and cut off the top of a spatula from its roots; then put it over the vitriol ground fine.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if, after removing the outer layer, the lenticular cautery is performed gently, and the cauterizer after incision moves; and often they repair themselves, as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the ice (or frost)
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come onto paper one kind of thing that appears twisted in its form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "frost," which is a gathering of great moisture on the paper above and below; the work is as follows: take care if the frost becomes silent from one side to the other, and it is a light matter to know; then make it wide, then scrape gently from each part, then take it with pincers and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper slightly, it causes no harm to the patient; and if the split is large, with a stitch, treat it until it heals; but if it is small, do not exert yourself too much, because humors will soon restore it and cause pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the pain is descending inside the ear towards the top part, turn the paper against it, and the pain holds onto some pinches, pressing from one side to another; and if the paper is moved by the incision, it causes no harm; and when the pain is cut away, drain the water with salt, and treat the place where it originated until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Xerophthalmia is a fat that is embedded in the thin films of paper-like substances on the eyes, and it occurs more often in children than in adults, causing great pain to their eyes. In the mornings, they experience cataracts, and because of this, they cannot bear the light of the sun, as tears constantly stream from their eyes. Therefore, they rest their faces down, sleep, and their paper-like substances become moist under their eyelids, filled with xerosis that has opened in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel the extraction between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient places his head on the healthy side, and then takes a linen cloth and prepares a tent in the form of a circle according to the amount of extraction from each part, and places it there; and he presses with his fingers on both sides so that the extraction is gathered within the circle; then, in the middle of the moisture, using a cutting spatula, they make a groove not wider than the wound made in the vein; and they continue until they reach the extraction; and in various arrangements, extraction comes from the groove in the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take therefore a whole piece of cloth dipped in fire between your fingers and turn your hand to the right and to the left as long as it is dispersed; and be careful not to insert anything into the wound, do not reach all the way to the oil, and do not touch it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the wound does not open at the beginning of the incision, gently widen the wound slightly until it opens; then extract as we have said, and moisten the cloth with water and blood, and apply to the wound, and wrap tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such people who grind and apply something to corrupt the moisture that is lingering.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it as long as it is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the place of the hot abscess, treat it with external soothing as long as it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow in papers (or unnaturally), they become inflamed, causing harm and leading to various diseases, such as cracks and molts in the skin, and a white crust, all due to the destruction of the hairs; and the cure is according to four methods: by entire fire cautery, or by sharp medicine according to what is mentioned in the chapter on cautery, or by incision and stitching, or by binding, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the patient's head in your hand, then turn the paper from the oil on your left hand; if it rotates, that is good; if not, insert an needle along all the threads above; and this should be done either along the edge of the paper where the hairs grow or along the entire paper, turning it against the razor. Then make a cut in the paper beneath the hairs, close to them, from the large tear down to the small one; then pull out the thread and place beneath the paper a small piece of cotton and cloth, and draw on the paper a figure of an anchor, like the shape of myrth, and nevertheless the figure should be according to the quantity you raise with the paper which is marked at all points.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if at that part where the skill is needed, one takes a great quantity of paper according to how soft the paper is; then make a cut along all two lines that you have marked, and begin with a large tear from one end to the other; and let it be one of the splits close to the natural hair in the thickness of a root, then turn the edge into one of the two angles at the heart, and scrape off all of it; then bring together the two edges with a single stitch using a needle and thin thread, and wipe away the blood, and remove the excess threads from the two corners without anything sticky, if you are able to do so. And if not, leave the stitching and threads for three or four days, then treat the wound without stitching with drying and constricting things, because the paper revives at the healing of the wound and its gathering together, but the stitch moves (as the ancients say), and this is work without poverty; and if in another way: it is that you mark the paper with a figure as if it were the leaf of a myrtle, as we have told, at three points according to the shape shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then take what rises up with small force equally according to its form:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the pliers, and the task is not even, take a needle with thread, and wrap it around the figure; then take another thread from beneath the large tear, and the smaller one from under the small one, and twist them together equally between your fingers; then gently release your hand equally, and lift all the skin marked by you, as we have said, then sew together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed; if an abscess forms at your incision, soothe it with ointment or similar soothing application; sometimes the paper-like skin grows back; in such cases, follow what we have said about the incision; but sewing is more artificial in either case.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure for broken bones is as follows: you must mold the paper and make it inside according to what I said, then create two splints, thin and long like the paper and wide enough for the fracture; bind each part where you hold the bone fragments; assemble them carefully over the paper from the oil, forming the two splints from the broken parts; leave it like this for several days, and the bone that is bound will heal and stop hurting.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes time and the wound has strength, then treat it while it is still healthy; if the wound is deep, and if the paper does not adhere, and the hairs do not grow back; this is the form you will make for the two splints according to this figure and this quantity of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work involves such a task as you would prick a fine needle and wrap it with soft, thin silk thread; then align the dislocated parts and tie them gently, making the length of the threads one palm's length; next, arrange another thin silk thread quickly and tie the ends tightly together; then place the patient's head on your healthy side; and let it rest in the sun so that the work is unveiled, for it is a delicate and small task. Then push the needle through all parts to the root of the hair gently, piercing the paper hospital-style as you pull it away from the natural hair; then remove the hair up to the needle, and wrap the needle with the hair if there are one or two or three or more strands; finally, withdraw your hand until the hairs emerge completely from the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the wound is treated and the hairs do not grow with it, pull the wound out from the root to all the thread that you have arranged, until the wound comes out completely through the opening above and you see it with your eye; then pull the wound and the thread, close the eye and leave it closed for one or two days, until the hair grows back into its place and the scar appears. And if the hairs are small, accompany them with a long natural hair from the horse, and raise it with that one or as long as you keep it stretched.
de la porriture de l’oil	regarding the impurity of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this illness called "aleacrati" or putrefaction comes upon the body, it can manifest in two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it occurs suddenly from wounds, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of operating in this case is that you open the wound, separate the edges, and place linen strips inside, binding it tightly until it heals; and it is not appropriate to use things that dry out and restrict in the treatment of it.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but it works through softening agents, such as fenugreek; and rosewater of either fresh or dried roses and flaxseed oil are cooked, and any diluent herbs melted in one of the eyes, and it covers over temporarily, and treats it.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the true value of your treatment is that you must be careful not to adhere to the previous form; and this work that we have mentioned is only a proper direction for this illness, so that it does not return in the same way as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the grease that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is sore, which is truly called "abscess," is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidental injuries come from wounds, incisions, and similar things; and in the work of this process, if you press an needle, it will have a double thread, and be inserted into the flesh, piercing the left tear duct so that the thread comes out on the right side of the cheek; then the needle is pulled out, leaving the thread attached to the wound.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the paper figure returns according to what is appropriate, that's good; if not, take a razor and insert it into the slit, turn the paper, and make two slits on either side inside the paper; let the edges of these slits form two angles of the incision you have made, so that when they are brought together, the figure resembles a 'grecian' letter 'I'; then remove the bandage according to the extent of its attachment to the skin from around the paper, adjust the two parts carefully, and sew them with a thread of wool; finally, apply the treatments we have mentioned for mollifying and cooling medicines until he is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from cutting, stitching, or cauterizing, it is necessary that you make a clean cut between the hairs and the skin, according to what has been said before; then separate the two leaves of a tent, as I have mentioned; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it varies greatly in form, and skilled masters have devised various tools of every kind to restore the natural shape, and the patients themselves, according to what is appropriate for the operation and instruments in different dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	The phrase "dou soudement de la papiere" appears to be incomplete or corrupted in
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture is done by skilled hands in this manner that the paper above is adhered with oil's white, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must pierce the tip of a razor beneath the paper and lift it slightly; hold it like pincers, until you remove what is sharp on the delicate spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient does not suffer from the excessively sharp spatula; make your incision gently, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and all of this assembly heals cleanly, never leaving saltiness in the oil or bringing up foul water, then place between the paper and the oil a thin cloth of linen, and over the oil lay moist wool in abundance; after the third day, use collyrium and things that promote healing until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	from the nail of the finger
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You know that the nail has two kinds of appearances: it is either nervous and similar to a hard, sharp object, or it is not nervous but appears as white, moist, frozen matter. When you touch it with iron and care for it as if it were pliers, no one can do so; and both appear to begin at the great toe, growing little by little until they cover the entire vision and all the light and movement of the finger.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The procedure for incision is as follows: the patient places their head in a healthy position, then opens the fingers; takes a piece of paper in their hand, coils the nail like pliers with fine teeth, and extends it above; then takes a needle, threads it with horsehair, or silk, or cowhair, ties a strong thread to it, and inserts the pointed end of the needle into the nail, piercing it all the way through, and ties the nail with the thread, extending it above; then carefully removes all the hair around the nail at the base, using a small, precise scalpel, leaving the natural shape of the nail intact so that the incision does not cause tears to the skin as usual. And under no circumstances should the nail be extended immediately after the procedure, but only with thread and needle, as we have said; then it is shaped as follows:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be sure that the scalpel does not touch and tear the soft flesh, and that the point is not pierced; after the incision, pour a little bit of broken silk into the wound, and then cover it with a collar made of lithargy, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the fingernail is not connected to a nerve and you cannot push the needle in, and the hooks cannot enter, this condition is often treated with medicines; as I have described in the previous section, if you see it covering over and opening up the wound for the patient, take a light scalpel as per this shape.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently remove the nail from above, and if you see that it shrinks little by little and the reason presses, it will discharge from your mouth into a collar made of collyrium composed of litargy and red dye, and seal the oil until the next day; then repeat the other work according to this same method, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing in the oil is contrary to you, such as a hot abscess, then apply it and treat the hot abscess first until it is healed, and then continue with the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh in the eye causes harm in the oil by great damage, if it suspends at the edge and cuts off a part but not all, so that tears do not come; then it distills into the eye red collyria made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	on the flesh that is born on the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some men do not have red flesh grow on their eyelids, covering the prune (eyelid) and resting on the papers, resembling a rosebud; and the work is such that the patient places his head in a healthy position, then opens the eyes, and pulls all the flesh with suitable hooks, and holds it firmly; then cuts off the first piece of flesh, cutting it close to the edge until the end, and be careful not to scratch the eye during the procedure; and use the spatumile (a surgical instrument) as we mentioned in the incision of a nail, these small forces extract the sebum. As the shape demonstrates after this chapter. And when the incision is completed and all the flesh removed, apply oil from crushed silk or distil red collyria and similar caustic medicines, and place cotton on the hot aposteme (eyelid infection), ensuring it is secure; if nothing remains, and a sore appears, do not touch the oil and treat the hot aposteme with soothing remedies; then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus make all the cuts adjusted in the eye like this.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless, it is necessary that you attend to the treatment of each weak oil in the natural path; and in the accidental path, in the work of iron; and do not push your hand into any of these works until you see that this member suffers from this work.
des voines des eulz	veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These are red veins that are covered over the eye, they rob the sight of their function and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Skill is therefore in the first place that you look at the eye, where it is inflamed, swollen, and there is no other disease outside of the inflammation; then tie them in this way: instruct the patient to place his head in your healthy hand, then suspend these veins throughout their entire length according to your wisdom, and make the incisions delicate and double according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And there should be two incisions by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then, gently draw the veins, wiping off the blood hour after hour until you have removed all the veins from the flesh; be careful not to pierce the oil with the points of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, being very zealous in your task so that you do not stop until the veins are gone; and once you have done this, distil green and red collyre into the oil to corrupt what remains in the sebaceous glands.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all of it in that hour, make a poultice over the oil with soothing things for the pain of the joints, and leave it for no more than a day until the pain is soothed and assured, then resume according to this manner as long as it is healed; and this is the form of the veins:
de la fistule de l’oil	from the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	He calls these fistulas "arissati": when you treat them with cautery and strong medicine according to what I have said before, and they do not heal, there is an infection in them that you must drain from the abscess where it is located, and remove all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, take all the instruments mentioned here; it is called "sharp point", and it should be made sharp from iron to the tip, and pointed like a file as shown in this shape.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the corrupt bone back in its socket, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand gently until you know that corruption is gone; do this several times, then return the joint to its medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bones are fused together and the patient is born that way, and the bowels' wall is also fused and remains so for 40 days without healing or becoming abscessed, and no bad accidents occur, then you know it is healthy; if not, there is another method to bring the fistula back to the opening of the wound using this form: and take care to remove the bone a second time with iron and ague medicines, and when it becomes exposed, immediately apply the iron as shown here, with three angles, and make sure the tip is thinned as you can see.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the delicate bone of the arm, and remove your hand from the wound, then continue all the way through until it pierces the bone, and have the patient feel it, because if they hold their hand on their armpit, you will see the matter at the armpit; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the wound
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the edges open wide and do not disturb the breath or cause any constriction, it is then necessary to have the patient lie down; then apply cups or leeching without causing injury to draw out the blood, then pour over it a mixture made of aloe, myrrh, and frankincense, and bind it with strips, and wrap them in cloth; the manner of the cloth should be that you press enough soft cloth against the wound, folded in three, and then place one upon another according to the need of the wound; then strain it from above a hard board, and apply new cups for sucking without causing injury; then remove the cups and leave the binding on for a day and night, and if it loosens gently, it is good; if not, repeat the poultice and cloth and binding and cups until he is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	loss of thread control
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the thread control, it opens up and lets out papers as if from a sieve, which is quite remarkable to observe. If you see this happening, take swift action. Insert an needle into the root of the affected area, just below the surface, and then another needle where the thread forms a double loop at the edge of the tear. Pierce through gently, leaving the first needle in place. Then cut the double-threaded loop and tie a portion of the thread around it tightly. Remove the needle and apply fresh, moist lint to the wound. Leave it until the thread absorbs with the moisture, then treat the wound with comforting remedies until the injury heals; the wound should be secured by the thread forming a circular pattern on each side, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the joint appears to be deeply embedded, pierce it with a fine instrument which comes from oil, and remove the white, moist matter within, and draw out the joint, then extract it as soon as it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the oil's bowel
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is not acute but a swelling that appears like a sharp descent, and it is not sharp; the manner of the work's appearance is such that you cause the patient to sit upon a seat arranged and straight, then take the head in both hands from two sides, and move it until you see the swelling come above the joints; then it should be firmly fixed, and do not allow light to enter, and have the patient look at things as he usually does; if it does not descend below, know that it is acute, and if the movement of the swelling is not arranged as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient rest between your hands, then take the delicate spatula and make incisions on the cornea in the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the iris, until the bowel is released; and when it is released, it exudes clear hot oil mixed with honey, or boiled water or fenugreek with honey, then apply other remedies until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Des aiges de l'oil" translates directly to "water from oil" in
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have similar waters in the division, and what is necessary to pierce; and this should be done according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should place the patient between your crossed hands, away from direct sunlight, and bind them tightly; then place the paper of the oil in your left hand if the veins are on the left side, or in your right hand if they are on the right; then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if the veins are on the left side, or in your left hand if they are on the right; next, place the tip of the instrument along the edge of the vein, following its thickness, at the lighter part near the smaller branch of a vein, and press the instrument called "almagda" firmly, and twist your hand as it pierces the vein, and feel that the almagda reaches the empty space; and it is important that the length of the almagda be precisely equal to the measure of the space from the plum to the end of the darkness; this is the crown of the oil; you will see the bones in the paper due to the clarity of the corned cloth, then place the instrument up to where the water is, and press it out one vein after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he lowers himself now, let him see the patient before him and hold the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting briefly, then raise him again the second way, insert the instrument and when it is firmly in place and does not move up, gently extract it by rotating your hand back and forth; then lower again a little bit at a time while keeping the oil inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply the heated oil or any other moist oil mixed with rose oil and plenty of honey, and bind it with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, place hot compresses with abundance of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the substance cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, as there are many people with very hard eyes, it is necessary that you press the instrument called 'alberit', which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Then pierce only the conjunctive substance, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then introduce the hot compress as we have said; and after the work is complete, provide for the patient a comfortable position to sleep in, on his back in a dark place; and let there be no movements, and feed him with light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and tie him according to his condition for three days. Then release him in the same dark room, and test his vision, and make him see nothing, and then put the bandage back on for seven more days; and it is not appropriate to perform this at the time of the cure or after the incision, but it is appropriate to ease it, because acute pain rises suddenly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When an abscess appears, you must loosen the hair in front on the seventh day and apply the remedies for soothing the abscess; and once it is soothed, loosen the bandage and place a little cloth on its face to cover it for some time, and keep it in that dark room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then, leave the house little by little and recover in your own way; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	Then, a man came to us from Syria who told us that in his country they use a certain root that makes people urinate freely, from which they extract water, but I have never seen or heard of it in our land, nor do I find mention of it in the books of the ancients; perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of magic, for whoever does not know them will see them as different; and they should be pure gold.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head be cut from this same subtlety in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the charm on the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No one is born with these charmed figures; they do not resemble any kind of scorpion but are full of pain. And if there are such charms, either beautifully adorned with fox-colored or smooth and of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In this case where the wound is hot and raw, you should place the patient between your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils, pour wine into those wounds, and treat them fiercely; but pull as much as you can hold in a thin, sharp instrument from one side, until you know that the wound is completely healed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is anything left that cannot be pulled out with all the delicate, thin instruments, opening it further with slight force, so that nothing remains; and without delay, cutting as it should be done; and if it are malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize until the blood is completely drained from all wounds, then apply heat or cold and wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If he feels heat and moisture in his head, know that it is clean; but if the moisture does not come out as it should, know that there is something stuck in the upper bone, which prevents the instruments from cutting. Then you must insert a thread of linen somewhat thick, being careful with your hands, and leave between each space the desired or lesser distance, and place the patient's foot in the thread at his convenience, and pull gently while smelling until it comes through the gum inside the mouth; and often children do so at school, and it is a light thing for him who wants to do it. Then hold the head that comes through the gum with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, knowing one after the other as we who are in thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do as you know, corrupt the new charcoal, then treat the child, wipe away the blood, and moisten the wound with Egyptian ointment, and put it back to the neck as before; do this for three days or more until the ointments corrode all that is remaining of the charred flesh. Then place a moist compress on the neck for no more than a day while it heals, and if there is a need for drying medicines, use them; this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, with which one distills oils and medicines into the neck.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or gold, resembling an open lamp, like a pipe, and use it thus; if you see, make a closed pipe, and let the instruments be full to purge the head; and have many at hand for the head to hold when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Of the pain near the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often, near the nose, a pain arises called "telul," which swells and grows very large, making it a thing of concern to look at; and for this reason, you must catch it at the beginning, take it all out completely, then apply cautery or the burning medicine; and if one delays in treating it until it becomes large, be careful if it is hard, of poor color, or without sensation: do not touch it with iron, because it is an abscessed joint, for when you treat it, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is sensitive, not of poor color, and you see that it can be completely treated, empty the patient gently and apply the treatment without causing pain, curing the limb from things drying and restricting.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is broken and bruised
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	You know that when the fragments of these powerful cartilages come together, it brings little relief, indeed, to no one.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to do nothing when the wound is fresh and filled with blood; then close the two lips with a single stitch, and treat it until it heals; if the lips are already separated on one side or the other, you must scrape all parts of their core while they heal, then bring the two lips together with another stitch, and tighten them, and apply powder made from dragon's blood and incense that has been ground; place a piece of strong or other adhesive plaster over the powders, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then treat the wound with care until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of stitching is such that you bring the wound together: either with needles, as we have said in sewing the belly; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home, the abscesses on the lips appear as hard, grain-like bumps, both small and large. Then you must turn the lips and make a cut in each one, using pincers to pull out the pus and applying vitriole (a caustic substance) to each part after the incision; then use a dry leaf to clean the wound until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	from the condition of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often, a condition afflicts the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; it is necessary that you hold it with tongs, and cut at its root, allowing the bowel or abscess to drain; then place upon it vitriol powder, or other restrictive and desiccant powders; and if this condition returns after incision, and often occurs, especially when cutting the gums a second time, and cauterizing them: if it does not return after cauterization; these are the shapes of the instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of disorders
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	No teeth should be forced together at the gum line, between the rough and unpleasant scales; nor should they be black and yellow and rotten as long as the corruption affects the gums, making them stinky; it is necessary that you make the patient hold still in your hands, keeping his teeth or gums firmly in place until nothing remains; and so do with black, green, jaundice, and other kinds of decay, as long as they are present. If you remove what is at the root cause, it is good; if not, continue to try again on the second and third days, until everything has been removed; and know that teeth require various types of instruments for removal, according to what the work demonstrates, because the tool used to remove them from between the teeth has a different shape than that used to remove them at the gum line; and these shapes should all be prepared in advance.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	You should cure the tooth of its pain as soon as possible, for you must not delay treating it at all, for it is a very delicate matter so there is no excuse for postponing it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then, when the patient is in great pain, it is necessary that you be certain about the tooth's condition.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the patient cries out from the pain, believing it to be from a tooth infection, and has it pulled; but nevertheless, the pain does not cease until the abscess is drained, for we have already experienced this with many patients; and when you are certain about the tooth's condition, you should cut around it with a sharp instrument to protect the gums from all sides. Then use tweezers to grasp it gently at the first sign of movement, as carefully as possible, until it is well dislodged. Affirm your hold on the tweezers and place the tooth between your fingers under your jaw, holding it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take none of these instruments and push it gently from every side, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	If the tooth is broken and chipped, it is necessary to fill the gap with cloth, either at the opening or the perforation; and if it is tightened tightly with pliers, be careful not to break it while pulling; and it must be done very carefully around the gum line to extract the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Be very careful not to break it, and if a piece breaks off, return it to the patient; due to the evil of its root, it will cause greater pain than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And take care that you do not act like the ignorant healers who, out of haste and foolishness, break the vessel many times, and do not listen to what we have said; but they bring about a great illness through their words, either because of the roots where it dwells or because of the vessel that is broken, as often happens; and when the wound is deep, wash the place with wine or honey and silk; and the flow of blood comes, which often occurs, if you employ vitriol paste; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, with which one first mutely extracts the tooth, should be long and sharp with thick handles, so that they do not bend when pulling the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have strong members that do not bend when pulled, made of well-forged iron, and toothed for proper movement.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains stuck when pulled, it is necessary to place cotton moistened with butter on it for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the eyes are moistened, then apply the pliers called 'algefri', which resemble a bird's beak, and they should be made as follows:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out of these claws, it is necessary that you uncover the whole area around the root, and place the instrument called "alethal" or "palainche", which has this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is very hard and does not break, and the root jumps out by itself, that is good; if not, use all the instruments whose shapes are as follows:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument with two prongs, its shape is:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are used in the treatment of teeth, and of this tool which resembles large pliers, whose form is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	This tool should be of a strength that it cannot break, and you must know that many tools for teeth exist; and also other tools, which are not mentioned. The most skilled surgeons invent their own instruments, according to what their work and the illness show them, because there are certain diseases for which no instrument was taught by the ancients. If a part breaks or an object is stuck in a bone, and he seeks the appropriate instrument that I have told you about, and uses gestures, then its form is as follows:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and well-holding to hold the bone, that it does not escape but can be held and removed; and then return the limb to suitable medicines for this, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, small or large, use all these instruments.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural course of things and its shape is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth has grown after the one before it, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or polished: then extract it. And if it is loose with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is like a small beak, made of sharp steel.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And take a small, sharp knife in your hands each day for the pain in your teeth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it from one side as this shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	It is also like filing the iron that makes the needles; file the tooth little by little in your hands every day gently, so it does not move until it heals; then, at the end, there should be no jagged edge, and if the tooth is too sharp, it bleeds the tongue, so you must file its roughness until it is even, so that it does not hurt the tongue or impair speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth aches
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth aches severely, whether by impact or pulling, and the patient cannot bear pressure on it, he suffers from a painful condition. Treatments with restricting medicines are ineffective in such cases; instead, they should be restrained with a golden thread. Note that silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes. The thread should neither be too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth. If you need to align the teeth, take the thread and loop it double between two healthy teeth, then place the aching tooth(es) in between the healthier ones. Continue tightening until you reach gently yet firmly the sound tooth on the other side. Then repeat the process from the beginning until the aching tooth is secure at the root.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the joints with a pair of pliers, assemble them, and reinsert them between the healthy tooth, and arrange it so that the tongue does not get damaged; and then leave it as tight as possible, and if it loosens, the thread will unravel, if held by another thread; it should remain in this position for the entire duration, and this is the shape of the teeth and the proper arrangement of the two healthy teeth and the two molars, as you can see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is removed and replaced in its socket, fresh one by fresh one, as we have said; it should only be done by someone skilled and patient, and never shaped like a bone of a weak tooth, but placed in the missing spot, held as we have said, and remain so for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to uncover the tongue's ligaments
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No, these are the ligaments that originate from beneath the tongue, either naturally or due to a deep wound; and the work involves opening the mouth of the patient with care, so that his head is in your hand, and gently lifting the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament widely, as much as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or any resistance, and this is due to a sudden wound, then use a hook and cut the ligament widely; be careful not to cut too deeply, in order not to harm the artery beneath; and after you have done this, raise the tongue with rosewater or some other soothing liquid, then apply a thin linen cloth under the tongue; repeat this for each patient every night, so that the ligaments do not harden.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the flow of blood comes, apply vinegar to it immediately; and if the pain intensifies, cauterize it with a slow-burning caustic, which is good for this; then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see it is of red, black, or hard color, so the patient does not smell it, do not touch it, for it is a cancer; and if it inclines to white and there is moisture, pour vinegar on it and cut it with a fine spatula from both sides; and if the pain persists in your care, apply vitriole ground until it is stained, then return to your care as you remove everything; then lift the limb gently and slowly, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	from the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No sign of these abscesses in the throat, which are called "godath," should appear, and they are properly known as the II amandres. And when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they remain untreated, be careful: if they are small and have a thin, pale color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is thick, do not touch them with iron, also to prevent the spread of pus; but leave them until they die, and then you will remove them, or they might break on their own. And if they are white in color and the root is thin, have a ready instrument to cover them, but first ensure that the abscesses are calm and at ease.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient sit before the sun, and his feet in a healthy position, and open the mouth, and press the tongue down with the instrument between his hands, pressing it firmly to the end of the tool, from which the shape is formed; and let it be made of silver or fine gold as if it were a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You cannot press the tongue down onto all of this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the hook and the file and insert them into it, pulling upward as much as possible; and do not touch any part of the threads with your fingers, but cut it off with the instrument, from which the shape resembles a forceps; nevertheless, the head is bent, one side towards the other, and they are very sharp, made either of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, if you make it with pincers, then it has this form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	It should be carved on one side and smooth on the other. Once you have shaped one of the mandibles, shape the other in the same manner, and after the incision, rinse the patient's mouth with hot water and cold, clear water, and if bleeding occurs, rinse the patient's mouth with water treated with pomegranate peel or myrrh or similar substances until the blood is stopped. Then apply the cure as long as it remains clean; and no other abscesses will form in the throat besides the two mandibles, so shape them just like the two mandibles.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was in her throat, namely a small abscess; and had she tightly closed the whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passageway, and could neither eat nor drink, she would have died if she remained thus for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so swollen that it had forced two ribs through the two openings in the throat where it originated.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then quickly inserted a probe into one of the openings and pulled it through, causing great pain; I withdrew it and did the same on the other side, opening the throat and pressing the tongue; afterward, I inserted the probe into these abscesses and extracted some pus; and thus was the passage from the throat of the woman opened, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to drain the abscess for a long time; but the abscess returned again, filling the space that I had emptied, becoming quite large. Then I seared it within the throat and so it healed; in this way it did not return, and I departed from these tasks, leaving God to complete them after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the retina descends into the eye, and it is swollen and detached, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thin and round, it is called "retina".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have mentioned in the previous section, but the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscess is calming down, and it is subtle, then it is necessary to drain it; and the round one that is not completely detached; and it is bloody or of a bright red or black color, then be careful not to cut into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the poor patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see this, according to the manner I have said, you should make the patient lie face towards the sun and press his tongue with the instrument we spoke of earlier; then insert the hook in the eye and pull from behind, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for incising the stones.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is important that you do not remove more than the excess beyond the natural limit, because if you do, it will cause great pain to speech and movement; and after incision, use what we said for incising the stones and dress it as long as it is clean.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient suffers from great pain, it is necessary that you use tools for cauterizing the sensitive parts.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The method of cauterization should be sharp and swift.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should place his head on a healthy surface and then press his tongue against the instrument described in this chapter of cauterization with firm but not too harsh pressure; using the movement of this instrument, which has the following shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the head have a hair or cloth on which to place the medicine, like the shape of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye; and have the patient lie on his side so that saliva and mucus from his mouth can wash the medicine down without going to the throat and causing pain; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for about half an hour until you see it dry up and the stinging of the medicine subsides; and if necessary, take cotton and wrap it around the instrument and dip it in the medicine, and continue moving the instrument over the cotton on top of the eye until the cotton dries on the eye; repeat this several times until the cauterization is complete, then leave it to dry for three or four days. And if you need to re-apply the cauterization with the medicine, do so, and after cauterizing, wipe it around the eye using cotton dipped in medicine, and then clean it with cold water and make gargles until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than cauterization, especially for incision; if it is carried out by fumigation in this manner, take plenty of calament, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, and similar herbs, and combine them all or any of them in a pot, and put it on the fire; let the mixture be well cooked over a strong flame, and place the pot on a hot stone according to this method.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be of silver or gold, and one of the feet should be pressed into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the nose, while the eye remains moist; after that, it often recurs as the eye dries, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, as many complications can arise; and only perform this when the hot abscess declines.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not available, take a cane and insert within the mouth a piece of wool soaked in vinegar, so that it does not burn too much for the patient; for the woolen strand does not let the hot vapor burden the mouth, and this is a good cure together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a burning sensation occurs in the throat from bone or fish spine, or some other thing. Therefore, it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing move; and if it does not open and remains stuck in the throat, it is good to make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach. Perhaps this will dislodge the foreign object through vomiting. Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval gant, or a leaf of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and ties a thread to the sponge, and then swallows it; and when it reaches the throat, it will burn, and then you can pull it out forcefully. And if it does not come out as we have said, take an instrument made of salt according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be bent towards the throat so it can enter more easily, and hold the head raised high; beware not to touch the epiglottis, lest all of it comes down, nor push any bones inside; and make sure the patient pushes the instrument, because it needs to move in order for the object to come out; if it goes down into the throat, pull it out slowly until it is completely out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is the throat treated with medicine, as I said in the previous division, other than through the use of medications; and if it does not benefit, then look into the throat of the patient at sunrise, and press their tongue with the instrument I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the wound, pull it free from every tiny thorn, or subtle pincers that it holds.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if the wound does not heal, take a horsehair, and insert it into the throat of the patient, then pull or raise the hair slowly, doing this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has a fever every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in slowly, letting the patient swallow it, doing this often; and immediately as the wound feels the water, it will close.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not break as we have said, and infuses the patient with bad odor from the fumigation of the eye, do this many times, for it will eventually come without warning.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	The method of fumigation consists of filling a pot with hot coals and placing a perforated cover over it; the instrument should be placed in the hole in the center of the cover. The patient then puts the tip of the cane in their mouth, seals their mouth, and inhales the fumes until they reach the back of their throat, without letting any smoke escape. If the mucus does not come out, repeat the fumigation many times. The patient should endure thirst and eat salty and spicy foods, avoiding water; then, it will be necessary for him to spit out the mucus using this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound, if it is possible to see it, resembles a curved claw that enters the throat, and it looks like a hawk's beak, and has the roughness of lime, so that whatever it takes hold of, it cannot leave. And here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many appearances of abscesses are, according to the remembrance that this book presents here and there, diverse in their openings and dimensions; and they exist in two ways, one being of the same appearance, and those that retain moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the joints where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess of the head is different from that of the base, and the abscess of the fleshy limb is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if, for abscesses, one must not pierce the bowel until it is completely dead according to its completion; and if for others it is necessary to pierce when they are hardened, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are in the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from damaged joints, and they are left until the pus is drained around them, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If the abscess is in the main member and you delay the incision until it is gangrened, it will harm the principal member; or if it is from the foundation, perforate it only when it is thoroughly gangrened, otherwise it will not be cut completely, remain inside, and become a fistula, and will not heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you should know the moment of perforation of the abscess which is killed according to completion, and this is when the pain is soothed, and the fever departs, and the pain and redness diminish, and the swelling of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation depend more on the abscess itself, and there where it moves; and let the perforation be long in the body, and if the abscesses are in hands or feet, or in joints and tendons and arteries, and everywhere equally without any swelling.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when there are abscesses in soft flesh, it is better that you do not make an incision until the swelling subsides after the digestion has been completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you make an incision too early, the body's defenses will weaken due to the wound, and it will be filled with bad humors; and by chance, the lips may harden and become attached to it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscesses that have been pierced are too deep into the flesh, according to what the member requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you should treat them with small incisions, small openings; and in large incisions, large openings, and many fissures according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to press the heart, and cover; when they have reached a suitable size like a cloth, and are softened, then you should treat them as you do with blisters: and if there are such that are cut in three angles, and if there are such which are covered like the fleece of mistletoe, like the abscesses of an attack; and if there are such where a large size is made, and other sizes and similar incisions.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	For those who do not have a head, like a superficial sore abscess, you should pierce it thoroughly; and if the abscess is large, and it has collected great bowels, and you pierce it, without draining all the bowels at that time, but only part of them; then stop the abscess for the next day, and then do nothing from there on; repeat this many times, gradually, until the bowels are completely drained; especially if the patient is of weak strength, a pregnant woman, or small children, or old, decrepit people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For often the patient jumps at the result of the bowel movement, which may suddenly cause the sick person to die, and you should not be surprised.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Beware therefore of this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, if the wound is clean, and the abscess wound is small, then apply a thin cloth or fresh cotton; but if it is a large abscess with many openings, then put a tent over each one so that they press against each other. And if in the abscess there is a part of hard skin, and you have cut it around, then fill it with old cotton or linen raspings without moisture, and bind it for three days; then remove it and treat the wound with medicine until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the bleeding occurs in your work, apply cold water and ice, moisten the bandage, and lay it on the affected area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bleeding persists, apply government and treatment, as well as the powders I mentioned in this book, and if it is a deep wound or an abscess, it is necessary to place moistened cloths and drapes on top; and if the wound is fresh, moistened with wine and hot oil; and if it is chronic and the flesh is fleshy, lay moistened cloths with cold water and fresh oil, or wine and hot oil, until the third day, as we have said; then remove the abscess and clean and treat it as appropriate, as long as it remains healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know this universally in the treatment of abscesses: I have already told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and now see this chapter.
des soros	from blood
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Often, small abscesses come from the head, and they appear in various forms, just like the pus of a wound or that of a boil, and there are many similar conditions.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are large and soft, containing moisture, just like veins; and others that are hard and resistant to cutting, but there is no doubt if the arteries do not oppose them.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work on the body if such that you should try all instruments called 'entangling', from which the form comes as follows, containing something.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they make a hole from above down through it.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is emptied, it pulls out nothing leaving the skin that contained the moisture, for it returns again when you leave nothing; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if present; if not, use water and string, and apply to the wound, and leave until the other day; and this will cure what has been left behind due to night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then begin the bandage again, as before, on the second and third days, until you know for certain that it does not remain during the night; then treat the wound with suitable care until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if an abscess becomes hard, following this form, it should be incised lengthwise; and drain the pus, and scrape from all sides, and apply all your care to draw out the pus from where it lies; and if the artery reacts contrary, do as I have told you.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do the same with an abscess that is pus-filled, and cut and treat it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut the abscess and the moist flesh first; it is lighter because they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if none of these abscesses or boils have any moisture, and these are the type of abscesses that I found on an old woman's chest; I found the abscess as hard, rough, and white like a stone, unyielding, and if one tried to break it, it would cause just as much damage as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses that appear on the head, especially those at the top of a child's head or at the root of the ear, the opening should be kept completely open for as long as possible to allow the pus to drain; and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess appears in the neck, and it dissolves the adhesions, and causes anger, and never comes anywhere else on the body, and they are painful, and are entwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly inside its rib, as we have said of the new and abscess from the head, and these scrofulas have many similarities.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and others of a malign nature that will not obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those you see with a good disposition for touch, resembling the healthy color of the flesh, silent from every side and not exposed as the skin around the neck or the artery or vessel, and not too deep; it is necessary that you sever it from above, peel it from every part, and the two lips of the heart remain in their place, if need be, as we have said in the chapters on the head; and move it little by little, ensuring you do not cut the nerve or vein, and do not let the scalpel slip, so that your hand is safe, and look forward with caution, so you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you sever the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work, apply vitriole (a corrosive substance) or any powder that stops blood flow, constricts the wound, and leaves it until the inflammation subsides, and the wound softens, then begin to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is stained with blood, it returns to your work until you complete it; then pay close attention to your skilled indication if there are no small abscesses remaining, if you drain and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the abscess, it is not enough that you drain only the abscess at its root, but you should tie it with a double strand strong thread and leave it to heal without harm; then apply the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian dressing, and cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you drain the entire abscess, it is necessary that you close both edges of the wound and sew them now, so that there is no delay due to the size of the abscess.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you want to understand how to deal with it, and pull it out firmly, and cut it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that have an excess, pierce them where they appear to be dying; and the piercing should be done as mentioned before, depending on it, then apply these treatments with bandages and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what is left from the corruption; and once the wound is well cleaned, continue the healing treatment until it is healed.
de squinance	squinance (Old French) translates to "squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	They old ones spoke and discussed about the incision of the throat; but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those with squint, it is necessary to avoid the incision of the throat known as "epiglote"; no aid should be provided for this, because all the veins and the source of the pain are in those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the tongue, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to prevent the damage that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it through three circles or four small cuts across, between two circles or according to the size of the cut, without touching the cartilage; and these cuts are most suitable for cutting through the epiglottis, so that there is no sticking, and the wound heals quickly.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the surgeon is afraid, it is necessary that he stretches the throat skin to the entire opening, then cuts through the heart until it reaches the trachea; and avoid blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut through the tissue, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the river of the trachea that comes out through the place that is broken, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed and doubt arises about the strangulation, gather the two edges of the wound together where the cartilage is, and cut it completely through; then administer medications that promote healing as long as it remains healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albuscasim (a type of herb) should not be used until the throat is completely sealed, and the patient is considered near death, as it lacks effectiveness.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then, they should open the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, thus preventing death; and for this reason, the ancients advised to keep the wound open until the evil of the illness has passed, which takes three or four days. And then they ordered to close the wound and treat it as long as it was healing; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a damsel was wounded by a knife, and she stabbed it into her throat, cutting part of the tongue from the gum; and I was called to cure her, and I found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and realized that she had not coughed up any pus or phlegm, nor had the injury caused any discharge other than into the throat, and the vein had burst from the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I acted swiftly, sewed up the wound, and cured her until she was completely healed; and she could not speak for lack of voice, but later recovered fully; therefore, I say that in the surgery of the epiglottis there is no need to be afraid.
de la grosse gorge	from the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Cysts known as "throat hernias" are large abscesses with the appearance of a pus-filled sac, and they predominantly affect women; they present in two manners: natural and accidental, where the former has no apparent cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And accidental hernias present in two manners: one resembles fatty tissue, and the other appears as an abscess stemming from an artery; these cases instill fear, and it is not advisable to perform any surgical incisions unless absolutely necessary. If you discover a hernia resembling fat and find no apparent cause, treat it like a common nose hernia by carefully cutting away the affected skin and ensuring complete healing.
des nous	From us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways by which we can suffer, of which I will describe all their appearances; and now it is necessary that I explain the distinction between our state and its origin.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the origin is heat and fever as long as the ebullition persists, and when putrefaction is complete, then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the new birth, there is no heat, no fever, or pain, and it possesses satisfaction, which is its own sac, according to the color of the body, and begins like a seed, becoming fat; and they are similar in two ways, either greasy or moist, and have much the same color as I mentioned in the previous division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is important when you approach the treatment of a new patient that you first test and inquire about all instruments called "entromissory" according to their form, as described in the subsequent chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	The method of inquiring about abscesses is to press more or less moistently on the abscess, and move your fingers in and out little by little, until you know that the instrument has reached the center, then, according to the size of the abscess, extract the entromissory tool, and be careful not to let it slip.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the abscess is surrounded by a hard crust, it has the same color as described for other abscesses; and if the entromissory tool does not come out moist, know that it is full of pus, so make a cross with it, and grasp it with pincers, and peel it gently from each side, taking care to remove all the pus, or wash it with new bandages until it becomes clean. If you cannot do this, cut off pieces of it, removing everything.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it does not move, the pain returns many times; and if it moves a little bit and does not cause great discomfort, it employs the wound with some corrosive powders or hot water, constricts the wound, applies soothing things to the abscess, and treats other ailments until it is healed; and if the pain is great, it cuts both sides of the wound and treats it accordingly.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the pain is intense or other discomfort occurs and you hurry, use the vitriol powder and leave it for two or three days until the wound purifies and the inflammation of the blood subsides; then return to cover what has come undone from the new.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the shapes of the instruments introduced, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters called "albaret", and one called "breb", and they are also like needles used to cut through sorceries, made of gold, silver, or iron, and move best when yellow, and are most effective for encircling fistular corbs; and these are also of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the opening.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the hooks are very similar, as you can see: large, medium, and small; and there are also hooks with two curves in three ways; and some hooks have three curves, also in three ways; and others have two curves, or even just one curve, and they are also in three sizes; all these are necessary for their use.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The tip of these instruments is sharp, and there are some that do not cut through both sides, which tear the skin, because one does not sever the vein or nerve; and these insertions are blades placed in several ways, so that the patient does not lose blood when opening abscesses; and they are of three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see; and they should only be used on fleshy parts like legs, arms, breasts, wounds, and similar places; and one never makes a smaller instrument resembling a forceps, according to this form, to stop the flow of blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it should never be placed in places that heal poorly after cutting veins and arteries, and never according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never inflate the breasts of any man when they begin to be corrupted, as long as they appear like women's breasts; they remain ugly and swollen, and anyone who wishes to cure them must do so according to this form described in this line b until g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat and apply medicinal herbs with charred wine to the wound, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and treat it until it is healthy; if the breast dips downward, and becomes soft due to its size, just as in women, if it has two cuts, like splits, then one should hold onto the other at the end of each, so that the larger cut contains the smaller according to this form described in this line b to line g. Then scrape off the leather between the two edges, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment, until it heals; if it does not heal, or the incision has not been properly made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood flow, then you should fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive dressing, and leave it until it removes the fat and flesh, then treat it until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	from the abscesses of armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that come from beneath the armpits are hard scrofulous nodules or they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B to line G.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, apply a wound dressing of clean cotton, leaving it for another day, then remove all the cotton and continue with appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, then do it as we have said about cutting into scrofula, and if the wound opens, apply the fire cautery as we have mentioned before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When an artery ruptures and the tissue above it sears, many abscesses often form, and similarly, there is often a swollen vein with an abscess; and if one knows thus when it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and severe; and when you feel this in your limbs, it feels strange; and when it is due to the vein, it appears red and inflamed; and it is folly to treat such an abscess, especially when it is deep within joints and muscles and other places, and it is very great.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	You should seek iron cautery, and whoever is in charge should also be cautious, and for those with an artery close to the skin, make a cut from above the flesh down; then carefully sever the artery from its attachments just as you have been taught when extracting the two arteries within the temple. Then mark the space between the two cuts with an instrument until no pus remains, and treat the abscess; then apply the appropriate dressing while the wound is still infected; and care for any subsequent treatment as needed, until it heals. If the abscess is located alongside a vein, be sure to keep your hand over the entire area, then insert the needle from below the affected area, and pierce it through, forming a double thread, so that you can pull it from the other side; then bind the abscess as I have instructed, or tie the thread to one of the two ends. If you doubt whether the thread has completely detached, insert another needle into all the remaining parts of the abscess, just as with the first, and pull out a total of three threads; then remove the excess material until only the healthy tissue remains, and apply a moist cloth, followed by treatments and dressings until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	from the abscesses of nails
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly to abscesses in arteries and veins, nails can also develop abscesses when they are injured or subjected to excessive work, among other things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this occurs more frequently in joints and fingers where there are many articulations, which is a source of great abscesses, and their appearance resembles the color of the flesh, and they are in various forms filled with pain; and when they are pressed, the patient feels great pain, and it is not entirely whole like the heart, but remains in the center; and it moves well from all sides, neither advancing nor retreating, neither downwards nor upwards, and the one that is in the joints should not be covered with iron; perhaps it would cause contraction; and those on the head or forehead make the flesh splotchy.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, and it has a clipper, cut it at its base; and if it's large, suspend it with a hook, then scrape off the skin, remove the flesh, and stitch up the wound until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	Des grosses boces pendants" translates directly to "hanging large mouths
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	It never occurs in the belly alone, but elsewhere as well, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its appearance, it has subtle roots, and large droppings; and there are both small and very large ones; and I saw a man who had two or three funguses in his belly that were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had thin roots, and were constantly oozing with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I collected them and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 Z., and the work of incising is such that if you look at the patient, they are moist, and the color of the artel (joint) is pale and moist and of subtle root; if it sticks to a wide spatula, then perform fire cautery in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For cutting often brings too much blood loss, and if it weakens you, then hurry to cauterize; and if you see the patient afraid and anxious about the incision, take a well-made thread and bind the joint as we have said, leaving it for two days; then restrain it, and do not stop pulling the thread until it detaches the joint, without effort; and if the roots are thick, be afraid to cut them, especially in the abdomen, but you can still cut half of them, then cauterize so that it does not return. Then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the tissue which is of dark color and poor quality and full of pus.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess enlarged, and I will come to the treatment of the ulcer after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the wound is closed for too long.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the wound comes from cauterization of the flesh or a fracture of the bone, and it is on the belly and not in any of the bowels, as it happens with other ruptures, or of blood that cuts veins or arteries according to what is above, or of farts; and if it is due to the rupture through the bone and through the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of flesh, and is a small thing without pain, and has various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressed at its ends, it re-forms, and then returns, and sometimes it narrows, and widens greatly at the entrance of the bath and through hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing and opens well when pressed in the hand, without constraint; and if it is due to blood, it appears through these signs: a thick and hard abscess, inserted according to its quantity; and if it is due to windiness, it feels soft to the touch, and the severity is such that you must look to see if it is the blood of an artery, or a vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary, you must leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For in the case of abscesses, as I described in the chapter on veins and arteries, there is often doubt and fear, which can lead to death.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if it appears to be an intestinal or bowel issue, you must instruct the patient to keep their rectum relaxed and completely open; then make incisions around the abscess, stretching it straight, and cut across the entire width of the abscess; tie it firmly with a strong thread or sturdy silk string, making sure the intestines are not squeezed; then open the abscess while it is tied, and gently pull on the intestines; if you find them caught in the string, release them and bring the intestines out through the opening; if it's a bowel issue, take care at the anvil, cutting off excess tissue; if the artery or vein obstructs your work, move around it carefully, then take two needles and push them through in the shape of a cross that you made with your initial incision; pull the abscess apart three times with the needles, and if visible, remove the needles, leaving the abscess to heal on its own until it disappears, and treat the wound as necessary, completing the abscess treatment as we have said; then drain any blood or moisture you find, treat the area as appropriate, and close the wound.
dou chancre	A deep ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed in the previous section the appearances of chancre and how to treat it with medicine, and how to avoid the cure of iron; we say that chancre should be attacked in the early stages, and great caution should be taken when treating it, and they advise that when a chancre is located where it can be cut out like the one on the mammary gland, or the ankle, or similar places, it must all be removed when it is in its beginning; but when it is large and old, it is not appropriate to approach it, for I have never been able to heal any, nor has anyone else before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for the work when it is located where it can be removed as we have said, it is that you do not at any time purge the patient of black blood; then make it healthier if there is a visible fullness, and cut out the illness in the good place to perform the work; then pour on your poultices or chancre, and the head from all sides, and remove it from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow completely, and examine the wound with your hand or any object, and if the bleeding continues after the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the blood is stopped. Then apply another cure as long as it is healed.
de ydropisie	From hydropsie (a condition marked by excessive fluid accumulation
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have previously described the similarities of hydropsie (a condition marked by excessive fluid accumulation) and in what way the assembly of water is formed within it, the signs of each manifestation, and the cure that is carried out through medicine, and that which is cured with iron: only in this case; and one should not touch iron in these two manifestations: namely, tympanites and yposarche, as it is a mortal thing. Therefore, when you administer medicine to this manifestation of hydropsie called "eclites" by medicine, and the cure does not benefit, if the patient is weak or has another illness other than hydropsie, such as stomach distress or similar conditions; then do not touch iron, for there is doubt. And if you see the patient possesses strong vitality, and he only suffers from hydropsie alone, and is neither too young nor too old, then thus should you proceed: place the patient in a sitting position on your hands, and have the minister press the abdomen towards the lower part while expelling the water, then take the sharp spatula according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And make incisions from both parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Pierce with a point, but do not insert it so deeply that it reaches the intestines when pushed in, and do not let it burst; then observe if there is any droplet formation towards the intestines. It is necessary to make an incision through three-quarters of the bowel, directly below the armpit, and if the drops are due to a liver disease, make the incision on the left side of the armpit; but if it is due to the urinary bladder, it should be on the right side. Do not let the patient lie on the incision to avoid any excess fluid flowing to the weak point. Then cut through all the skin with an instrument, and the bladder, and gently press your hand against all the tissues between the skin and the underlying structures as if scraping with a fingernail or slightly around it; then pierce the bladder until the tissue becomes pale, which is the sign of blood vessels, and remove the instrument. This is the shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a delicate silver chain, thin as gold or bronze, and has one small opening in the center, three on one side, and two on the other; and the part is cut like a feather, which is the shape of the incision that scribes make to cut feathers.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top of it, there is a cavity, so that when the tool comes to the water, it sinks immediately onto the instrument; then empty half or a third of it, for if you empty more than is necessary at that time, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit into the weapon, or he may lose his palm, or approach death; but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the sick person suggest, and his pulses; then take up the instrument and hold back the water, which is now retained by the stop that closes the opening on the side we spoke about, then pierce in this manner; then repeat the process the next day, if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw out a small quantity of blood; do this every day, and be careful not to let any water remain for too long.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much water, whether through the cure of a burial or hot sand, or by sweating or a bath or in the sun, and it turns to drinking; and apply dry medicines until it is healed, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after draining the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	from the obstruction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without an opening in the penis, or if the opening is small, or it is not properly positioned.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary at once that he does not pierce all the subtle spatulum according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then open the subtle hole in the bladder and hold it closed for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the closure so he can urinate, and then put it back; and sometimes it is not necessary at all, because the force of the urine will not allow you to keep it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the hole is small, it is treated with a gentle closure of the bladder, as we have said, so it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the rupture in their place are blighted, because none are born with a rupture at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they raise their penis; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot come up to the bladder, and this is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method for performing it is that the patient lies on their stomach, then the penis is stretched and lifted up as much as a quill, so that the rupture can be made in the right place; and beware of the discharge of blood which comes many times, and if it occurs, stop it from those who stop the bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	from the pus of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often, this affliction appears on the penis, and it manifests in a disagreeable manner; there are both malignant and benign cases. You must prick them gently with a needle, drain them, and then clean and bandage them with moist cotton in an Egyptian ointment. Then apply the healing ointment as needed until they heal.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	If the affliction is malignant, with pus and an unpleasant odor, it requires cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have achieved it, and if the splint is in a sleeping state, with some part within the flesh and some part outside, then you must first remove the splint that is inside; and when it is dried, then treat the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, unless you are certain about the condition of the splint that it is not broken, it will turn black and corrupt in the bone and joint; then it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupt, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour from crushed red apples and times, and continue to treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery helps in two ways: that is to say, for the bleeding and for the corruption. If the tip of the knife is rotten and withdrawn, it is necessary to push or guide the knife with a plug of cloth, and let the patient urinate; and if the hair at the top of the penis is dry on those who have never been circumcised, or there is a wound or abscess, then you must scrape it with a sharp instrument until the strings are loosened, and free the part of the penis from all sides. And if it is difficult to decide how to do this, it is necessary to scrape it with a certain spoon-like instrument from the top of the penis and the scrotum; then gently separate them, and place a thin, moist linen cloth on it in cold water so that it does not dry out directly.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a dislocation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will, especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best and lightest work for their healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children, as they do not practice it in their laws, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen most of the masters and elders who practiced circumcision in those days, strong and skilled, using an entirely new instrument; it was customary for them to cut one cord while preserving the other, or perhaps they would remove both at once.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or she returns with double pain, and the point of the limb is not assured during washing, and perhaps the iron escapes and the wound is corrupted, and the work is ruined, and often they heal in such a way that no further washing is needed, and I wish it so.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the washing done with force, I have found the benefit of experimentation, for the forces cut just as well from above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, if the cut is even in all parts; but ensure the thread is well twisted around the skin; and make the first operation in such a way that the child, if it understands, thinks that you are only tightening the thread around the stick and then making it tremble in every possible way; then straighten it between your hands and spread the forces between your hands or beneath your feet so that the boy does not see them, nor any of the instruments. Then pull your hand away from the stick and blow on it, pulling it upward until the end of the stick is completely free; then wash it well with the dirt that is collected on it, tie a double knot around the wound, then tie it to another thread below, keeping two fingers on the second tie at the pouch and the proper index, then cut between the two threads, then lift the heart gently and pull the end of the stick; let the blood flow slowly, for it is curative. Then apply powder above and below, covering it with a gluey strip from half an egg cooked in rose water, mixed with good rose oil and fresh herbs, and leave it until the next day, treating it in another way as long as it heals.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of purification is as follows: both shoulders should be held and cut, and the shoulder blades should also be large and equally balanced.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in purification is when the veins escape during incision; then you must extend your finger to press them, so that they do not form an abscess; and treat it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, use tweezers and then treat it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they exceed three days, and the skin under the arrow is swollen, leave it until the abscess has healed, and gently peel off the wound; treat it as best you can, and be careful to avoid the arrow's tip, and there will be no harm done.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the wound suddenly caused by gunpowder, which we have spoken of in treating about powders, and if one takes too much care beyond measure, and it goes above, then it will not harm; treat it therefore, as we have said, while it is clean.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to an obstruction such as a stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or a newborn, or similar conditions, as we have discussed in the previous section. If the urine cannot be released and you notice retention caused by a stone in the bladder or neck, it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees; pressure should then be applied to his lower back, and he should be made to extend his abdomen upwards, towards the small of his back, thereby constricting the neck of the bladder around the stone. This action will often cause the urine to flow. If, however, this does not work, and the patient experiences severe pain, a syringe (a device consisting of a tube with a needle at one end) should be used to extract the urine as quickly as possible. The syringe should be made of thin, light silver, roughly 10.5 cm long, and easy to handle.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the method of urination is as follows: take a double thread, tie one end to a ball of wool or cotton, and insert the thread into the syringe; cut off the excess wool and insert it up to the top of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and place the patient on a bed. Elevate the bladder and the urethra with moist oil and olive oil and still water; gently insert the syringe into the urethra until it reaches the root of the urethra, then double it over towards the opening. Insert the syringe in front up to just before the bladder, let the patient feel the urine flowing out until it empties, and if it does not follow this order properly because the direction of the thread is twisted; cut off the thread at each knot of wool, and the urine will follow the thread, then pull it out and drain the urine. Repeat the syringe until the bladder is empty and relieve the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	From the illnesses of the bladder.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorching or inflammation comes to the bladder, due to putrefaction gathered therein, you should view it as a distillation of waters and medications. This is done with an instrument called a "clepsydre", and its form is thus:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is sealed, and if it has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see; the lever's edge by which the medicine cuts so well the sensation without addition, if one can drain the moisture and push as necessary. And when you pour your medicines into the bladder, place the head of the instrument in the moisture and draw out gently the substance within; then pull the lever firmly towards itself. The moisture will follow the lever into the bladder immediately, that the patient may feel it; and this is the form of a delicate enema by which one enemas the bladder: thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or gold, and the wound is deeper; then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you wish to use for enema, tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat this moisture over fire; then insert the enema into the rectum, and press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make it circular, and pierce it roundly; then thread a strong string through these holes, assemble the circle as one assembles a dal, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it with the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed the methods of treating stones and their extraction along with various medicinal practices; I have explained the distinction between stones that cause rain and all the signs, and in which cases one should perform surgery; concerning the bladder and the penis, I will now clearly and succinctly tell you.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign of acute urinary retention, similar to the clarity of water; it opens the urethra and greatly pains the patient, often repeating itself, and then becoming chronic; and it attacks the foundations [of health]. The treatment for children up to four years old is light, but much more difficult in the case of the elderly, and is a middle ground for those between youth and old age; the cure is lighter for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with a cleanse bath, in order to draw out all impurities from the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often gets stuck while trying to pass the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and upright them, moving them away from the body so that the stone descends completely into the bladder, without getting stuck in the upper part; then place him between your hands with his legs away from his hips, so that the bladder is tilted downward; then search and touch inside. If you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out at the touch, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, and if the patient is weak, use your middle finger, and if they are young and robust, press down on their lower back, grasp the stone, and when you feel it against your finger, apply pressure upwards from the outside or where you see the cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the helper to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to extend their right hand upwards, and with their left hand, remove the skin covering the stones in the area where the cut is made; then use the spatula to completely remove it, forming as follows:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make an incision between what is between the cheeks and the foundation, not in the middle but on the side of the left navel; let it be straight on the stone, and your fingers should always rest on the foundation, and cut through so that it is wide enough to prevent sticking, but narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure from the finger resting on the foundation will cause it to come out easily; and know that there are stones with angles and margins: if they are stuck, they must be carefully removed; and if there is one beneath, similar to a spearhead or curve, whose passage is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	If there are angles and margins in the stone, make the cut larger; and if it does not come out, you should use pliers that are similar to a file at the tip, so as to extract the stone without letting it escape; or you can insert a thin curved instrument at the tip; and if you cannot do this, open the wound wider and, if necessary, pull with vitriole; and if there is more than one stone, first extract the largest one from the urethra, then cut, then pull it out, and afterwards the smaller ones.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, they should cut it out carefully, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things can happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine returns again through the wound that the muscles cannot close; but nevertheless, make every effort to extract it, either with tweezers or by scraping, as long as you treat it in pieces. And when you have completed your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, tighten it, and place a moist cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then dress the patient's neck, and do not loosen the bandage for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, if a lot of warm oil and water arise from the joint, then apply healing ointment and basil-ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses and corrosion arise in the wound, and congealings of blood in the bladder, and retention of urine causes it to flow out with difficulty: then press your finger into the wound and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and cause decay; then cleanse the wound with water and fire and heal it in every way you can, until it is healed; and it is necessary that during all treatments, you bind both thighs together and apply medicines to the joint.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is in a urethral channel, and stuck together, and urine cannot pass; then if you treat it as I say, cutting it many times, that will excuse the cutting through this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tested it thusly.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take the iron at the front according to this form, and be sure it is inserted into three pieces of wood:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the urethra away from the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then gently push the drill into the urethra until it reaches the stone, and turn the drill in your hand slowly against the stone from all sides until you can pierce the stone; soon urine will come out, and press your hand on what is remaining of the stone inside the urethra.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is sometimes broken and jumps out with urine, and the wound is infected; and if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders, then hold the stone from below and another from above, then make the stick into a lever against the stone between the two edges, then pull it out forcefully, loosen the bond, and clean the frozen blood in the wound; and cure it as long as it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	Of women's stone" (a common term for kidney stones)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It is rare that a stone occurs in women, and if it does occur, the cure is difficult, and it is hindered by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; the second is that it is not possible to find a woman well-versed who knows how to uncover herself properly, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of healing; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman's body is more hard than that of the man, so it must be cut deeper, and great fear is involved. And if necessity calls for it, it is right to engage a midwife well-versed in this matter, and look carefully for one who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command regarding the examination of the stone; and pay much attention to whether that woman is a virgin. Then she must push her finger into the base and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she should force it down under her thumb and press her left hand on the swollen bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she feels it, she must move the stone gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to the root of the thigh; then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the cone, where it is moved and appears, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her leg above or below the stone, or make a small incision first. Then press the rat (probably referring to a lever or tool) against the wound until you feel the stone coming out as far as it can go, and know that there are many types of stones: small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with ridges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know these similarities, you will know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	If the wound does not heal, apply crushed vitriol and keep it for an hour until the wound is cleansed; then return to your task, as long as the stone remains firm, and have the tools I told you for removing stones from humans to assist you in your work; if the wound persists, and it's an arterial cut, sprinkle powder on the wound and press with tenes and belts, and don't repeat this, leaving the stone and not pulling it out, unless by chance the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the eyes opened, return to your task, as long as the stone remains firm.
de hernie carnouse	from herniated cartilage
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Rameous water is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white matter, which is detached from the heart of things, containing the soul; and it is called "white matter," and never properly part of the soul's fabric, if one considers that this is another thing; and it is the thin skin of the soul between the white matter we have mentioned; and this does not occur spontaneously.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this white matter is due to weakness, which affects the limbs, and that material is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never does it come from percussion on the joints, and this moisture takes many forms: it can be yellowish, or devoid of redness, or black, or white watery, and so on; and these are signs to recognize this gathering, for if it is white as we have said, then the abscesses are bright red, very long in shape like a serpent, and do not open the joints because they are filled with moisture.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	If there is moisture in the flesh itself, then the abscesses are bright red with a part of the effusion, and because of this, one thinks it is another infection; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white substance, it smells quite well; so when you want to know the color of the moisture, try to feel all over the affected area, as its shape has been described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after, judge of those who are inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to their ability and the replenishment of their body; then place them on their back, on something slightly elevated, and cover them with many sheets; then have them sit on their left side, and instruct the healer to sit at their right, and extend the staff to one of the two ribs near the heart of the chest; then take the scalpel, and cut the skin of the ribcage from the long end to the elbow, and make the incision completely straight by examining the skin of the ribcage until it reaches a satisfying white, and carefully remove the flesh according to the patient's ability; then punch the fabric plain with water at a wide opening, and extract all the water, and then apply your bandages, and pull the fabric upward; and do not touch the heart of the ribs, but only the fabric; cut around it carefully, subtly, than if you do not cut it cleanly, the water will return; and if the air escapes from your work, put it back in its place when you have completed the fabric work; then sew together the two books of the ribcage with a stitch, and treat it as other wounds, until they are healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the heart corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you hold the vessels that are suspended, doubtful of the outflow of blood; then open the coccyx throughout the suspension, extract the heart, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the blood is collected in two parts, knowing that these are two branches, open the other part just as you did with the first, then drain the blood, and apply a clean moistened lint cloth with rose oil to the wound; and place another moistened linen cloth with wine and oil, and put the two coctions on top of it, and cover them with doubly-lined cloths, and bind it securely according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloth strips, and prepare them from woolen rags according to this form, and join them together by sewing in the groin of the trousers, one strip covering the thigh from the base up to the back, and the other on the palm side; then sew the third strip over both these, forming a loop at the back of the trousers. Never use this ramage (herbal preparation) as cautery in place of iron, but rather take a sharp cautery instrument, pierce through the skin, and burn it with this delicate cautery hot:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	Cut it in any way you can, as long as everything is removed; be careful that the fire does not touch the egg (or other sensitive area), and know that this method is safer; move gently to avoid blood clots or complications from surgery; and if anything goes against you, whether it's an abscess or blood clot or another issue, treat what's going against you as described above.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its terribleness, then apply a perforation as I have said, and make certain by the signs that we have mentioned that ramice aquouse (a specific tool) is at hand; therefore, place the patient in a raised position, since the abscess is located beneath the skin, deep within the whole wound. Make the incision long through the body, and ensure the wound is wide enough for all the pus to drain. Then apply cotton to the wound and bind it, allowing the remaining pus to drain, then treat the wound until it heals; and if a clean cloth does not allow the pus to escape from the wound's opening, then insert a needle or the instrument used to treat water retention, as shown before. Open the wound wider and know that the pus will return and be collected after six months or so, and when it collects as before, in this way the patient's condition will improve each day.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the abscess of the hairs
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Knowing that in this section there are various causes of great danger, it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone; and I will tell you the work and the signs of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say, therefore, that many abscesses come where there is hair; and most often in the hairs; and this is in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is known from the excessive acridity and fever that spreads to the hairs, or from percussion; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin; it does not cause pain, and it is a serious abscess; and sometimes there are several abscesses that are hard, pale, dark in color, and never come from new arteries or veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is through no fault of an artery, if it is blocked by the arrangement of a hot abscess when you press on it with your hands; and it is not appropriate that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is afflicted by a swelling of the veins is blocked due to the arrangement of their expression when touched by the fingers, and can have an incision made in this similarity, and in other parts; and it is to remove the heart of the clots, then there is warmth at the top, and treat the pain strongly with white medicine, and release the suspension from all parts of the clot.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the clot is already solid with these means, then it is necessary that you treat and remove the clot; and if it is hard to the touch, or within the veins, it is necessary that you release all of this tension, and treat it thoroughly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the source of the pain is behind, it is necessary that you remove it entirely, and extract the foreign body, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is done, immediately apply a moist linen cloth with rose oil and wine to the wound, and then use other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the cowshed
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a similar covering like a borion, with the swelling of the glands, and it makes the patient suffer greatly; and the cure for this illness is as pressing and fearful as the one mentioned before, yet we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You should place the patient in a comfortable position, then apply a suspending bandage to the affected limb, extending it from the fingers or toes to the nearest joint, and stretch it tightly; then, using a broad, sharp spatula, cut through the skin and tissue in a transverse direction until they are exposed, and scrape away from each side as we have said during the extraction of arteries inside the temples; then insert an needle where there is a double thread, and secure it to the first joint where the tendon is attached, and likewise to the other end; then cut them evenly straight according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture; finally, treat the wound as you would others, so that no vessel is damaged; for by this method there will be no harm, and all joints will receive blood flow, so it is necessary to stretch the tendons over all the joints, so that the eye does not lose its nourishment due to cutting of the vessels, and they heal and can aid themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	from the dislocation of the shoulder joint
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The cure for this condition is through incision or extension at the site of dislocation, allowing the intestines to descend from that rupture into one of the openings; and this dislocation occurs either in the shoulder joint or in the abdomen in the region of the angles, causing the intestines to move from that rupture to one of the openings. This dislocation results from either a blow, a jump, shouting, lifting a heavy weight, or similar actions; and its signs are as follows: it happens little by little over a long period, rather than suddenly, and the abscess is evenly distributed up to the very edge, since the dislocation pushes the intestines forward.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the incision that a sudden pain arises at the beginning, and various abscesses appear beneath the skin, close to the bone, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the flow of blood from the syphilis.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never drain the abscess with the intestine, but keep it closed, causing great pain to the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these poor treatments with iron, for which one must be careful to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method of the procedure is that you command the patient to realign the intestine in his hand within the wound if he can; then gently hold it between your fingers and lift the thigh. Then extend the heart above, and cut all the skin from the length of the tail. Then pinch the tail between your thumbs, and extend the white skin on top with your left hand, and lift the testicle towards the stomach. Command the assistant to stretch the testicle upwards and free what is stuck behind the ligament; if you find any part of the intestine or hard white skin still trapped, then insert it back into the abdomen. Take a needle with a thick thread made from X threads, and insert it into the rear part of the white skin after the skin of the thigh; then cut the testicles that appear through the threads until there are IIII threads left. Arrange them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the white skin we previously mentioned, which is beneath the skin of the thighs, with a strong ligature of II parts. Envolve the testicles with the thread and tie them together so that no vessel that nourishes them can enter, and the abscess does not come back; then make another ligature with the first long ligature, two threads from it, leaving one part of the white skin beneath the heart of the testicle as long as a finger. And after all this, do the rest according to the curvature that the testicle has; then cut the part below the thigh's skin until it is smooth and bow-shaped, as we have previously mentioned. Then apply moist wool to the wound and dress it, and use the ligature that we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never should the white scar be cauterized, as we have said, after the incision, out of fear of further bloodletting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, leaving the wound open until it heals by itself; and if it takes time to heal, it can be helped with hot water, and we have said, as long as it needs; then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia (fleshy protrusion)
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, never should anyone attempt to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is made like a rivet that joins together the bone, in such a way as you tie the vessels after cutting them slightly on the inside and then cure the abscess of him who opens, until the vessels stop bleeding; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No rupture should occur without opening the veins as we have said, and draining them; nor should any intestines be exposed, and if they are, it is a sign of danger, and repair must be done every hour; nevertheless, if it lingers too long at this stage, believing it to be a wound or abscess, until the intestines drain; and this happens due to the expansion of the syphac (abscess) which is located near the veins, as it expands then softens and opens the vein; and the cure for this, as we have previously said, is cautery, and never by iron in this manner: and thus, the patient should lie on his back with his hands beneath him, then cut the vein of the rupture with a sharp blade according to its width; remove the syphac located below the skin with the usual tool, then take the rake and place it over the exposed part of the syphac; press it firmly into the abdomen, then cut both parts of the syphac on top of the rake's handle, and stitch them closed; then remove the rake, and do not drain or expand the abscess in any way, as I have previously explained regarding the cure for intestinal ruptures; then treat it with wound dressing.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you treat the wounds, if they become contaminated and the wound heals, as long as it is clean.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The treatment is difficult, and it has no appearance in the fracture, but the cauterization moves on this side, and is closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the tough skin of the limbs
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often, the skin of the limbs is softened in no one person, because the muscles inside are relaxed, and it is easy to see. When one wishes to treat it, one must lay the patient on their back and cut the soft skin at the site of the muscle; then bring together the two edges with a single stitch or, more securely, three stitches; then cut between the stitches and treat the wound as other wounds, until it heals, and draw out the thread.
dou chastrement	This treatise" 
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You know that castration is outlawed in our law, and for that reason I would not speak of it in this book; however, there are two reasons why it is necessary: one is that you should be able to answer knowledgeably when asked about it, and provide the appropriate treatment; and the other is that we often need to castrate certain animals to aid us, such as goats, sheep, cats, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say, therefore, that castration is done in two ways: either by pulling or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method where we pull, we should immerse the animal in hot water until the testicles are softened and relaxed; then with your hand, grasp them firmly as they return to their normal state and you no longer feel any sensation.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	From the operation of castration: You must restrain the animal and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspending string, and cut each testicle at the scrotum, when you have well sliced them; leave no drop of blood or the subtile blood that is on the vessels; and this method of castration differs from that which is done by attraction, because at attraction, by chance, something of the testicles may remain, causing the animal to desire lust; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	A hermaphrodite is according to two manners in men: one such that between the two testicles appears also like the form of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and never shortens the urethra.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another way is for women; it has a protrusion on the wrist as well as two fingers.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for thirst and hunger is to remove all the adjusted characteristics, and heal it like other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of the penis, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the goiter
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Goiter is an adjusted characteristic on the natural part, so severe it's unattractive; and no woman can bear it as much as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you hold the excess of the tendon in your hand or with pincers, and cut it lightly; do not cut too deeply, so that no further bleeding occurs, until the cure takes effect; and for another condition that appears at the opening of the wound, apply and use it, and perhaps it will fly out, and it resembles a cow, and for this reason they call it in old times "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you cut it, as we said about the tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erroneous is the judgment when one does not correctly perceive the nature of women, or if the wound is small; it is either innate by birth or accidental due to illness that occurs; or it is caused by a tight fit, or some subtle or specific pain, and it happens in any part - front, side, back, or wherever; and it affects conception, childbirth, and perhaps even the flowers to be born; knowledge of these things comes from observing the signs.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the symptoms are soon apparent, whether to your touch or at a distance.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle pain and the symptoms are soon apparent, act quickly: place both your index fingers together, have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread apart; then form both hands into fists until the subtle pain disappears, and so the symptom vanishes. Then take wool, dampen it in oil, and place it over the affected area, having the woman rest on each side every day so she cannot move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if it is hard and rough, you must cut it with a scraper resembling a holly leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is from heat, suspend it at the joint and cut it; have medicines that stop blood flow, such as elderberry, dragon's blood, incense, in abundance; then apply a wide bandage so that the wound cannot close; and thus keep it for a long time, and then apply a dry linen dressing; and continue other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when the swelling comes from cold, it must be covered in this manner; if it is an abscessed swelling, it must be treated accordingly.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that has worsened in the wound, one must not attempt to treat it with fire.
des emorroides	hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that, without proper care, can become chronic. In this division, we have previously discussed the similarities and signs, and I will now describe those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and their complications, when they are completely in the anus and do not cause pain, can only be treated properly with heat.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the sea, one can feel, are those who can heal.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then stretch her legs with pliers and cut into her roots, then sprinkle medicinal powders to stop blood, such as sage and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water. And when the bleeding stops, make a decoction of sumac and bark from pomegranates and gall and similar things, and then take flour and confit it with honey and herbs, and make an emplaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it becomes soaked, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If that does not work, apply cupping glasses on the back and around the mammary area without causing injury; then take linen and soak it in juice of plantain or hazelnut with old wine, and apply to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has subsided, keep the wound clean until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles an open wound, so it must be covered as I have said in the previous text; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	from the abscess of the mare's uterus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses occur in the mare's uterus, such as chancres, old abscesses, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, among others, as mentioned in the previous section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I discuss in this treatment the hot abscess that occurs in the mare's uterus, which is not a true abscess but rather a swelling; and if you observe the effect of heat, consider whether the abscesses are red and hot at their onset, and full of feverish pus, and turn red, as you can see.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hasten to pierce, but let the patient suffer until the pain is relieved; then place the ailing person in a reclining position, with two small pillows where he bends and leans on his back, gathering his feet towards the affected leg; spread his knees wide apart, placing his arms below his knees and binding them firmly with a good bandage. Then insert the blade on the right side, and use the instrument to open the wound, from which this shape will emerge. And it is important that when you insert the instrument, you first test the depth of the wound, so that what enters from the instrument does not go further than necessary, and does not harm the patient; if the instrument is too large, it should be covered with cloth to prevent it from causing pain, and the instrument itself should be placed on top.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens and one makes it with a gentle hand, if necessary cover the wound with a sponge or a piece of cloth dipped in rose oil or dry green oil; place the bandage deeply into the wound at the margin of the abscess, and put over the abscess and the surrounding joint a clean moistened lint soaked in boiled almond milk or chamomile; then treat after this for two days with ointment coming to pass, until it is healed; and never raise up the abscess or the wound by a cleansing enema of water and honey, nor of water and extracts of lily roots and long-soaked aristoloche; then return to treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is healed in the joint, it is necessary to avoid heating with iron, but treat it as we have said in the previous section.
de l’enfantement	From childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Skill is first in the dance, knowing the figure of natural childbirth, and its signs are when you see the woman struggling down, and she desires to smell the air: then hasten for the child to be born; then know that these children come according to nature, and are delivered head first, and secondarily with him; and when you see these signs, gently press her belly, so that the child is born soon; for when it descends on its head, it helps him deliver, and the mother gives birth to her superfluities through proper cleansing; and this one who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes upon its feet, and strikes the body here or there, or the hands, or comes upon the belly or back, and turns by chance upon its neck, or takes other bad forms; so it is necessary that he who deals with it be wise and subtle in these matters, and guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the forms how he should help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the evil spirit comes upon his head through natural causes, and a woman gives birth badly, and her virtue is weak, then she should sit on a saddle, or women should hold her; and take out of the oil or fennel seed cooked, and then apply the ball between her two fingers, in the shape as mentioned below:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and cut through the second joint, and saw off his finger as far as the moisture that is stuck in it; and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, it is necessary to wash the woman with fennel seed mucilage mixed with sesame oil; then make her cough and sneeze from a position of comfort, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will come.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	If both hands are stuck out, it is necessary to reset them little by little; and if they still cannot enter, place the woman on a seat and raise her feet up; then remove the seat from the ground and have the woman lie down, so that she does not try to get up; and if her hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, cut off the hand at the joint that has been previously placed, extract the child, and reset it properly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes on its feet, it should be pushed upwards, and then pulled back little by little until it is even; then press on the feet and extend them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it can jump up to the ankles, under command press down, and make it sneeze from its condition; if it jumps further, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not respond as we have said, pull back little by little until it is according to its natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it becomes slightly better.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not improve as we have said, take some musk, and oil of rose, and gum resin, and grind them all in a mortar; then apply this remedy to the woman's vagina both inside and out, and let her sit in warm water reaching down to her ribs; when she is moistened, put on a collar of myrrh and leave it for an hour. Then have her sit on a seat, and make her sneeze, and press her mouth and nose, and gently massage her abdomen, as the child will now come out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the birth of the child on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, he moves his hands little by little; then he sits up on his collarbone, and his feet hang down, and he lies on his side; and he bends his hands little by little, then takes hold of his hands on his stomach, and removes the cushions from beneath him, until he is completely relaxed downwards; and if the child does not cry, he takes his feet and moves them, then moves his stomach upwards, and turns his hands inside out; and gently handles the child little by little; and tells the woman to press herself as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the birth of the child who comes out with a large hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I know how to bring the hand back: if it cannot be brought back, one must raise the woman and let her rest; if she cannot stand, lay her down on her side and support her legs; then apply the musk as I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then study how to bring the hand back; deliver the child according to its natural position, make it sneeze, and tell it to push until the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the birth of the child on its mother's lap, with its hands spread and its face turned towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I want the patient to hold his hand, then twist it little by little and gently; and when it is even, he should apply a light, muscly compress of wool and oil, as we have said, then instruct him that it move little by little; and when you have done this, let it rest on a pillow, and command it to press; and make the patient sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner, do all of the following:
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it progresses in this manner, if the seconding (unclear term) sticks to your finger, drain the moisture; and if it gets caught on its face or neck, cut it from the edge so it is not trapped, and let the child breathe; then place the baby inside, as you have learned it should be, and instruct the woman to sneeze several times. Then gently pull.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the origin of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Knowing that twins are born many times, and never three or four at once; this is not a strange thing, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	These are strange things, and they do not live, they have no name; I know that they are multiplied, and their fate is in the will of him who divides them, who is bound to the womb; and they never emerge as naturally as one single child, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they emerge painfully, as the cure has been said, and there are subtle joints, making the process slow and gentle, doing what is necessary for their safe delivery.
de plusors enfans	from many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	They are never formed in the womb I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII or more up to XV, and they are all shaped like a child according to the measurement of its wise form, and it is necessary that the midwife knows all this, for by chance, something similar may happen; so do as is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you cure a woman who has suffered the death of a child in her womb, as I have said in the previous division, and there is no expulsion, and you are compelled to use manual force; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound constitution and has no fear or concern over the death; she should be placed on her back, with her feet inclined downwards and legs raised. The midwife should apply a mixture of two parts, or keep her in bed so that she is not subjected to the downward pull of the child. Then, she should gently rub the woman's mouth with moist eye drops prepared from fennec and fenugreek seeds, and then anoint the perineum with these oils and eye drops. Then, she should apply gentle pressure, and if necessary, insert fingers at suitable angles so that the head of the child descends; place the finger in her vagina, either in her own orifice, or her labia, or mouth, or hard palate, or under her beard, or in her vulva, or near her anus, and press gently until the head is free. If the descent is complete, insert a finger and hold it there while she bears down with her middle finger; this will prevent any tearing. It is important that she grasps the finger with her right hand and places the index finger of her left hand between them, then applies gentle pressure with her entire hand, keeping it in place until the delivery is complete, and the vagina becomes empty. This is the shape of the finger:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then find another joint, where you need it most, so that the extraction is even; and then they move equally from one side to the other to be able to dislocate, and this joint becomes sharpened to hold its position, as follows:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains stuck, apply no oil to any of its sides, but push it into that part, and pull the other part; and if nothing comes out, place this joint higher up on the limb, and do this until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes forward before the other and it cannot return due to tightness, you should wrap it with a drape until it completely straightens; then cut at the joint of the foot or the knee, and do the same for the other hand, and have both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and stuck in the birth canal, it is necessary to insert the spiny spatula between your fingers, and move the head, extracting the water; or you can use the instrument called 'almidach', from which the form comes with the tools of this chapter, and thus do the same for a child with a large natural head; then carefully pull the bones with pincers, and if the head emerges but the moisture remains in the canal, break it off piece by piece as you can; and if it is swollen in the abdomen or under the ribs, pierce it until the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the disease is in its feet, it has a light pull, and the direction towards the opening of the wound is gentle.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is in the belly or the bowels, it is necessary to pull it with the drape wrapped around the hand; and make an incision on the belly or the bowels, as much as the moisture that is there allows; and if the other members are broken and the feces remain, he should press his hand from the wound towards the mouth of the wound, and pull it out; then he can use a hook or a forceps to extract it; and if the mouth of the wound is constricted due to the heat of the abscess that has formed, it is not appropriate to work on it, but rather to apply moist and greasy substances; and apply poultices, and immerse in soft water that softens and moisturizes.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the dislocated joint is on his side, and you can put it back even, just as we have said for a living child; and if it cannot be moved, then treat it in parts, and leave nothing of the dislocation.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, apply what we have said for abscesses that come near the wound; and if bleeding occurs, it should be treated with cold water, and other remedies should be applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose stomach had been cut open and a child had been removed, then another was cut open on that same wound, and the other one was saved.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, there comes a abscess in the cheek, and it swells so much that it opens, and begins to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called upon for treatment, and I thought for a long time, but could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong plaster, and an bone came out, and after a few days, others followed.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because this belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought this was a bone from a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound and found a bone in my hand, as long as the woman was in the best condition; and the woman remained in that state for a long time, and then a little bow-shaped part of the bone emerged from its place; and I have never remembered this chapter being written except because, when a master encounters something strange, they know how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the wife back to her place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	After this comes the form of a press, with which books are bound; and at its turn to the second part, to the two threads.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle in their tightening, and made of ebony or box; the mouth should be wide enough, and the margin of the trees, one palm and a half long; and both sides of this same horn should have a firm adjustment, about half a palm long, or a little bit more; and this adjustment is inserted into the mare's mouth to open it when turning the horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling pliers; it will have two sides, as you can see, one palm long and two fingers wide. When opening the mare with all the instrument, make the woman lie down on her side, with her feet apart and legs open. Then adjust both sides firmly into the mare's mouth and hold the base of the instrument between her thighs; then operate your hand over the entire instrument, just as you did with the pliers, until the opening in the mare's mouth is wide enough for what she needs.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	The surgical instruments are all sorts and have many similarities; and when you have made them appear clear to the eye, then the work is done faster, and it requires greater skill for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not disregard the instrument even if you have not made it clear, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second stage of labor is reached, if it is necessary to retain the child, you should instruct the patient to hold her breath and then force a sneeze, while holding her hands to her mouth and nose; and if she does this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If no, then take I a pot and make I an aperture or cover, and put therein herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calament, rue, anis, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over fire; then place one end of the pot or aperture into the wound, and the other at its opening, and hold it until the vapors go inside the wound; then make the patient sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second treatment fails.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if after this treatment, the wound remains and is not healed, instruct the patient to moisten their left hand with sesame oil or alder mucilage, then place it in nature (the air or environment), and want a second treatment. And when they find it, press and stretch it little by little straightening, so that the wound does not open during extraction; but they should move it slightly to the right and left, and then extract it. It will come out and depart.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the wound is tightly closed, we have said the remedy of sneezing and herb fumigation; and if it does not respond to all that we have said, be careful not to follow these remedies; but it is necessary that he who has a wound in the mouth, ties it to the woman's thigh, then cleanses it with a four-ingredient ointment; after which it will heal and leave, but nevertheless, if it opens again, there will be a bad odor in the stomach and on the head, and the patient will become worse.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	It is therefore necessary to use appropriate fumigations: none of the ancients have tried fumigation with arugula and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one cauterizes the woman to prevent the flow of blood and the discharge is this one.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it resembles a glass tube, and one places the narrow end naturally in the wound, while the wider end is held over the fire; and the smoke should rise from the charcoal until it is completely consumed, then another one is started.
de percier lou fondement	to drill into the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not had their foundation drilled, but instead have a weak spot covered by thin skin: therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to perceive this weak spot with her finger and not pierce it with anything sharp, and protect it so that she does not touch it; then she should apply a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not return, if you insert or perforate a plug of cotton, and leave it there for days, and it has to be removed when the wound wants to heal.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And this sudden stopping of the wound or abscess should never be allowed; it is necessary to cover this stoppage, whether it is cured as we have said with the plug of cotton.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from its origin
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that originate from below the fundament are larger and more serious than those that arise from above, or in the space between the two parts, if it is a fistula or several; and when this nodulation has been present for a long time, if it opens up, and still emits white, moist, or subtle pus, these fistulas do not heal; and they are known because there is discharge or flatulence when the patient evacuates, and sometimes they burst open.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if the ulcers perforate to the bladder, and to half of the penis; and they reach to the joint of the thigh, and to the root of the cow (leg).
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus, you recognize the fistula that is not present (or open), and it is necessary to insert your index finger into the anus and push a thin needle made of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has curvature, and you insert a thin plug or a horsehair as far as you feel it in your hand, and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of pus or wind as we have said, then know that it does not perforate; be quick to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula persists up to the bladder or up to the urethra, if it bleeds while urinating and cannot be healed with medications.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is located near the hip joint, then the veins are close to the surface; if there is no curvature or sudden onset of pain around it, and it persists, neither medicine nor any ointment helps; and in these persistent fistulas, there is no cure but labor, and vanity on the part of ignorant people who try to treat them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the case where it is not persistent and old, there is hope for healing with fire, as I have experienced, and the patient lies on their back between your hands; they bend their legs up to their hips, and their hips are inclined towards their belly; then draw a tent-like shape with an arrow, or a curve if there is curvature, as long as you know where the vein originates.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain throughout his body, it is necessary that you press your index finger into his palm, and then he will feel where the pulse is beating; whether you feel it between your thumb and forefinger or in your wrist, know that it is present; if not, it cannot be treated.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	Despite this, no one can be completely cured, but progress is possible; and the aid that is provided consists in applying a gentle cautery according to the extent of the fistula, as mentioned above; it should be done hot all around the fistula until it comes out at the base; and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred areas have healed, which resemble the quill of a bird's eye; then apply moist compresses until the wound is completely sealed, and then proceed with treatment using ointments that promote healing and close the wound.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is in this state, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this cannot be, then he cannot be cured; and if a thread enters between his fingers or the nail bed, and does not pierce through to the flesh, place a thick covering of wool or similar material between your two fingers and where you see the fissure near the covering; when the pain from the beginning of the fissure subsides, remove it before the thread, and then cauterize after, as much as possible towards the tip of the finger; and the thread will be released and healed. Then beware of those evil threads that seem like a bird's feather, and do not delay in treating them.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pain persists, and a cut occurs between you and the task, cauterize it with fire or strong medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cautery combines two beneficial things: namely, the burning of these prepared materials, and the drawing out of blood and moisture; then, for moist wounds, apply butter or crushed herbs until the heat softens the burnt skin; finally, treat the wound with hot compresses and dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not relapse.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula appears all the way to the bottom of the foundation, and it is removed from the body, if you press down on its root or foundation, it will close up again.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tentation and between it is the web or the syph or the char, or it is about to pierce, unless there is no other way of hope and salvation, through one of the three means: you cauterize it as we have said, or cut it all the way to the bottom, or if you can gently pry it open and treat it as before; but be careful not to go too deep, so as not to remove the covering that holds the foundation, and let the healing happen without the patient's knowledge. Then treat it as we have said; perhaps it will heal, or you remove that covered part and clean it then, after cutting it away from the base, either with a tent or some other pointed instrument; then purify the wound, as best as you can; and try to prevent the fistula from returning in the area beyond the foundation. If it is a lighter matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And never are the fistulas made in this manner: and it is when you press the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side near the base of the skin above, if a piece of cloth is taken with a point at the top according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And it is pressed into a twist with the thread, and press the tent along all the thread in the fistula as long as it is at the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is persistent at the base of the skin, then extract the thread from that opening, so you press your two foundations together; and handle the top with the thread, and join the two parts together, holding them close to each other, and leave it for one or two days; never loosen it, until the threads have healed completely which are between the two parts, and stop moving. Then treat the wound as long as it is sealed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open, even if you try to open it in every way possible, it will not be too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For if the opening is not deep enough and then you try to heal it before it heals properly, as we have said, it will not be healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form is a sharp, spiky one from which the fistula is made, if it is thick and solid on one side and hollow on the other; on no account should you try to open what you should not open, as you can see.
des emorroydes	Of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids exist in two ways: either they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, with small and large ones, and oozing blood, or they protrude from it, singly or in clusters, and are inflamed at the base; but those that protrude have little moisture, sometimes a bit of clear water or blood, and have a skin color. For the treatment of hemorrhoids located inside the anus, you should order the patient to lay on his side until the anus heals and the children are born; if in a hurry, use tweezers or your fingernail to remove them, then cut them at their roots. If they cannot be held due to their moisture, grab them with cloth, cotton, or a piece of chamois, and extract them gently. Then cut them and apply hot powder over them as described in the cautery chapter, or cauterize them, after which treat them with other remedies until they are healed; if the anus cannot be opened, use a strong enema to wash what is inside, so it can come out easily. As for the pain of the patient and the size of the children, this treatment is light. You can pinch them with your fingernail or tweezers and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they heal, avoiding surgical incisions with a hot iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary for you to administer the stitch in this manner: take a twisted thread, and wrap it around an needle, then draw the thread from above and pierce the needle from below, and pass both ends of the thread through the needle, and if it is too thick, tighten the thread well, then tie it off, and extract the needle, and do so for all the others, leaving one for drawing out the excess blood; then apply a damp cloth or wax to the base, and place it there, and instruct the patient to rest; and then leave it until the stitches fall out, and when they have fallen out, treat the wound with care or other remedies, until he is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Carefully and slowly prepare the causes or foundations.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often, there is a drying up of causes in the intestine, due to restrictions of nature, and when the illness is old and no medicine avails.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary that you scrape off the crust with a spatula or your fingernail, which will not let it moisten; then treat it as it should be until it is healed; and if it cannot heal, continue shaving more forcefully than before, until it is moist and cut; then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	He shudders.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Mice are small, hairy creatures that move just beneath the skin, and they go in deep; neither fire nor any other treatment can stop them, and their movement feels like a tremor, affecting the entire body, especially the hands more than any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a thin piece of a duck's feather or a strong vulture's feather, and place this feather on the tremor until it engulfs the tremor completely; then turn your hand over the entire feather until you envelop all around the tremor, and reset it in its place, eliminating the tremor from its source.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make this of a snake's or iron wire according to this form, and be subtle from below and draw upwards.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not cut, so as to hold the two together, and press. And if you see, cauterize the tremor, as it is in front or at the beginning of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a douche
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never use a clister of silver or gold, or melted iron or wire; nor ever these small and large instruments according to those by whom they are used.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	He who thus administers treatment to children and those who are weak and afflicted, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the enema is small and wide at the top, or the abdomen is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and I say that when the abdomen is bound in this manner, as you see, and the stool is contained inside, it has one opening on one side and another on the other. The abdomen should be filled with medicinal liquid from a bladder of an animal or parchment, and all around these openings there should be small spaces, separated by one thread, then tightly wound into these openings a thin, twisted thread in X or any other pattern, and assemble the abdomen as if it were a bell. And when the medicine is inside, fasten the instrument with a strong thread at its front end, and perform the enema; this is the shape of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and apply a warm compress of oil or egg white, or something similar, then gently squeeze it out; then the attending practitioner should massage both hands together until the entire body is relaxed, then remove the compress, and have the patient rest his legs against the wall, and let the medicine come out as much as possible; if he sleeps soundly through the night, it is a greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use the enema for a bloating disease of the belly and the medicine comes out quickly, it should be repeated until it is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoid is at the anus or abscess, it should be as subtle as for a child; and this is the form of the very subtle clamp to hold the skin tightly.
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken of the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments of hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the use of stone, and sword or knife, or lance or spear or arrow, or similar objects; or they are made according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that breaks through the collarbone, or head, or side, or stomach, or liver, and similar parts; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and begin with simple wounds of the head, for the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is caused by stone or similar objects, and the skin is nonetheless torn and the wound is deep, and you doubt there is an abscess: do this as soon as possible to heal the cephalica, especially if little blood comes from the wound, and treat it on the contrary of the affected part; and let the patient avoid fullness of wine and heavy meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to be healed, let his flesh be reduced and he should not drink wine or eat meat; and apply a poultice of rose oil alone, or of astringent wine; and if there is a hot abscess, place it on the wound while it is still fresh with all its blood, and do not let air, powder - which I will speak of later - touch it, as long as it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a sword's width and similar, and the edges cannot be brought together, then bring them together with stitching, as I will say of abdominal wounds, by suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed through bone, and is deep, but only holds for a short time, then dress it with medicine, and replace the skin with hard wood, and instruct the patient to eat hearty meats, such as beef, cooked wheat, also poultry, and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find putrefaction in flesh or leather that has not reached the bone, and it consumes all the putridity, then dress it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, from which nothing stops, and medicines cannot stop it, then cut the artery, and if you dislocate it, bind it with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: it is that you apply this powder that seals so as to move the fire.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The method for the powder is as follows: take one part frankincense, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts quicklime, mix the powder finely, apply it to the wound, and tighten it until it disperses well and joins with all its moisture; then tie it securely and leave it unbound unless it swells. For the medicine is not removed as long as it remains healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never should one use quicklime only, unless one has frankincense or dragon's blood; but the fire must have moved the wound first.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has moved the wound, especially if there is no powder applied; but put on some boiled herbs, or a paste of barley flour made with water and honey, until it flows; then apply other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a bone fracture occurs with the wound and it is small, then extract it with delicate pincers; and I will tell you below about the fractures of the skull.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound occurs on the neck and it is simple, then it has no distinction from that at the top, but if there is damage within the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is an artery, then there is no other remedy but to allow the healing and not put anything restrictive, as it hurts the artery and causes it to retract; do not apply any sharp objects to the wound, because the substance of the artery is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member. But use medicine as if washing with cool water mixed with rose oil, and clean bandages also in cool water, and other stones according to this method, and moist compresses.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is great, cutting through skin and muscles, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and wide, filled with pus, pierce them to the bone or below; and if an artery is cut, and blood flows, treat it with discretion, cauterizing if necessary; and if the spine in the throat is cut, or the juices, guard the passage so that the flesh does not stick to the bone in the throat, but remove it according to its natural form; then apply a tight bandage and do not release it for several days, applying poultices until healed. And if the wound has pressed into the bone, treat it as needed. If there are pieces of bone that cannot be removed, let them stay until the wound festered, becoming drained and lighter; and if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones or a fistula in the wound, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and deep, pay attention to the signs of the patient's condition: if they are conscious alone, then know that the wound is mortal; but if it is not very deep, and still has fresh blood flow, do not apply any medicine in the first hour, nor bandage it tightly so as not to delay its healing. Instead, apply an attractive dressing and change it twice a day; and if you have no dressing, put old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three or four days, or more. If there is no spasm, no tremor, or no other distress, then know that the wound is healing well.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat the wounds with various remedies and others, as long as they are clean; and if they cannot heal, know that there is a fistula; then treat it as appropriate.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is shallow or deep in front, or back, treat it as described above; if it is large, use stitches; and if small, apply powder, and if it affects the bone and has pieces of bone, clean the wound thoroughly, and remove foreign objects if necessary; and if they are not removed, let the wound heal, and the extraction will be easier. And for other wounds in other limbs, judgment should be made as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	disruption of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The disruption of the belly is great and medium and small; from a large wound, the intestines or the nerves of the intestines leak out, causing an opening; and stitching is more difficult, and never worth less than a small wound compared to a large one, because one must handle the intestines delicately, pulling them up and down; for they tend to swell soon after, making it seem like there is pain, so one must be careful not to pull them too tightly, and because the smaller wound allows for more delicate handling of the intestines compared to others. And know that the rupture of the belly occurs in four ways: common stitches in the stomach's stitching, and the stitching of other wounds on the body, and other specific stitches are common to other wounds; yet they are still more suitable for stomach stitching, and I will explain each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and nothing of the bowels is affected, and it is a difficult thing to repair, then this is by one of two methods: either because of the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to the cause.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in the following manner: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth with hot water only slightly, or boil water with cinnamon and cloves and pepper, and straighten the intestines as soon as the swelling is gone; never use wine that constricts, and it will be moved so as to reduce the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, if the intestine is filled with water or some other fluid and the hemorrhoids are cooked, because by this means the entry becomes easier for a short time; and if it cannot enter, they make a small incision with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to move the stool, that we should not cut it without great need; and this is the instrument to split: slice inside the pile and turn it away, and see the shape like this.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound has enlarged and the intestine protrudes, if you can return it to its natural position in its proper place, do so if you have the ability, for this is beneficial.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large and located in the lower part of the belly, it is necessary to make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the abdomen, put the head and anus higher than the other parts, and also ensure that the rupture in the abdomen is in one of the two parts so that the injured area is higher than the other; thus it is appropriate to apply what I have said to both large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, prepare a gentle medicated liquid to cover the entire wound with your fingers and gather the edges; this is the common method of stitching. Sew an agle or more, according to the size of the wound, leaving a small gap at the top of the wound; then insert a strong thread through a needle and sew from behind the skin down to the wound, gathering the two edges together; this forms four stitches that meet at the top. Then tie a double thread around the needle on both sides, gathering the edges of the wound properly, leaving small gaps, and inserting another needle; repeat this process until the entire wound is secured. The needles should be medium-sized, neither too fine nor too thick, as thin needles can pierce through the flesh and open the wound before sealing it, while too thick ones cannot penetrate sufficiently. Therefore, they should be medium-sized; do not pull the needles too far from the flesh and skin, otherwise they may cause discomfort to the patient when sleeping. Place tents or sheets at the sides of the needles to keep them in place until the wound is healed. This stitching method is more suitable for small wounds as it only requires one or two stitches; for larger wounds, you gather the edges with a needle and strong thread, making a single stitch across the entire width. I sewed a wound on a man's belly who had been stabbed by a knife; the wound was over a palm in size and extended several palms from the intestines.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine to its proper place after it had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed completely within fifteen days, and he was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they marveled that he did not die, and it was a miracle; I did not cure him with any treatment, for I was in a place where none could be found, neither medicines nor anything else. I put clean cotton on the wound twice a day and washed it with honey-water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle and thread it from the outside to the inside; when it has pierced through the flesh, bring the edge together with the needle or stitch where you have threaded it, and then pierce from the other side, going from the outside to the inside; the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as a pelter sews fur, leaving one edge unsewn on each side until the stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second stitching method, which Galen properly calls, is like a way that no one does, which joins the two parts together naturally, and applies one of the ends with pleasure to the other end, in this manner: take a needle or an end of thread close by, and pierce it only into the surface, leaving the two ends of the thread; then turn the needle and pierce it from the opposite part inside as far as the two ends of the thread; then pierce one and the other from the opposite part inside to the other side, in the two other ends of the thread that are on each other's sides; and this is the moving stitching method and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen calls this method "sewing the belly with two needles," where each needle has thread, and one needle is passed from one side and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew wounds; and know that when the rupture is within the belly, the stitching is more difficult than for other abdominal injuries.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you cut into a fresh wound until all its blood flows out, if the flesh moves, then cauterize and bind it tightly; apply the healing powder, and if the flesh moves again, apply some immediate treatment, as long as the wound remains open; then sew it up, and let the bandage, mirra, and balsam heal it, just like other wounds until it is healed; and if you have no medicine, immediately place a piece of old cotton and move it back and forth during the day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you need no other medicine in addition to these remedies for simple wounds; and if you doubt that the wound is spreading to the principal members (of the body), then it is necessary to moisten a light linen cloth with warm temper oil, or rose oil, and place it around the affected area, under the armpits; and if it feels painful or putrid in waves, and this happens often, then give it enemas of warm red wine, especially if the putridity reaches the intestines. If it is the large intestine, healing will be easier than for the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestinal organ, called "young" (or "jeun"), cannot heal when it is weary, and this is due to the weakness of the veins, and the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	If the fat (or flesh) jumps out of the wound, push it back as far as the intestine while it is still fresh; if it has become old and turned white or black, then you must tie the black part to prevent blood from coming, for it contains veins and arteries; then cut away the tissue in between, and hang the two pieces down on either side of the wound until the fat falls out, thereby facilitating its removal.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the bowels
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, it cannot be cured in any man, as I have seen a nobleman pierced through his bowels or stomach; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, it became inflamed and formed a fistula, from which came evacuations and flatulence; I applied treatment according to my ability, and did not cease to apply remedies until he was healed and the bowels healed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him healed, I doubted that the patient would not have pain in his stomach; but he felt no pain, only improved conditions, diet and drink; and certain practitioners said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be treated in this manner: take a large bandage, then pull together the edges of the wound, and when the bandage has opened its mouth, place it over both lips, so as to draw his mouth together; then cut off the top of the bandage, and this will hold until he is completely healed; then apply another bandage in the same manner, until the wound is fully closed.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the sharp end of an intestine penetrates the body and causes no harm to the patient, it is possible to sew it up with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal: take the sharp end of this intestinal thread, which is well cleaned, and then tie it to the tip of a fine flaxen thread twisted, then wrap the thread around the needle, and stitch the intestine, and arrange it in the wound; this method of sewing is not inferior in effectiveness, provided that it follows the path of reason and hope. If the wound is deep and wide, especially when it involves one of the major intestines, no one can heal it except with great subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula, regardless of its location.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Every wound or abscess, when it opens, is generally called a "fistula", especially when it is chewed and hollowed.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	A fistula, according to the truth of its formation, is hard and white, causing no pain, and just like the feather of a bird; sometimes it is clear and thin, other times thick and pastey; sometimes sour, other times sweet; and I have spoken about this in the division of wounds: every wound that is not healed, and there is no discharge, is due to one of the nine causes. These are: the lightness or hardness of blood or pus; its evil nature; the presence of hard matter within it, preventing the formation of discharge; excessive secretion; the bad state of the veins or their closure; the quality of the material being of poor quality; improper medication; corruption indicative of a plague; delayed digestion and late absorption in the region due to natural properties; or the existence of veins or bones. I have already explained all these causes, their symptoms, and the cures for them in detail.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I make you know the treatment of a fistula which is performed by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	You know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistules that affect major veins, arteries, and nerves, or the bladder, intestine, or kidney, or any of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint in the hands or feet, and they can be as large as these structures.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All fistulas of this type are difficult to heal and require hard work and knowledge. If there is a fistula that does not come to the surface as I have described, but you are confident in the cure, take a thin piece of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, use it; if it is crooked, seek a subtle piece of pliers, for the pliers will bend around the curvature. If the fistula has an opening in the hand and you cannot reach it properly with pliers, wash it with one of the openings, as moisture travels from one opening to another and cleanses it; then cut it cleanly in your power, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and whether it is completely removed, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press your hand on it and the location where he feels it. When you have accurately determined the location, and if it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein, or any of the openings I mentioned, cut it as I instructed, and remove all debris and corrupt tissue inside; then heal it as sanely as possible. If the fistula is very deep and straight, cut it completely through as best you can; then apply moistened medicine-soaked lint around it until the medicine corrodes any excess that remains at the bottom; then put clean, healthy bandages on it until it heals; and if this does not work, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve does not affect your primary member as we have said, and if the bone is exposed, with corruption and blackening, wait until all corruption is removed, then treat any remaining issues thoroughly until it is healed; and if it is not healed and bows again as before, know that you are not yet safe: expose and cleanse it as much as possible, remove all corruption, then restore it to its place; and if it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If no, know that the corruption is too extensive, and you cannot restore it; if there is no other cause but to let nature take its course; and if there is a small corrupt bone, and you can extract it with suitable pliers, then remove all the bones, leaving none; and if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, cauterize and dry, and relieve the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, put something corruptive on the wound, and let it fester until the pus has drained out among the bones, and then the bones will become lighter; and if it is a large bone, like that of the leg or thigh, scrape off the corruption as much as possible until all the blackness is gone, then close the wound; and if there is a great deal of corrupt matter, and it extends almost to the bone; it must be kept clean and covered up until the corruption has completely healed, and then treat it until it is firmly healed. And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take an example from it and provide aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man around XXX years old who had a pain in his leg due to something that arose inside the body, causing the materials to reach the leg, and it was infected with a large abscess, and there was no clear cause for opening; but because of their folly, they pricked the abscess so much that many things were drained, and it became a fistula, and there were numerous openings that let bowels and moisture out of the body; and many treatments were attempted for two years, without any wise person in the art of medicine, until I was called to see him, and I observed his leg and the medicines used to cure it, and what was corroded by the openings in the large body; and the skin of the young man turned red, and had a citrine-like color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these gaps, and then I examined all the gaps, and I found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	Then I quickly acted and cut into one of the gaps until I discovered a portion of the bone, which was corrupted and broken, and the corruption extended inward to the bone; I understood what appeared to be the corrupt bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except that which I had left; and I began to treat the wound with medicines for a long time, but they could not unite. Then I re-examined it and discovered the bone as before, and found that the corruption continued in the bone, so I treated it and then secured it, but I could not press it together until I had removed a palm-sized piece of the bone, and brought it back to its natural shape; then I treated it again with medicines. And it was healed and united firmly, and did not want to begin the operation again except for the weakness of the patient who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because for the complete evacuation of blood, it often happens, but it was healed entirely, and a hard scar remained in place of the bone, and was of good disposition, causing no harm or contrary effect at all, neither to leaving nor entering.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be handled in this manner: take a rope, and stretch it across the opening of the bone, and instruct anyone to pull it upwards; then tie another thicker rope of linen over the first one, and fasten it to the flesh that is now separated from the bone, pulling the flesh downwards, so that you dislocate the corrupt flesh from the bone, and expose the flesh beneath where you saw the break. Put coals or a plank underneath the bone to cover the corrupt flesh; and be as careful as possible, as you must see and feel the corruption, and do this again if necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if a bone is corrupted and will not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then expose the whole body; then apply heat from one side to the other of the corruption, and make it firm for a long time as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, cut out the corrupt joint, and make the bone strong on the other side; and if the corruption is in the connection between two joints, do not cut anything else but that which contains the corruption; and if the corrosion is at the wrist of the hand or the ankle of the foot, it is very difficult, but you should investigate how it opens, and purify it in every way that does not harm the vein or nerve; and know that there are many instruments for cutting and binding bones, according to their position and appearance, their thickness and thinness, their size and hardness, and therefore it is necessary to match each work with its appropriate instrument; and know that the work will show you the instrument needed, according to the knowledge of this art and the signs of the ways of illness; choose the instrument that suits you best.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The joint dislocates internally or externally; and when you have medicated that corruption with the cure of medicines, but they do not help, it is necessary to cover that limb until the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes from death, or from evil, which is greater, through the fault of the limb; and the sign of this is that the limb turns black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackening, since that corruption goes from member to member and takes hold throughout the body; then hurry to cover it, and if it is due to the bite of some venomous creature, such as a sea scorpion or a snake or similar, immediately dislocate it, and do not give it time to come to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes up to the hand, so that the bone affects the joint, preventing corrosion from reaching the arm; and if it comes to the arm, then cut at the elbow; and if it passes through the elbow, it is death, and there is no cure outside of its quantity of strength; and thus does corrosion affect every part: if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint; and if it comes to the foot, then cut through the entire foot; and if it rises to the leg, then cut at the joint above the knee; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to leave the patient to die; and the manner of cutting or binding the member is as follows: bind it from above and below, and extend one assistant with each tie, and you sever the flesh that is between the two ties with a wide spatula, until the bone is exposed; then cut or bind it, and place a linen drape on each side so that the linen does not touch the healthy part, and cause further injury and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if the flow of blood occurs when you open it, cauterize the vein properly and do not apply any restrictive powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed, bind the affected limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you that which happened to a man in great pain: he had a blackening which seemed to be burnt by fire, and that corruption appeared first on his right foot, until it discolored the whole foot; and when the man saw the corruption, he covered his foot, and it was healed; but a long time later, the corruption returned on his left hand, and came to me, and I applied reflective substances after purification of the body, and the corrosion would not stop; and he asked me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to do so, as I had hope of reflecting the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, since the man's virtue was weak; and he became completely desperate, returned to his land, covered his hand, and it was healed; and I have never heard of such a case except for when one does otherwise, if necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No abscess ever forms in a fresh wound, and it lingers so long that it causes great tension within; then it bursts and pierces the bowels, and remains until the vital force is exhausted, just like a vessel; and the skin covering it is as delicate as fine cloth, and doesn't extend to the bone or nerve, and this condition is called "sain," not "fistule." But if it spreads so far that it reaches the bone entirely, it is called a "fistule"; and the skin should be cut all around, especially when it is delicate, just like fine cloth; and its corruption is not easily recognized.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you believe that the skin is infected and the corruption is not completely healed, and the skin is dry and brittle, then treat it with a cleansing enema: check if the breast is swollen and the wound emits a bad odor, then give an Egyptian medicine made thus: take equal parts of salt, oil, and lithargy, and place them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey. Then take as much as needed and mix it with water and honey, and use it to enemize the breast, squeezing out the discharge; leave the medicine for two hours, then extract it while straining; do this several times until the breast is clean and the pus is gone. If the patient cannot endure either the Egyptian medicine or the water from ashes when that medicine is not available, crush ashes from vine wood, pour water over them, strain it, and use it in the enema; continue until you are sure that the breast is thoroughly cleansed. And if the patient cannot tolerate this, give an enema of honey and wine, with a little bit of powdered lithargy, as honey has purifying and cleansing properties, while wine helps to aerate the wound; when you have done this and believe the breast is clean, then give an enema using whatever causes the breath to become sweet, whether it be incense or some other medicament; and if the opening in the breast is too small for the enema needle, enlarge it slightly with a hot iron and apply the Egyptian ointment or basilicon until it is wide enough; and if the wound is very large, cutting it will not leave enough space for the enema to enter, and if the discharge flows downwards, place the enema higher than or lower than that point.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Because when the bowel is in perfect condition, it does not allow itself to be interrupted; and if you cannot cover the opening of the wound as well as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bowel moves to the lowest level it can, because when the bowel is perfectly healthy, it does not allow itself to be interrupted, and if you cannot cover the opening of the wound as well as you see fit, arrange it so that the bowel moves slightly downward, leaving no part of the bowel exposed; and take consolidative medicines to apply over the wound, and place them under a linen drape that covers the entire wound; then press with force around the opening in the side of the wound, making it slightly larger than before; apply gentle dressing according to the size of the wound, and place it over the opening in the healthy tissue to lighten the pressure from the bowel, and do not remove the large linen drape for several days; and whoever is over the opening in the side of the wound often removes it to relieve the pressure from the bowel, and knows what comes from the bowel—whether it's poison or a bit or enough, or digested or undigested—and be careful if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and how your medicine has spread in this way, and you see the nature that springs up on the opening of the wound, then know that healing is already beginning; and then release it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change the dressing, and renew the treatment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast becomes bowed and indigest after many days, knowing that it will not open.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons appear after a long time, do not despair of health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are some who have late discharges of pus from their wounds, and others do the opposite; and if the breast becomes bowed and indigest after many days, knowing that it will not open; and if the breast remains closed for a long time, and is far away, then apply moist medicines with a subtle substance and dry in virtue, as a definitive cure, because there is a great part of vitriol, which is the last medicine; take the definitive cure, and make it with rose oil, and mix it with old wine in substance; then preserve it and use it; and do the same with cooked honey thickened, when definitive ointments are not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and crush them, and powder them on honey while it is still warm from the fire; and then spread it on the breast, and never administer in large doses, nor roots of celestial lis, which is also like wheat flour and centaury; and use simple or composite ones: grind them, and make a powder, and put it on the honey I mentioned, and use it; and if the cure takes a long time, and this cure does not heal, then know that corruption is in full force, and makes an impression on the bone, or hard members, or ligaments; as we have said before for the treatment of fistulas.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Gangrene is an abscess that forms under the nail in the hand or foot, or occasionally in other parts; and when it becomes old and one does not take care, it develops a gangrenous abscess, causing pain and discharge as it eats away at the root of the nail, and possibly even the entire nail. It leads to corrosion down to the bone, producing a putrid odor, and the nail bed becomes swollen and red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have described in the previous section, but the treatment is not effective, then you must remove all debris remaining under the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is of great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound; and if the nail pricks the flesh, and begins to puncture, and the wound bleeds, it is necessary that you place the edge under the nail that punctures the flesh, and lift it up, and gently and lightly cut off the flesh, and apply burning and corrosive medicines to remove all of it; then treat the wound with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and pull it away, for as much as the bone decays, it cannot heal; and if you see both bones corrupted, remove them as mentioned above, then treat it until it is healed; and if it is heated and swollen, and causes great pain, it is necessary that you dress it first; then cut the nail with a sharp scissor diagonally from above, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, apply something soothing.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of a severe wound should be soothed by the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The adjustment that is born in the hands of no one by chance is entirely fleshy, and perhaps has part or all of its bones, and never has a claw, and neither does it emerge at the root of the joint, where birth is not within our control.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	What is born in no place has no movement, and what is born at the joint of a limb might not move; the shape of that which is fleshy should be light, in this manner: size it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: if you keep him covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In him who is born or has an injury elsewhere, it is necessary that you first cover the wound thoroughly to the bone, then cover the bone with a suitable cloth, and then treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The deformities that come at any age come either from birth, or from the union of wounds, or from burns by fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you need to tighten that suture, so it must be repaired according to their natural shapes; then place between two moistened cloth or drapes in rose oil, so they do not stick together; or put between two pieces of fine leather, as long as the skin is sewn, as appropriate.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If dislocation occurs in any of its fingers with the palm, tighten the suture as appropriate.
des vils	Des vils" translates directly from Old French
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	They are veins thickly enveloped, full of melancholic excesses, which come to many members of the body; and more so in the legs of those who walk, work, and bear weight, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary for you to administer purgative once, and then cleanse the basil (or abdomen).
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment of fire is according to two methods: one is with cauterization and extraction of the black blood; and the other method is that you open the vein and drain it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The operation is carried out according to this method: first, raise the affected limb with hot water until the swelling subsides, then extract the sick limb from above the ankle to the knee joint; next, cut the vein in one, two, or three places with a broad knife, then squeeze and drain the black blood into your hand from one end to the other, as much as the patient can bear; then bind it and order him to immerse the affected part in water, causing the formation of dark flesh; and repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, until harm to the patient ceases.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	They should raise the affected limb, remove any hair, and immerse it in hot water until it turns red and swells; then heat it over a fire if there is no bath. Afterwards, apply pressure to the vein from above the knee joint or the part below the ankle, opening the skin at both ends as you feel it pulse; it will appear red and black, and like a white string when exposed. Then pull gently on it from below, until it detaches from the skin, and repeat the same process with another pin, as before. Apply more pressure if needed, then lift it slightly and apply a fresh pin at a different point, just as you did previously; then pull and lift again, moving to a third pin, then remove the skin gently, and apply a fresh one on the second pin, and so on, removing and applying new pins until the entire vein is removed. If it cannot be pulled out, insert a strong needle through its entire length, and draw and twist it back and forth; also pull from below with a finger and remove the needle when there is nothing left to draw. Be careful not to sever it, for if it breaks, it cannot be pulled or removed, and will cause harm to the patient. Once removed, place a moist, soft cloth over the wound, using wine and rose oil, and tend to it until healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if you see that it is contracted and twisted and rolled up together, and it is not straight at all, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cover it; treat it as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The way to treat it if the vision is crooked and does not straighten, without cutting the vein, but only compressing it; it is of great curvature, because if it were delicate, it would cut the vein, but since it is thick, as we have said, then this is its form:
de la voinne civile	of the vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is located in the legs, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow, and on land where there is no moisture; and sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to putrefaction that comes from below the skin, as it winds and coils within the body.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein appear, it is that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to protrude forcefully, just like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein opens, it is necessary to wrap a piece of cloth around it, from one and a half fingers up to two fingers wide, and leave it on the leg; every time that it appears at the surface, you should wrap it again around the flesh, and remove any excess; and if it is too long, cut off a part and wrap the rest back, but do not cover its root until it is completely out. For if you cut it, it will retract into the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction, or some other malady. Therefore, it is necessary to treat it little by little, up to the point where no trace remains in the body; and this vein appears as long as five palms, or even more; and when you cut it, it leaves one or two openings, and perforates to the bottom, allowing everything to come out; and you should empty the matter that is inside, and apply medicine to the wound that prevents putrefaction for as long as needed, just like with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never should one touch this vein again, especially when it opens at the foot or leg joint, or where there is much tearing and bleeding; treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers that emerge between leather and skin.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "beef disease" in our land because it often affects cattle, and it is characterized by the emergence of small worms between leather and skin. They travel throughout the body, ascending and descending, causing great pain from one limb to another, until they break through the skin where they were embedded, and they exude a strong odor; this disease is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and lice do in the belly; and its malignancy is doubted because when it spreads throughout the body, it rises to the head, reaches the eye, sometimes retracts, and destroys the eye; and this occurs many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it healing and draining, it cannot be done faster than it goes: therefore, you must lie the limb above and below with a strong, tightly bound bandage, then cut and drain it, and if the wound is deep in the flesh, do not remove the bandage until it has healed; and the greatest harm it does is when it causes bleeding, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the oil, tighten the sorcil (fist) below, then cut and drain it; and it is necessary for the patient to use purification of the body with solvent medicines to remove bad humors, and to wash with foods that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	The pain that comes from flatulence.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in no particular member, but can move from one member to another; and I have seen this as I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and after that, I noticed something rising on her shoulder, brighter than anything else, like bright silver when it cuts through flesh; the pain left that spot and moved to her shoulder, and then, shortly afterwards, spread throughout her body, reaching the other arm; then she told me that she felt it returning around the body, as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marvelled greatly at how she moved from one limb to another, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I had observed that many experience great pain when moving from one place to another, but I had never seen it in a woman; and I thought it was due to her dry skin, exposed veins, and this constrained windiness; and I did not find this to be the case with those who are delighted, and have moist skin and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see this disease heal, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, press down hard from above and below until that constrained windiness in the place subsides; then cauterize the place; and if you do not have these at hand, cure it with those who relieve windiness, such as foul pills, snake venom pills, and others like them.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows vary, according to their appearance and according to the parts of the body from which they come.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Their diversity is such that there are those with large and small tips, those with barbs, and those without; some have two points, others have lengths, and some have pieces. They can pierce any member in two ways: either in a principal member, like the head, body, liver, kidney, intestine, bladder, or similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it breaks in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appears: it is necessary that you struggle with the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after various dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not fully extracted, pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow breaks and pierces the bone, and there is a sudden sensation in the head, as if it were hitting, and blackness and darkness and turning in upon itself, and redness of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps the arrow comes out through the nose or ears; and sometimes it loses the ability to speak and sing; and there is also a white moist discharge from the wound, like pus, and sometimes it smells bad like horse urine; and if these signs appear to you, take care, and extract the arrow even if it's not fully embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of an arrow when it pierces or enters the body is that it is close to the left breast and feels as if it were embedded in something hard, neither empty nor hollow; and by chance, the arrow may become silent like the pulse, and produce black blood, coldness, and cold sweat, and even fainting. Therefore, be certain of death.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that never revives is that no foam comes from the wound, the throat swells, the patient's face turns pale, and he breathes heavily and stops moving.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow breaks off in the deepest part of the flesh, it leaves small bones shattered; it causes great pain and breathing difficulties and heavy sighing, and all the muscles around the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow pierces the stomach, perhaps something from the indigestible flesh jumps out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow pierces the belly, and there is no trace of good through the intestines, then there is little hope for treatment or for the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow pierces the bladder, and urine jumps and flows out, and the patient feels intense pain, know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, as they feel and the pain in the throat, shoulder, and back, along with the stiffness in the joints and the legs, and the dislocated limb, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you should do the same.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	There once happened to me a case of an arrow that entered the ear or cheek root: I tried it, and pulled it from the other side, through the fat of the ear, and it was completely healed without any pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And once, in a game, an arrow entered the fat of the neck below the skin and below the paper, and the arrow was lodged, and it only left the tip towards the wood, and it was a large arrow with a blue bow, without causing any pain; the wound healed, and no bad accidents happened.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And take an arrow from the throat of a Christian, which was an arrow with ears: I cut the barbs, and pulled as I took it, and healed the Christian.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I extracted an arrow from a man, which had penetrated his chest and abdomen, and thought he was dying; but after thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut the arrow, and removed it, and there were no adverse effects.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	If you wish to treat a man who has an arrow lodged in his back or chest, and the wound is deep, let the arrow remain within him, and do not alter his natural conditions; nor will you find any harm from any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And see another man to whom an arrow fell in his face and the wound became deep; he remained thus unable to suffer great pain; and many others like him.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated a prince, the king himself, who had an arrow in his neck that was slightly inclined to the right side, and the arrow was completely embedded; I was called for treatment after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very deep.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I probed it gently all around, and I felt nothing; but he experienced a sharp sensation and pain from behind his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow I placed a soothing poultice on the joint because the joints were not swollen; and then I saw the arrows in the joint.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I left the poultice on for several days, and thus healed the wound; then the patient endured the arrow inside his body for a long time, until he felt it in his flesh; and so he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it healed, and then I probed it; I felt the tip of the arrow stuck in the joint; so I adjusted the opening of the wound using that medicine until the part of the arrow became visible; it took about four months for the wound to heal, and then I pulled out the arrow using pincers, moving it from side to side, but it wouldn't come out; then I continued to try subtle and clever methods, until one day, as the shape of the arrow's head appeared at the end of this chapter, I managed to remove it while treating the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And they consider that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I then restored it, and the wound healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have also told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you place your cure where I do not mention it, because books cannot contain everything; but wise masters compare well and carefully a few small things, as well as what is present and lacking, finding new works and new tools for the descent of strange things that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come out of members unless they are removed in two ways: either through the place where they entered or from another part; and that which comes out from the side where it entered is an arrow embedded in the flesh, and does not come out again at any time.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not now come out, let it stay until the swelling around it subsides and becomes light; and if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days and then move it; and when it comes out, use a fine needle to pierce the opening until the swelling around it is widened.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone at the base of the skull and goes all the way to one of the cavities of the brain, and none of the aforementioned accidents occur for the patient: do not try to pull it out, but let it stay even for several days, for if the arrow reaches that far, it can be fatal.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the bone and does not come out satisfactorily, it leaves the patient no days without some bad consequence, if cleverness in pulling it out is lacking.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot come out, then apply tar around it, as I have told you; then cure the wound while it is still healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is deeply embedded in the flesh and cannot be seen, even after trying everything; and if you feel it, use any suitable instrument; and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones or nerves nearby, leave it until the wound has healed; and pull out the arrow if possible, and if it has roots by which it is attached, remove the part that is firmly embedded on one side, while bending or folding the arrow's tip, as much as you can without breaking it, so that you can pull it out more easily.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, so that the bone around it is completely healed, then treat it later, for extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If the signs of infection contradict what we have said about treatment in its chapter, then apply as we have described for the cure; and be careful with incision near the nerve and the vein, and find a way to extract the arrow without risk, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow entered, for that is the greatest help there can be, and if you cannot do it, then follow the signs as they show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another direction, opening something within, where the skin is swollen in a noticeable way: cut then on top, as much as the pincers can grasp, and then extract it: if it still projects outwards.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters the bone, widening it, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be extracted, leave it for now, and then try again until it comes out; and if there is a splinter of the arrow remaining in the flesh, let it stay, and then continue to extract; if it is hard, you must press gently, as if administering a stratagem, so that the tip of the arrow enters the opening of the instrument; then push it out, and if the arrow has been removed from the wound, insert the instrument with its point entering fully, in order to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is stuck, it is necessary that you clean all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow has pierced the skin, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close to vital parts, and you can reach it, cut it out; but be careful not to cut the vein or nerve, then extract it, and cleanse the wound, as is necessary, and treat it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The tool used to extract arrows resembles a bird's beak; here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The form that points downward like a horse's tail is also like the feather of a bird, to push to the tip of the arrow, as this is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of claws to push and to hold, if this is the case:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are 31 veins from which one can draw blood, of which there are 16 main ones: 2 veins behind the ears, called "herb cheeks"; and 2 arteries visible in both temples; and 2 veins in each elbow, called "aspirations"; and the vein across the forehead; and the vein at the base of the skull; and 2 veins around the collarbone; and 2 veins above the lips, called "augerich"; and 2 veins beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The common veins from which one draws blood are 5 in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, located on the left side and commonly called "vein of the head"; and the median is called "fast" and is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and the common people call it "vein of the body"; and the basilic is on the right side and the common people call it "vein of the belly", located above the femur, and it is the one from which blood is taken, clearly visible through the skin.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the cure is the vein that lies between the little finger and the ring finger, and if it rains; and in the leg, there are three veins: one below the ankle on the left side, and the second on the ankle of the right side; and the third vein called "nasse," which is on the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg, there are three veins below these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The cleansing of the veins behind the ears aids in the treatment of old catarrh and migraine; and the quality of this treatment is that you raise the patient's head and rub the affected area with a rough cloth; then bind the patient's collar tightly until the two veins behind the ears appear in two parts depending from the head. Hold them there, and where you feel the pulse below your hand, it signifies improvement; then take the lance and cut through the vein just below the bone, lifting your hand up the entire vein upstream, cutting and cauterizing the skin and vein well away from the bone, and drawing out blood until you see; then bind and tie it until it heals, as I have already mentioned incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	He heals the two arteries that are in the temples, if they are old and sore, and accustomed to tearing, and at the source of hot tears alone; and the quality of healing is as I say: and it is that the patient pulls his collar tightly, until the two arteries open wide; and feels the pulsation beneath his finger, and then signs with a gesture; then gently presses the heart over the artery above his right index finger, and withdraws the lancet underneath, and loosens the artery above, and the clot, as you have done in the other arteries, and do according to your need; then release the patient, and put your finger on the artery for an hour, then put a cotton ball; and then form a bandage and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their healing and extraction, as well as the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The health of the vein on the forehead is as valuable as the health of the cerebral vein, in the treatment of old facial ailments, such as migraine and redness; its quality is that the patient tightens his neck by twisting, until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "disserter," which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip on the vein, holding it with your hand or something else, allowing the blood to flow according to its quantity; then loosen the patient's neck and tie the vein as long as it remains healthy without any wide wound.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, one must not let the flames be too strong; and do not cut across the body, for the bone is close, and there is a risk of breaking the flames when they are thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The health of the two veins located in the arms is particularly important for healing wounds, itching, redness, and facial disorders; and its quality lies in the patient's ability to straighten their neck without any tension, as mentioned earlier. Then, the treatment should be gentle, with the flame slightly thin and not too long, for there is no room for error.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, it may break; then draw out the blood gently, as much as you need, and then bind it with cloth, and tie it tightly.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The health of the vein near the nose is very valuable for treating sudden and severe conditions, such as migraines and redness that appear on the face, both new and old. The quality of the health is such that the patient tightens their collar and pulls their nose to the left hand, taking a subtle flame, long and thin, and inserting it between the two nostrils, since the vein does not open well enough, and the blood will begin to flow. Do not dig too deep, and draw out the blood gently according to your need, then bind it for one night, as it is quickly restored; this is the shape of the flame.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The holy oil of the two glands is helpful for the tightening of the eyelid, and for the onset of inflammation, and for many ailments, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and boils; and the quality of the oil is such that it draws the patient's skin away from each other, as we have said, and the master who is on top of the sick person's head, and the sick person sits in a certain place, then he opens the vein with a long cut, then treats the blood with temper, or as much as necessary; then does the same to the other vein, then loosens the bandage, and tightens the veins slightly so that the patient is not strangled, and leaves it until morning, so that the wound may heal.
de la sainie des leivres	from the cleansing of the veins
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The cleansing of the veins of the lips helps to improve the condition of the mouth, and it aids in the healing of gum disease, lip cracks, and pain and swelling around them.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the cleansing involves having the patient sit before you, holding their chin as mentioned earlier; then turn the lip and examine the veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, which can be recognized by their black color and the small veins around them. Therefore, clean both of them, and if you do not know or doubt, take care to clean the thicker ones from each side, and in the same way, clean the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	from cleansing the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The cleansing of the veins that are beneath the tongue is a valuable procedure after cleansing the head, and it helps with throat constriction, eye diseases, and mouth ailments; the quality of the cleanser should be such that the patient holds it between their hands in front of the sun, softens the tongue, and looks for dark veins on both sides. Then cleanse them, but do not press too hard, as there are arteries beneath.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck, which are commonly cleansed, are done so in two ways: either by pressing with a hot flame, or with a delicate olive-shaped instrument called an 'anesil', and they vary in width and tightness according to the veins themselves.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame burns intensely if it is very renowned, and it is wide as you can see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it requires skill to open veins with thick, clear blood that contain much blood and pus; and this is the shape of the olive-colored flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more delicate pointed, and it is for healing the subtle veins where there is delicate, yellow-tinged blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The healing of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, provides aid for diseases that are beneath the throat, and the collarbone, and the chest, and the belly; and it is important for the healer to heal gently and wash the artery below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it affects the artery, and blood loss occurs, if it is necessary to stop it, as I have said; and the fire should not be painful, but cutting like a blade.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the vein does not open clearly, it is necessary that you extract it and change it for another; or if you do not want to cut from it, heal it in place with a bandage: it opens clearly; and cut through it like a blade, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you recognize the place of the vein, it is necessary to extract the arm as you know its pulse; then mark the place with a signet, and bind the arm, and cut through the vein with a blade; but be careful not to hurt the artery when you see it swell, for that is the artery: beware of it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it protruding at the top as urine from a child, and the veins are red and thin, know that it is an artery: then hurry, and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger so that it does not bleed again; this happens often. Let the arm be still, and do not move the patient; be afraid, and do not move until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the veins do not stop bleeding and it weakens you, and there is no medicine available, if the artery opens up, as the source of the retreat; then stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a piece of fig bark, and cut it, and take one half and bind it tightly to the other half; if the wound stops bleeding, that's good; if not, treat it as we have said with powders that stop blood; the binding is not too tight due to the size of the wound, and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	If the vein bleeds from its head and body, it is because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; the healer should wash himself for the nerve below, and if he does not reach it thoroughly, and it touches the nerve, it swells and the health is compromised, and perhaps it cannot heal; this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, then it must be healed with an instrument for venipuncture; avoid touching the nerve.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two bones, cut it from the tip.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The treatment for headaches, which draws blood from the head and helps the joints, it is beneficial to apply oil of olive or myrrh to the flame, as it is the safest of all veins, because it does not affect any nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is necessary to seek the lightest method and do not be concerned if it fails the first time, and start over; and sometimes the veins may swell in some people when they try it for the first time, but there is no cause for concern.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it should only be done to maintain health and prevent future ailments; and it is performed through one of the three veins: the cephalic, femoral, or basilic. One should bleed in the morning during prayer, after eating, in autumn or winter, when signs of saturation appear; and it should be done on the first day or third day, after two to three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Bloodletting to treat ailments does not have a specific time frame, but should be done as needed throughout the day or night; and children under 12 years old, and women who are pregnant for less than seven months, should not undergo bloodletting.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	One should not treat the old who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone wishes to be cured, in whatever way, it is beneficial to cleanse the intestines with a mild enema if they have a lot of feces retained, so that the veins do not draw excessive impurities from the organs; nor should one cure oneself who is excessively salt from meats, or who is lazy, as long as these conditions persist, or those who are hemorrhoid-prone, or who suffer from colic, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent sexual activity, hard work, watching, fasting, and similar things; then carefully eliminate the humors, if they are excessive, through diet, drinks, and medications, if you have access to them; then enter a bath, if nothing else is available, to purify the blood, and cure the vein from the inside on the third day, as we have said; and guard yourself that day against work, fatigue, lust, and similar things; and be peaceful and joyful, and let the cure be more effective than that of others; then twice or three times rub the affected area with your hand, gently loosening the skin from above; for when it is too tight, it cannot heal; then rub it with your palm until the veins swell and you feel them. Then moisten the dressing with a little old oil, put your left-hand finger on the vein below the site to be cured, not allowing it to burst or injure itself.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow like strings in the body, and if they are blocked by something such as phlegm, when fire is applied, it retracts from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus the person suffers; and if he manages to open the vein, the wound is too narrow, so it is necessary for the healer to be knowledgeable about these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens on the first attempt, it is good; but if not, it is necessary to repeat the process a little below, or with more care, so that the veins do not become inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the joint is swollen and the patient fears, leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm: perhaps an abscess will form; do not enter a bath, then recommence cleansing as it pleases him; and if the opening is small, pierce it delicately and you will doubt that it does not discharge much blood as you see, so confident in that very piercing to all the flames straight; and work a little carefully, so that the joint is swollen; for this happens often when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the joint swollen, do not recommence cleansing, but apply a little oil, for it lightens the body from blood, and moves in this swollen joint the oil that is applied; and thus administer oil in each cleansing of veins to stop the flow of blood; and it has the same effect and draws out evil when placed on the joint; if too thick, divide it and spread it thinly.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there appears a large abscess, which often happens, especially when the opening of the vein is small and you are not skilled, hurry and place a damp sponge in water and wine with a little heat on the affected area for an hour; and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has drained from the vein, and if after some days there is no black or green color, then it does not harm; and if you see, apply aloe or myrrh mixed with calament juice, show, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there appears an abscess and an appearance at the wound of the basil (a type of surgical incision): therefore place your hand on it, and if you find the area soft under the pressure of your hand, then this is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid putting anything on it that we have mentioned, for it may break without the strength of an artery; but apply a dry plaster to harden the joint, then use another remedy until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each case of pain according to the quantity of its strength, and the colour of the pain.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the pain is black, let it continue until it becomes red; and if you see it is swollen, let it continue until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is strong and robust, and has the skill to extract blood, to make a wider wound, and have larger flames; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and heal him more gently and often, and heal him by cutting across, not by pricking; and this method of healing is safe from infection and nerve damage, and it moves faster than long-term healing.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body requires healing, it is necessary to apply a mild pain-relieving poultice of pomegranate juice; if he is overheated, he should be treated with bloodletting three or four times. And if he has a cold complexion, before the healing, he should be given a mild pain-relieving poultice of syrup made from musk, or honey syrup infused with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and nutmeg, and a fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he grasps at the wound, after the flow of blood has ceased, it is necessary that he inhale a steamy brew of herbs and subtle-smelling syrup, and use other things as we have mentioned in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to extend his arm, or heal another wound, it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bloodletting, that he press and massage it little by little, according to the amount of its continuous strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to extend his arm after the first bloodletting, and has a strong cramp, should wait seven hours after the first bloodletting or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if he wishes to become healthier from another direction, he must heal himself on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood inside the body that has been heated, causing fever; so it is necessary to extract a great quantity of it and open the wound as wide as possible until it stops bleeding. Then, after applying all the conditions for healing, place your hand on his pulse when he gains strength, so that death does not come instead of healing, which often happens when healing is neglected. And it is wrong to release the arm and cause blood to flow out again and close the wound while it is still healing; if it is crooked, stretch it gently, for that would be harmful. But leave it until it heals completely the second time; or if there is a burning sensation at the tip of the flame, wait until the cold that has formed in the vein disappears, put a little silk soaked in water on it, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it alone and do not squeeze it until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to drain the blood again from the abscess a second time, if the health improves in that place or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthier in place of the vein from the head because it is composed differently.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of the vein is that the patient bends his hand in hot water until the veins are red; then tie it gently so that the vein appears well, but not too wide or too long; and make the incision wide at the joint of the hand, and do not let the blood escape, and repeat the process with hot water, allowing the blood to flow into the water as much as you can; and if this is done, do not stop bending the hand in hot water, because it puts more pressure on the vein than when it is in a state of rest; and the vein from which the blood is drawn in this manner is safer than any other vein, whether artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The doctor of salvation from the hand if it is good for all soft diseases, and this is the way: stretch the hand, and immerse it in hot water as long as the vein is inflated; if you feel the pain on one side, cross the hand over so that every nerve is exposed to the heat, and then immerse the hand again in hot water, if it feels numb in the wound, and it cannot heal.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as best you can, then apply oil and silk to the vein to bind it firmly, and do this for each person.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sick person should hold the remedy in their left hand for the disease of the mouse, and do just as I have told you towards the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sage of the soul holds sway over all diseases that affect the body, such as diseases of the marrow, retention of flowers (perhaps referring to a metaphorical blockage or inflammation), diseases of the kidneys, and old injuries to the legs and feet, and similar ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its remedy is that the patient drinks warm water and rubs the vein until it persists, binding it over the ankle joint; the vein then goes up to the foot, where much pain arises. Therefore, if there is a greater flow or at the ankle, this remedy must be applied accordingly.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cauterize it on the foot, be careful with the nerves that are exposed, and treat it as if you were sewing; and the flame should be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	If the wound will not heal, immerse the foot in water and allow the vein to drain completely.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if you treat the wound for the first time, repeat the process a second time on top of it, as the tendons are stiff; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and proceed with the same care for the other foot.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein's lion is at the foot's ankle, and its health corresponds to the pain in the back when it is filled with hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its health is such that if the patient feels it between the bath and above the ankle, they should twist four times, otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, then the health in all ways as you can, and crosswise; and it deserves to be quickly handled, because the lion is safe, and it is much relieved by human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not succeed in opening it, then no health from the one that opens on the back of the foot, towards the little toe, and be careful of the nails; and make as much correlation with blood as you can see, and then untie the bandage, and put cotton and tighten it; it is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	From the medical treatments of the suction cup.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horn, or iron, or glass; and the suction is created in two ways: either by puncturing and drawing out blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	This suction without piercing is performed in two ways: either with heat or without heat; and this type of suction, made by puncturing and extracting blood, is done in twelve places on the body, one over the forehead; others between the collarbone; others on both sides of the collarbone; one under the chin; one on each shoulder; one on the knees; and two on each leg; two on each ankle; and it does not involve the suction of blood vessels, only small veins scattered throughout the body, so as not to weaken anyone too much, as is done with vein punctures; and it should not be performed with heat or without heat in any illness resulting from excess, until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if it is necessary to open them due to illness or habit, then we should do so every hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in between; for there are those who, when they need to be opened, have a heavy head; and some experience swelling and redness on their face, head, neck, and become dark; and others have a drop of blood in their mouth, their tongue is swollen, and they bleed; and there are those who dream, see red blood, feel pain, die, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, and especially in the middle of the month, we order them to be opened after three hours during the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The doctor of the muse helps with the great pain in the head ...  that comes from sudden movements, and it is not appropriate to do so after evacuating all the body; and this treatment is for the health of the skull, and it is not appropriate for those with a cold complexion or scabs, as they cause them much harm; and for this reason, old people should not use it, nor those who have cold head ailments.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from it often become blinded; and for this reason, they should apply the suction cup a little lower, out of doubt that it may cause blindness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation of the chest should be in favor of the health of the heart and basil (organs), and for this reason it causes constriction of the lungs, and a split in the channel of the diaphragm, and to all things related; and it is necessary to expel it with caution, because if it holds too tightly, it can cause impairment or harm to the stomach and body.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilation between the ribs can cause pain in the head, eyes, and migraines, as well as strangulation and pain at the roots of the teeth, being contrary to the health of the heart and basil (organs); and it is necessary that you instruct the patient to relax his hand when placing them, not to press the artery, and prevent complications with blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The inflammation of the gums is beneficial for mouth diseases, and for the corruption of gums, and similar ailments in the mouth; it is useful for the healing of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The inflammation of the shoulders is beneficial for diseases that arise from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The inflammation of the veins is just as useful as three veins in the arm, as it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the patient not to press too hard, for the skin is bare without fat, and knows how to close off vessels and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is on the rump is as harmful as bloodletting from the depths, and it causes diseases below, and it is necessary that the suction cup be large and made of iron, so that it needs to be well stretched; and perhaps, if it is too thin, it will break; and it causes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs close tightly, as they draw blood from throughout the body, and they are like the ancient pains of the kidneys, and bladders, and intestines, and they cause convulsions; and they are located on the two thighs, and the two ankles, but after long use, they weaken the body and bring on greater pain.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying a cupping glass is as follows: if you place it at first entirely empty and suck gently, then apply it firmly, move it equally, and do not stop until you see the red and inflamed skin, and open up the pores; afterwards, remove the cups, and pay attention to the condition of the skin, for there are some with thick, hard skin and others with thin, delicate skin. It is enough to make a single pass, and it is necessary to make deep wounds, and a little bit thoroughly; suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the wound is deep, it is necessary to make two incisions: the first time to open slightly the thick vein of blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the pain is very sharp, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw out blood little by little, we are content with only one strike.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, we should strike often; and if the pain is sharp, striking with precision until the vessels are suddenly pierced, it is necessary for one who has thick and tough skin, and who has calloused hands, to apply oil from suction cups that are softening and dissolving: in this case, purple oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in ivy, watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take amaranth oil, or balsam, or donkey oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if anyone has a skin that is tender and has large pores, it is not appropriate to put oil on it, but after the cleansing with rosewater, or cold water, or blackberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or any similar water, it should be washed.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture, if it rises from this, or from myrrh water, and sumac water, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have excess mucus rise from old wine, or eucalyptus water, or chamomile decoction, or other similar things; and it is not advisable to use a cupping glass before a bath or after a bath, but rather an hour or two afterwards; and they should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that they wash themselves when they need to be cupped and when they have been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And let those who have a fever be careful not to make it worse; instead, they should consume cold things like pomegranates, endives, lettuce, and similar foods; and eat little, lean meat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And he who has a cold complexion, should sip syrup of honey and fragrant wine, neither too old nor too new, and eat little, and eat raisins and small birds and pigeons; and on the day that he undergoes an operation, he must drink more than he eats; and it is advisable to give any man, at any time, three times or a pinch of triacle or musk before or after the procedure to strengthen the principal members; but the cold should be avoided by those who are hot.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cupping glasses that are applied without causing harm are those placed on the liver, and the spleen, and podagra, and the belly and the bowels and the kidneys and the hips, for these members do not tolerate being hurt in any way, and it is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we apply cupping to the breasts when the nipples are healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place cups on the belly and bowels to reduce the member; and it removes pain when there is congestion or a stone, as it may by chance draw away the congestion, or leave the stone in its proper place; and thus it acts when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retention of wind, and these cups are left empty to suck only; and they should never be made too hot, nor filled with cold water, as in cases where tears flow, and in this manner we fill the cup with hot water mixed with suitable herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cup (ventouse) administered by fire is this:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	It should have two parts as broad as half a palm from end to end, and on its outer edge, near the middle, it should have a small hole, no larger than to fit an needle, and it should be made of iron or steel, so that it does not injure the patient when placed over the limb; and in the middle there should be a crossbar of iron or steel, to hold a cloth with a good grip, and their size can vary according to the disease and age of the person using them; for the cup sizes for children are different from those for adults and thin people compared to fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And thus should one place this cup on the affected member: take wax or linen cloth and put it through the hole in the cup, so that the light shines at the bottom of the cup to prevent burning the patient; then place it on the member, and your fingers should be on the opening we have mentioned, so that when you look, the vapor goes out, and remove the cup; and use the linen cloth as before, and repeat often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cup used to treat pleurisy and other acute ailments, there is no hole or opening, and it can be applied effectively only when filled with water. It should be placed on the affected member only when it is completely full of water; this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without bandages, they are only healed in members where one cannot apply a tourniquet due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and when the skin is stripped from the member, like a doe or goat, or others of a similar nature, and if the quality of the wound is such that when you find bandages that are in clear, sweet water without putrefaction, take them; and place them in clear, sweet water until they become smooth, and have nothing in their bellies; then make an incision with a vein and tourniquet, rub the member until it turns red, and apply the bandages; and when they are sore and chafed, if this is a member where a tourniquet can be applied, apply it, for it is much better afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If he does not lift the lion from its place, and then water, well, and then hopes; and if his joints feel too stiff after the body of the bones, so moisten the linen cloth with cold water, and put it on, until the bones are relaxed; and if the bones are multiplied, so put vitriol powder or gall, and similar things, until they are relaxed; or you place half a peeled fava bean on the lion, and leave it until it attaches to the bone, then it will relax now; and if you need more, take other bones.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the bones do not want to be taken, rub fresh blood on the lion, or insert an needle into the bone until it bleeds, then place them back; and soon as they smell the blood, they will attach; and when you see that they are chewing, sprinkle a little aloe and silk powder, or ash, and they will stop.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	We begin the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the wise minds of this chapter come from a knowledge never seen in ancient books, nor written down; for this reason, the science is strange in our land, because I found no good book on it, and learned nothing about it except through the knowledge of ancient books, upon which I have so diligently studied, both by experiment and the custom of my life. And so I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and at the end I have abridged it, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we explain in this prologue of this book the principles of speech and the chapters where the wise men apply their understanding, and focus on truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	When a fracture, dislocation, or twist occurs, it is necessary to quickly tend to the patient, both on the affected side and the other, if nothing helps, such as weakness of the body, illness, or old age; or if the condition is very severe, or too cold, and you use things that are cold like ice packs, or a horse's or deer's skin, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty foods, and do not fill the body with meat that fills the veins with blood, as long as you have doubt about the formation of an abscess or the spread of material to the limb; then the patient will return to their previous condition as they had used to be.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one alleviate the patient from foods that cause excessive belching, or have a viscous consistency, such as cooked flour in water, laughter, and pressure, and the stomach, and effusions, and odors, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For excessive belching often prevents the bone from healing properly, and delays the recovery of the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that bones broken in the very old and decrepit do not heal well or unite firmly according to their nature because of the stiffness of the members, nor do those that are too soft, such as the bones of young children; but take no heed, rather hold fast to the broken bone with strong tenons that join the member together, as it was before, and do not remove it entirely from its place, for this reason one must consume large amounts of substantial foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manners of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another when sharpening, such as the cutting of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, then it is a small crack all around.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each condition has its own mechanism and specific tool for restoration, according to the memory that comes to mind; and the fracture of bone is known because the joint is twisted, well opened by force, and sounds when pressed with the hand; and when there is no twist or pain in touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture; but it can have a twist, or a split, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You should not move it with the hand, but apply remedies that come to mind later, and then gently tighten it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture that goes up in the air, and the two parts are disjointed, he must now set them even, so that the abscesses come from there; and if hot abscesses come, he should not leave it for any day, until the abscesses calm down; then place it evenly as you can lightly and skillfully, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restorations of where it is broken. Then tighten it, as is appropriate hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if a bone is broken in two parts, whether it is a hand or foot, or one of the smaller members, or at the joints, or at one joint and your hand, place the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are out of alignment, all the instruments adjust themselves to their proper places, and be careful not to cause the patient any injury or pain through your work; and carefully align the two ends of the bone.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he will feel it well with his hand if it seems to him that it is not well: if it is dressed properly and not pulled too hard, not pressed as those who cause the hot abscess and contraction in the member by their own work, as we have often wanted.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is at rest, gently encourage the patient not to move it, neither awake nor asleep, nor turn it in any way; and be careful that the member is well secured so that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, and it is not yet healed, it is necessary to put it in a position where he feels no pain; and be careful that it is put right, so that there is no twisting when it is restored; and the quality of the damaged member will depend on what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You know that broken members are diverse in size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For it has small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones: it is necessary to wrap them with soft and fine linen; and those that are large, like thighs and legs: it is necessary to wrap them with a wide and firm ligature, for the wide ligatures embrace the whole member, and tighten it equally from all sides, so that there is no movement; then apply slight, light compresses, three or four times around the member, and tighten your hand slightly on the entire ligature, then go above the fracture and tighten less, allowing the fracture to move a little; and soften the ligature little by little, until you press greatly on the healthy part below; then take another ligature and wrap it around again from the top of the broken member; then go back to the underpart of the fracture, and tighten it moderately, not too tightly or too loosely, as we have said in the first chapter above; then place between the ligatures soft linen compresses or pieces of cloth, until it is all even, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply a hot, soothing compress to it, which reduces the swelling, and leave it for several days; then stretch your limbs, and use a narrow cane cut sharply from a tree trunk, or palm fronds, shaped as follows:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the cane placed on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others; and as long as is suitable for the member, whether small or large; then tighten the canes as you did in the first layer, but tie them with thread as in the first layer on the fracture; tighter now, less later; and the thread should be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of flax; because if the thread is too thick, it's like the work of fools who make their bindings from twisted flax threads, and that is a great error, for the binding cannot be even if it is too thin, and it does not suit that there be less space between each cane.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is troubled by the roots of the stars after dislocating them from their healthy places, he should place soft cloth or other dressing over them to avoid bleeding.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the veins are broken, I will describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not appropriate to extract all the stars from all the broken members on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the members are large, it is not appropriate to put stars inside until after 5 or 7 days, or according to your judgment based on the heat of the abscess; and see here the ancient method of using emplasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that clings to the walls of the mill, mix it with enough egg, and make this paste, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common method for an emplaster that restores fractures in various positions, especially for women and small children, as it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to make a plaster that restores fractures, dislocations, and twists: take equal parts of bear's fat, lard, wool, asafoetida, and gum arabic; add X parts of myrrh and aloe, V parts of aloes, VIIII parts of alechen, and make it into powder, mixing with egg albumen. If the patient's body heat is high, use this plaster, as it is of good composition, and it restores broken bones severely, and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another plaster for twists: take mugwort and visalva, X parts; myrrh and aloes, 7 parts; acacia, 6 parts; Armenian bole, X parts; grind well and mix with vinegar or egg albumen, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of splinting joints and realigning bones in their sockets, soothing the pain that comes from it, and using the saw to cut the bone, and the fracture: take a new cloth, moisten it with oil and heat, and place it on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Cyst splints do not restore, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses and properly removing pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of splinting that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves and land pavot (opium poppy) leaves, grind together, and make a paste.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of splinting to restore the broken bone and thereby lessen the pain of healing.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the roots of chamomile, violets, and valerian, all in equal parts; grind them fine, mix with wine, and apply to the affected member after heating it. Alternatively, mix with fresh coriander water or water alone, and use as needed.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another stronger method of splinting when a hard abscess forms during the healing of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of alder, and flaxseed, and balm, and melilot, and fennel, and violets, and chamomile, from each a small part; grind them and prepare a paste with sharp salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates writes in his book that one should not apply heat or cold to a broken member, but instead use a plaster made only of wax and oil, neither too hot nor too cold.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen recommends applying warm, dry substances to a broken member to aid in healing, such as myrrh and aloe and incense, as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of dressing that is effective against injury and pain: take moss and sheepskin or chicken feathers, and wool equal in amount, grind them, and make a paste and bind it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, afterwards, be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor do the bones move from their place; if it becomes painful or there is itching, feeling of restlessness or swelling, act quickly, remove the dressing and take out the plaster now; then take a light cloth, a moist sponge, dip it in water, and lift up the affected area until the itching stops and the pain subsides. Leave the member to rest for an hour, then put on a dry compress, moistened with water or rose oil, and bandage it tightly, making sure you are certain of the heat of the abscess. This will reduce the inflammation in the affected member and alleviate the pain; then repeat the process gently, using less plaster this time, and do not strain it too much as before; treat it gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is red, swollen, painful, and hot, and it reoccurs, then you need to apply a poultice and bind it, just as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If the limb does not heal after what we have said, do not dislocate it before three or four or five or seven days; and never leave it for twenty days, as long as the fracture is open, and the adjustment of the bone to the flesh approaches; then you should restrain it more than initially, and fatten its flesh, as I have said above. And if you see that the limb dries out more than is necessary, know that healing will not come. Then apply hot water every time you dislocate it, every third day, and open the wound slightly; by this work, therefore, the healing of the limb is cut short, and a great deal of harm results from what the ignorant do, who distort the limb incorrectly: this is bad, and there are many dangers in it, and I see nothing else but to leave it alone and do it right.
des diverses manieres de brisure	From various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many ways of fracture, with various shapes and distinct causes; for there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, where the bone breaks completely through to the other side, as in a hack or a thrust; this is why this type of fracture is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or, the sword may cut through the bone without piercing it, and this is called a "absolute" fracture; and these two types of fractures can be either large or small wounds.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a pounding, or indentation, or cutting of stone, or injury from a fall upon stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a recent fracture, which approaches the skin just under the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound that is healed in the bone is as subtle as a hair, and the fracture is small, it is called a "capillary" fracture; and if the wound is made by striking with stone, or fall, or similar thing, and the piece of bone enters inside, and the bones are entangled as when a smith works on the furnaces; then between the bone and the stone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their heads, such as young children's heads; and it occurs in all these ways of dislocation, that small fragments are broken off, just as if they were. And I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all the ways of dislocations by the traction on them, and the inquiry at close range, and by the corrupt flesh above them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the hair is determined by the fact that when the bone is discovered and rubbed in place, it opens up the fracture, revealing its black nature.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be cautious regarding accidents with the patient, and if you notice any harmful accident, such as vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, excessive stretching, paleness, sudden fever, or other similar symptoms occurring in various combinations, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming accidents and hope for healing, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the injury.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if this happens, and you quickly remove the bone on the seventh day, so that the wound beneath the bone is corrupted, then the complications that we have described will occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone breaks down to the tissue that covers the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part in this way: and it is important that you press the patient's head with pain, and expose the bone in every way possible, and clean the wound gently as much as you can, and if blood oozes upon exposing the bone, or an abscess forms later, then seek help from those who know, and fill the space around the bone with moist, rose-scented cloth; and rest the wound until the swelling subsides and you are sure of no further bleeding. Then begin removing the bone, and this is done in two ways: one way is to carefully cut a narrow opening in front, and this is its shape...
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then take another treatment even greater than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second method is that you have many different-sized treatments, some narrow and others wide, and they are sharp and made of indurate iron; and perform them gently so as not to damage the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and dense, it is necessary that you pierce around it, so as to administer treatments with care, so that they do not go through the bone too deeply, and there should be a margin or a circle on top of the point, preventing it from going through the bone; and you need several of them, so that each one comes in its proper place according to the thickness of the bone, so as to have care for all bones; and this is the form of the three types of treatments:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to know when an bone is broken is that you apply pressure on the bone, and return your hand to its normal position until you know the bone is set; then place the pressure elsewhere a little later, doing this all around, then cut with incisions the space between the fractured parts of the bone, and do so as delicately as possible, lightly, as we have said, while still holding the bone in your hand or using any tools you have such as pliers or tweezers; be careful not to touch the brain or the soft tissue.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have set the bone and treated it, it is necessary to observe the tension that remains in the bone compared to any other tool similar to an incisive; however, it should be more gentle and subtle than the others. If there is no remaining tension in the small bones or scales, gently remove them with any suitable tools; then dress the wound with bandages and treatments as we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is that which Galen says, which is safer; it is very powerful, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you expose a part of the bone, either where the break is open, and once you have exposed this part, place the sharp edge of this lens-shaped incision tool against it, which has this shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, but expose the acute part on the inner side, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then gently strike with a small hammer, so that you slightly raise the bone all around, and be careful to protect the tissue underneath; if it is distant from the bone, gently lift it, for otherwise it will cause great pain and suffering.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the skin, and the bone is only cut from above, leaving small pieces, then it is necessary to clean these asperities, and remove the scales with a delicate rasp, having various quantities of it at hand, to apply in each case the most suitable, according to the severity and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you encounter great resistances, and afterwards more subtle ones, do not cease from this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other delicate incisions and fractures, it is necessary to apply treatment according to their location; and this is something that is not easily answered by one who has dedicated his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the patient is satisfied with the treatment and it needs to be uncovered, you should press a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, soaked in rose oil, onto the wound; then take another cloth, doubled over twice or thrice, soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; do this as lightly as possible so as not to harm the patient, then apply another bandage and don't tighten it too much until the wound is only slightly covered; leave it like that for a day or two, until the abscess has calmed down, then remove it and administer medications such as licorice roots, flour of alder trees, incense powder, arisology, and similar substances; make a powder from these things and apply it to the wound, and give the patient universal remedies without blistering; ensure the wound is always clean, and do not leave any dressing on it or let pus accumulate, because when pus accumulates under the cloth, it will corrode and destroy the flesh of the patient, causing great harm.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if no adverse event comes to the patient as we have said, it is uncertain without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if darkness comes only due to the medicine placed upon it, how much virtue it holds, then you should press a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and wrap it in a cloth; then apply it to the sick, and cure it with the remedies that are appropriate, as long as they are healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	You should know that the two parts of the bone are never broken, either completely or only partially, because they are two bones; and the inner part is cartilage, which does not break, but only bends or twists, then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, you should insert your little finger or a narrow tool into the gap, and place the same fragment back in its proper position, and close it gently, until the bone returns to its natural shape; and do this carefully, so that the patient does not feel pain from your actions.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the bone near the joint, and the fingers cannot reach it, you should place a thin, straight tool under one edge of the break and gently straighten it until the finger can access the broken area.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in both parts, you should do the same and try to restore it on the first day, if possible; if not, wait until the swelling has subsided after the seventh or tenth day, then gently pull the broken pieces together using strips of linen, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or turn to another side if it is broken, and let the fragments be; so that the edges are thick enough to fill the gaps in the wound.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say that no restoration is required if the edges are moistened with butter, and each day they must be changed.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened with an egg yolk mixture and mill powder; then leave the edges, until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never burn the skin with hot pens or needles on different parts, and if it hurts greatly around, and holds the bruise, and breathes among the patient; or do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses occur at the site while you are treating it, apply a plaster or moist cotton dipped in rose oil or in a poultice of duck fat.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess does not form, apply an external plaster made of flour, incense powder, confited with egg albumen, then place light stays on top and do not tie the skin; and if the bruise is small and broken into small pieces, remove it with suitable instruments, then clean the gap, and treat with charred things, and stitch it up, as appropriate plasters and bandages for it; and if there are no wounds inside the abscess, cure it externally, and place splints until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	from the dislocation of the mandible
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is dislocated and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only slightly out of place, and it is not broken into two pieces, but only crooked inward, then if you recognize this lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your index finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left mandible, insert your index finger of the right hand, gently pushing the fracture inward, and then pull it outward with the other hand, making it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is severe in two places, then it is necessary that you administer extension to both parts, as long as they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the teeth occurs, or loosening, using a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then apply cerate to the broken jaw and place a double cloth; on the cloth, place a large, well-made star or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jaw, secure it to the muscles you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you notice that the figure changes after three days, then reset it as it was; apply plaster next, using fine powder with an abundance of egg or sesame flour, after removing the cerate; place a thin layer of plaster and let it dry; if it does not change the patient's condition and becomes healthy, leave it until it heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses appear, it is necessary to do as we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both a fracture and a wound together, it does not matter which part of the bone is broken; it is necessary to use suitable instruments for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, it should be widened with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And after you have removed all these pieces and it does not delay, if the wound is wide, close it with suitable plaster, to promote healing, as long as it is healthy.
de la forcele	from the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps break many times near the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways: it may be broken and separated into two parts, with fragments, and is easier to restore; or there is a fracture with an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is as follows when the fracture is without an injury, that you have two assistants: one holds the aid that is broken; and the other extends the collar towards the affected part; then set the fracture equally in both hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is no bulge or depression.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend it further, place a round, thick cloth or woolen spear beneath the patient's shoulder, according to your need; stretch and gently apply force, holding the spear with your hand, so that you align the fracture correctly as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the fracture away from the stronger part, because it is firmly stuck, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their side with their shoulder supported, and have the assistants push the shoulder downwards, until the bone of the fracture is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then address the fracture with your hands, and if you feel any debris, it is necessary to cut through; gently pull the pieces apart, and if the bone cannot join together despite your best efforts, use the instrument beneath the fracture to achieve the desired effect.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it should look like a spoon, and is not broken off, and is as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and it has two ends, as you see, one being wider than the other, just as the rupture of the wound that you made when treating the bones; and when you are certain of the hot abscess, if you cut the wound deeply, or if the incision is small, then doubt the hot abscess, and apply drapes and bands to the wound according to its amount.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses occur, then moisten the bandage with rose oil and silk and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The binding of the bone, when it is wounded and broken, is to place on the bone the plaster of very fine powder and egg albumen, and put light bandages on top, and insert a spike under the shoulder blade if needed; then take a very wide strip of cloth, put the bandage with plaster on it, wrap it around the injury, so that the ends of the cloth hang down from the broken bone; place the splint on the fracture, and turn the bandage over the collarbone and under the healthy shoulder blade and the injured one; rearrange each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the splint firmly, and clearly see that the splint does not move on the fractured bone, reward it every day, and when the ligament loosens, tighten it; put the patient on his back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder blade while he sleeps, to raise the injury; lighten the fracture by aligning the shoulder, or tie the arm to the collarbone, and do not loosen it for twenty days, unless a bad accident happens; then recommence the plastering if needed, tighten it, and leave it thus until it is healed; it is healed in no more than 28 days, and less so for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	from the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	If the shoulder is dislocated and does not move except by touch, then reset it according to the shape of the dislocation, in every way that you can. Then apply a fine, powdery poultice with plenty of egg, and cover it lightly with a double cloth. Place a wide and thin board, slightly larger than the shoulder, and lay the dislocated bone so that it is evenly covered by the poultice; then fasten it firmly with a strong bandage, ensuring that the bone does not move from its place, and check it each day. Whenever it loosens, tighten the bandage and realign the bone if it has moved. Place the patient on their side, and in this way the shoulder will be restored in 10 to 25 days. And when this number of days is complete, untie it carefully, for it is not a bone that can be easily put back.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone sticks out and is not pulled away from the heart, it pushes up the bone and does what we said about soothing the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	from the break of the worst abscess
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The fracture is never broken in the middle, but that happens rarely; it often breaks at the extreme ends.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it declines away from the heart, causing the patient great pain and weakness, sometimes bleeding, opening up the fissures in the broken bone, and feels all better.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and places a cushion between their shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and aligns the ribs with both hands, subtly adjusting it to the proper shape of the bone; then apply plasters and compresses over the delicate salt or other light bandage, wrapping it in a cloth and securing it to the broken bone so that it does not move. And re-tie the linen around the back, tightening it appropriately, and check the wound every hour, if it becomes softer, tighten it; if it needs to be released due to corrosion, itchiness, pain, or an abscess at the site, act quickly, remove the plaster, scratch off the ointment, and address the cause of the condition with appropriate treatment. Then reapply the plaster and continue to tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	from the fracture of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	You know that the fracture of ribs only occurs in the upper part of the back, and at the top, and they do not bend unless they are broken; and this causes great pain to anyone examining them.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is such that you place the fracture correctly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a stick, if you have such materials at hand.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inward, it makes the patient feel very great pain and piercing, as if from crying, because the bone pierces the flesh; and then he loses his breath, vomits much blood, and this causes great suffering and illness, and the ancients have put great effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And for those who say that it is appropriate to administer foods that cause bloating in the stomach to expel the fracture outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not pretend that incisions without heat will not come if they have not previously been caused.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it appears, then it is healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that none of you should apply suction cups to the limbs for draining, as it seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the suction cup might draw away excess fluids from the limb due to weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that none of you should cover the wound with moistened wool in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to equalize the pressure around it, then treat it with care for pleurisy, flesh, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure through the bone where the fracture is, and there is doubt in the patient, it is necessary to cut into the broken ribcage, and place an instrument to hold it; then one must break the bone, pull gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with poultices, until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses form, place moistened oil-soaked rags on them and lay the patient down; treat while the abscess is present, lying flat on their side where it formed, until they are healed.
de la brisure dou col	from the fracture of the collarbone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No fracture occurs to the collarbone bone at any time, and it rarely happens that it hurts; also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to a person, and you want to know if they will recover, pay attention if you see their hands becoming soft, swollen, and numb, and are unable to move or stretch them, and if you prick them with a needle, they don't feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Knowing that it is dangerous in many ways, if the patient remains silent and feels well when you press upon them, but not when they are moved, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the illness of the patient will be cured, if proper treatment is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things occur in the back of the spine, you must know if there is a fracture or not, if you observe whether their legs are weak, and if there are accidents that are in the hands, and on the back, sudden movements and expulsions without will; and when it is remembered on the belly, such sudden expulsion without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is remembered on the back and he wants to move, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Knowing that it is deadly: therefore, do not labor in its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to him, then it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that if there is an abscess, you apply hot oil or egg-yolk oil to it until it is soothed; then put a comforting and drying plaster on it and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is detached, it should be covered with bandages; then the bone is removed, and the two edges of the wound are sutured if it is large, then treated with poultices in a warm manner until it heals; and if the fragment of bone is broken off, which is called the "fragment of the wound," you press it gently with your left hand, and place it level with the other hand, then apply the plaster and the splint, if needed; then bind it tightly, and if there are any detached bones, reduce them and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	From the fracture of the bone of the spine.
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the bone of the spine is fractured, and if there is not even a little reduction in the head, it causes pain, swelling, and inflammation at the site of the fracture.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it (the fracture), as long as you are above the break; and you know what the fracture is and its form; and if the fracture is only at the top, then make an equal cut, as long as it retains its natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, it bends inward, then place the patient on his stomach until the healing of that fracture becomes apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And once you have made it even, place a splint over it, then put a board or hard cloth on top and tighten the fracture so that it does not move, and keep the patient's side elevated until the bone is aligned.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess appears and is not touched, until the abscess is calmed down, apply what we have previously said; then return to restoration, holding it as appropriate, if there is no adverse event, and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	dislocation of the shoulder joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is located between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it must be restored using one of two methods: one involves taking a thick, middle-sized stick, according to this shape...
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And hold the two feet, and stretch them upwards, and place the patient on a seat; then break one of his arms over the thigh, until it becomes relaxed, and wrap it with a bandage of cloth, then stretch it onto a heavy object or have someone pull it down; then bring the broken part back to its proper position, as is necessary.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another method is to lay the patient on his back, and tie one hand to his neck, then instruct the attendants to dip what is above the broken part of the hand in water, and below in alcohol, and extend each part accordingly.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that extraction is too forceful, then tighten the ligature around the break, and on the break, extend each of the assistants to their respective sides.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the break is near the top of the shoulder, it is necessary to place a ligature halfway under the acromion, and another towards the side of the neck, underneath the break; and if the break is on the side of the neck, it is necessary to apply a light ligature without strain, as long as the break remains level on the bone, then set it properly and tighten it, without causing complications.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if a muscle pulls (aposteme) and will not release for seven days, apply a moist cloth in ash and rose oil until the pull is soothed; then tighten it, and the manner of tightening is to place the plaster on the tear, then reassemble the arm over the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; and cover with a drape, tighten over the muscle and the arm, so that the arm is in a straight position, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is not moved, use pins, and place a wider and stronger pin on the tear, leaving two spaces between each pin, and make each pin so large that it passes through the tear three times; then tighten the pins, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter regarding the tear, from a distance first.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the stars and the straining, as we have said, when you return the broken member, and doubt the heat of the abscess, leave it bound for seven days, as we have said; then every three days check the binding, that no swelling or pain comes to the place, or the healing cannot come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it agrees, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accident happens, do not take off the binding for three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach; place beneath the dislocated limb a flat cushion of equal thickness made of wool, and every hour during the day or night watch that the shape of the limb does not change or the binding become loose; if it agrees through the virtue of medicine, and give them food as we have mentioned above, in such a way that the food is first made subtile; and when they begin to recover, it will be substantial.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is custom that the shoulder and leg should be reset after forty days, and then the dislocation must be released and treatment with baths and medicinal herbs be administered to correct the position.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the contraction is severe and tight, it may take several days or even months to release it.
de la brisure du bras	of the dislocation of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, called the femur and radius, where one is smaller and extends towards the hand, and the other is larger and lies below, towards the elbow; so it may happen that only the large bone (femur) or small bone (radius) breaks, or both may be affected.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small fractures are broken, the restoration and healing is light, but when the large ones are broken, the healing is poor, and more painful than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small fractures that are broken, it is necessary to extend them slightly and evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large fractures, it is necessary to pull stronger; and stretch them on a cushion, and place the palm of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient cross his legs over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher than the patient's pain allows; then have one minister extend his strong arm to the part below his hand, or to the wrist, and another minister above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then arrange them evenly, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture, each one is placed in its place, and if there is none that grips the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, by making it on top of the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the specific chapter; then take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if, in the beginning of restoration, abscesses occur, then I apply a bandage made of rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and I wrap it gently over, until the abscess is calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the plaster, and apply the pouder from the soft mill with enough egg, then place the needles, making the needle of the fracture stronger and a little wider than the others; know that it should have 6 needles or more in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; tighten more over the fracture than elsewhere, but not too far away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and make the drapes on top of the fracture soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread, from which it is pulled, be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after no days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if no adverse event occurs in the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you soak the limb in hot water until the itching is soothed; and let the limb not be squeezed too tightly at rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then repeat the stretching, and if the ligaments loosen and the bones disalign, or any similar thing, address it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, it is necessary to loosen it slightly and leave it for a few days until the swelling goes down, and then tighten it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, then he should be released after twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If in doubt, bind his hands to his chest, making sure the collars are even, and guard against movement and gestures, and have him sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or forty-five, or perhaps in twenty days, depending on the combinations and complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and in the fingers there are often fractures, and they come but with great pain many times over.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the hand's bone is broken or bent, it is necessary for the patient to cut across it, and place it straight before him equally; then he places his hand on a stretched-out cloth, and extends the broken bones' ministers, and aligns them properly, until they are well joined; and applies the poultice and compresses if there is no abscess, and then wraps it with a piece of linen cloth according to its size.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is near the joint's belly, make a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to press it against his broken hand; then pull it out with a long cloth, and take a piece of gauze as large as the hand, and wrap it tightly, as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the end, it is necessary to place a stick across and another under the sole, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and stop the bleeding between them.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture occurs in neither of the joints, and it is dislocated, place it evenly, as it should be; tighten it with the sole, and if you see that putting a small, straight stick will raise the dislocation without moving it, do so. And if the dislocation is in the other finger, like the index or any other, place it evenly and tie it with the healthy joint afterward; either hold them all tightly or put a stick on it, as needed, taking care during the restoration and alignment of the abscess above, and support what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	from the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The hipbone is often broken, and one can clearly see it when it returns to its original position in front and behind; its restoration is achieved by binding it tightly over the break and from the other side.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their face, then each limb extends equally to both sides; this is when the break is between the bones.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the hipbone, one ligament should be bound towards the knee, and others ligaments should bind from below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is close to the knee, then loosen the ligaments of the knee, and allow the extension; then place the splint so that the bone is level in both hands, as per its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and fasten it, so that there are no gaps.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside, then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is made in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is advisable to wrap the fracture with a hard bandage, cutting off the excess, and then return the leg until the heel reaches the root of the toe, and insert a long thread between the calf and the leg below the knee joint, and bring the end above; then return to the leg and calf, wrapping the bandage again, and place a stirrup on it, and put a stirrup on the leg bone; then use eight pieces of soft cloth between the leg and calf to make equal compression. Then, as you move higher on the bandage, loosen the grip, and tie three or four knots above the bandage; and take two threads that you had inserted between the leg and calf, and tie three stirrups above them, then return to below the knee with the thread, until you reach the foot. Tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it as it is, so that there is no further abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens that he dislocates it again and it comes back as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that are caught, one must try to free them if possible; and if one cannot, it is necessary to break the joint and pull out the fragment, and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never should the ankle be broken in this way with staples, as is done in the aid of the shoulder or arm; however, even after such restoration, the patient does not recover.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the ankle is restored in 7 to 10 days, or a bit less or a bit more, depending on the variety of conditions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the gutter of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	You know that in the gutter of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, even if it is only a crack or an opening, it affects every wound, and feels wounded, and this feels good.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when you put each part back in its place as much as possible, and then apply a poultice, and place a round plaster if necessary, and tighten it appropriately, and follow all the arrangements we have mentioned for other breaks, such as an abscess or any similar condition; apply what is appropriate to each case, as long as it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	from the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called the "tibia" and the other the "fibula"; and all fracture occurs in the same way as in the arm, and the treatment is similar. If both bones are broken together, the leg will turn in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bones are broken, they bend forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the thick bone is broken, it causes great pain, and one can see it well; and it turns inward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply extension, and set it equal, and tie the stars equally; but still, it is necessary that the rupture be ugly, and there are many parts, so that the extension is smaller and lighter; and align according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two strips of strong cloth that cover the leg on both sides, and are as long as the leg from the knee to the foot; then wrap them in two layers and bind them tightly in the middle, so the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and so it is well. And no one should administer any treatment along the length of the leg, and if it is of strong cloth, they place the leg to prevent movement, and they properly perform this at the rupture where there is an abscess or other complication; and each day they move the leg to see if there is an abscess or other accident; if so, they treat it until it heals.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the fracture of bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones in the foot can be fractured and the toes, and there is no permanent cure except for various splints.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If the bones in the foot are fractured and you see them pushing against each other, so that the patient cannot bear weight on their foot, just as if they wanted to walk, then place your foot on theirs, holding the broken bones in place until they return to their natural position; then apply a splint and bandages above, and place a small, flat table inside the sole of the foot with two holes, then tighten it around the foot, wrapping cloth and other necessary items around it.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three days or four have passed, if you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones even, either broken or discolored.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are no bones broken, if they are restored, as we said about the hand's joints, then take a stick according to the length of the bone and make it slightly wider, then place the table (splint) from below on the foot, and bind it firmly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, then put on each bone a stick according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and bind the table from below the foot; and let it be firm on top of the stomach of the foot, so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, when we have discussed them; and treat each injury as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	on the fracture of the bone in the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When a woman's bone in her hand is fractured and the swelling subsides, then she should incline her body to one side, holding it from behind. Next, fill the gap left by the fracture with cotton, and also add a significant amount; then raise the woman up slightly, pressing her back gently, and repeat this process until the cotton reaches the entrance of the bone, helping the bone to heal in place. If she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, replace it, repeating this seven times or so. This will restore the fracture, and if you see any signs of infection, take a bladder from a goat, attach a tube to the opening, and completely fill the bladder inside the fracture site; then blow on the tube until the bladder is inflated inside: this will help the bone heal. Then fill it with cotton again and leave it like that for several days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the arm or the leg is broken, restore it as we have said for the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from one who puts his study and skill into it, and understands my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture indicates various dispositions for the right way of restoration; understand this therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When the staff is broken, take a goose throat and insert it into the staff; then wrap cloth around it, leave it for three or four days, and it will heal naturally.
de brisure avec plaie	from fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is great, such as the bone of the leg or shoulder or similar, it is necessary for him to be healed now, so that the healings we have mentioned bear witness to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, but there is residual poison, and you have nothing else, then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or day, before abscesses form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscess begins to heal, let it be for new days until the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it for a third or fourth day, lest you bring about a harmful outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible through the skin when you uncover the heart, it is necessary that you place it gently with your hands, slightly extended.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not appear suitable to place equally in your hands, then take this instrument made of iron, with seven or eight fingers (inches) long, and its width should be according to the amount of the wound; and for this purpose, it is best that he imprudently takes three or four (times), according to what is needed for each break treatment; and it should be rounded and slightly thick, so that it does not bend under pressure on the member during your work, and it should be thin in front, thick in the middle towards the front, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche," so the dislocated bone should be placed back on the visible head of the joint; then close it once, until it returns, and be even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot grasp the bone firmly, you must hold the head of the bone until the instrument has a firm grip.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, with a suitable instrument such as a chisel or saw, within your power; then remove what is left in the bone from jaggedness and small fragments.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reduced, and the patient feels great pain afterward, knowing that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do your best to ensure it is in its place, then moisten the cloth with a dry black styptic wine, and apply it properly; do not put any wax or other substance on the wound that could lead to putrefaction and corruption. Then administer remedies after you have restored the bone, leaving the wound uncovered, and clean the surrounding area according to the size of the wound; be very careful not to strain the wound with the fracture. Often, this has led to the patient's death or caused corrosion. The compresses should be softer and gentler than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or great, and you doubt that a worse accident may come, as we have said, and you feel pain in place, unless it is necessary to put bandages on, but wrap around, instead of bandages, hard cloth, and bind it.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is beginning to close, remove everything you have put on it, and apply a healing dressing for wounds, such as a four-ingredient ointment or similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to dislocate the member two times a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is swollen and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be dislocated in such a way that the bow of the joint moves slightly downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if the dislocation persists, and it cannot be reduced fully, understanding that there may be small fragments of bone, then you must open the wound with a knife, and remove all these unwanted pieces causing the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula forms in the place, or any other type of corruption, then it must be treated according to what is said in this chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when a bone is broken and open on the limb, like the bone of the calf or the shoulder, or other similar bones in the great limbs, do not pull it, for often death results, but let it rot until it falls off; perhaps after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	burns that come from the heat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the healing of the burn, especially when it is near a joint, and it is a bad sight to see the shape of the limb; and by chance, the member cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then, if we must administer: if you give stiffening medicines like aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, acacia, and similar ones, be sure to press any of these things, or all together, into a compact mass with pungent wine, or with abundant honey, or with ash; and place it on the affected area, hold it tightly, and do not release it for several days; and then dislocate it and begin again with another, until the swelling is gone; or press a piece of well-made lint; for the property of lint is to draw out all swelling from the limbs; and if the dislocation has already hardened like stone, it must be removed, cutting off the excess above, and treating the remaining part until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the weak member after treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed and the weak and delicate member remains, it occurs for many reasons: one is because it was bound too tightly and not properly secured; or because there are too many bindings and it cannot follow the natural movements of the limb; or due to excessive swelling; or from too great movements, not in their proper time; or because it has little blood in its body, making it weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	The treatment is as follows: you make the patient eat, and stretch their body, until blood flows abundantly within them; then administer a bath, give them joy and comfort; next, apply soot to the member, so that the soot attracts great blood flow, and often splash it with cold water, until the circulation reaches the limb; and it will return to its natural state.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The dislocated joint must be straightened after its healing.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When a member is twisted after healing and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those who claim one must break the limb from the moment of new growth, and many foolish practices have been observed in our lands. Such acts are blameworthy and cause great harm, perhaps even death. However, if the inflammation and pain are recent, it is necessary to raise them with hot water or cook soft herbs such as fennel leaves, roots, licorice, and similar things; prepare a mollifying poultice as well, using a carefully prepared aqua-distilled eagle's claw, and take the mucilaginous extract of fennel, mixing it with goose fat or oil of chamomile, and apply it as a poultice. Alternatively, use fig extracts and grind them with colon powder and other medications that help reduce stiffness.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the node crushed by continuous and prolonged friction with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And allow the limb to move every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the swelling and hardness become like stone, also as in the case of a stone, it is necessary to crush with iron, if required all the way to the bone, using a delicate incision; and apply compression and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begin the books on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations occur from no joint being in its proper place, which prevents movement, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs from no cause, it is necessary to bring the limb back towards its proper position immediately.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the limb swells, and by chance if it is reset at a later time, it may be painful; for this reason, it is not advisable to move it immediately when it is swollen. Often, it causes inflammation and other pains; however, once this occurs, make the patient better, then leave it until the abscess has healed; then apply hot water and oil, and gently reset the limb, treating each member as it comes.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the shoulder joint all the way down to the foot.
des mandibules	of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It is often the case that the jawbones become dislocated, and there are two types of dislocations: either they are slightly out of their sockets, soft and flexible; or they are completely dislocated, hanging down towards the chin, and draining saliva from the mouth, preventing it from closing, and causing the tongue to protrude when speaking.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself through various dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it forcefully, without delay; and in such a way that the healer places the patient's head with his sick mouth, pulling the lower jaw towards the root of the dislocation, so that it becomes aligned; and the other two hands should be extended equally; and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And [he/she] should make it equal, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is brought back, it should be carefully, especially when both mandibles are involved, by raising them with hot water and oil, gently aligning them; do not delay in bringing it back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back equally, and the patient's mouth closes well without straining, apply moistened cloth cerates made of rose oil and wax, then gently tie it with soft strings; let the patient sleep on their back, keeping their feet between two pillows so that neither moves to the right or left, nor makes any effort to move more; instead, gently feed them light food until the pain is gone and the jaws are healed; and then they can eat normally without opening their mouth too widely.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be brought back to their proper position within an hour and do not return to their normal place, this causes fever and frequent sweating, perhaps intestinal issues, and sometimes pure vomiting of bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know it is a sign of impending death; and often those who experience it die within seven days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fork cannot be dislocated from either side within the continuity of it, and it is never dislodged outwardly, and one feels it very much.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then he presses the joint firmly into the palm of his hand, and it will return; then he applies the plaster and the bandage, and tightens it; and the part that is towards the shoulder cannot dislocate; if it does not dislocate at all, or only occasionally, then he must put it back in place as we have said; then he applies the plaster and the bandage, and tightens it, and instructs the patient to rest until he is healed; and in this way the dislocation of the shoulder is brought back, when it is out of its proper position.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	**On Shoulder Dislocation**
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	You know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one is when it dislocates at the joint below the acromion; the second is at the part of the scapula itself; and sometimes it dislocates above, which is rare, and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder or inside the nerf; and often it dislocates towards the acromion, especially in those with little muscle, for them it happens easily; but in those with enough muscle, it barely moves, and returns barely.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to no one that there is a bruise or fracture, and a hot abscess forms in the shoulder, and they think it is dislocated because of that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary for you to test it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And the dislocation is known when it deviates towards the joint, and it distinguishes between the injured shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a clear difference; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and by touching the shoulder blade, the top of the shoulder feels like one entity; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his body, or move in any way; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, as long as it is not completely hidden, because you find it clearly visible when touched; and this kind of dislocation is not just for resetting, when it is new, or if the entrapped part is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister holds the patient's hand gently above, then places his palms beneath the joint, and pulls the joint forcefully upward towards the bone; and the minister holds the hand again, extends it upward, and puts it beneath; this will bring relief.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	If it does not come as we have said above, in a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and administer a gentle, softening, and soothing application, such as a decoction of althae and fenugreek and melilote in water, and apply it. Then help the patient to lie down on their back, and place a piece of equal thickness of wool beneath the joint, not too soft nor too hard, then place the heel of the foot upon this pad, and with gentle strength pull the head of the shoulder upwards, while also pulling the hand of the patient; and another minister should hold the head of the shoulder to prevent it from moving. This will correct the position of the shoulder immediately, and if you see that it is returned to its place, follow this method: and ensure there is a man present who is taller than the patient; and he should stand straight against the side of the patient, pull the shoulder away from the joint of the patient's back, and pull the joint upwards, so that the patient's arm hangs down; and another minister pulls the hand of the patient downwards towards their stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, and any heavy thing is laid upon him, then the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it is also corrected in another way: take a long stick and insert it into the ground so that the end is as bright as a pistal, but neither too thick nor too thin; then place it under the patient, ensuring there are soft rags above, and the patient's arm is straight and firm. Then extend the patient's hand downwards from the other side, and the joint will return to its place; and if it does not want to come back for all the reasons we have mentioned, do this treatment: take a stick that is two arms long and four fingers wide, which has a pointed end to enter perfectly under the shoulder according to this shape.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then place a heavy cloth over the head, so that it does not hurt the patient, and then lay the patient flat; extend one arm above the head and fasten the aid to the head, and the arm at the elbow of the hand, then put the arm on the edge of a broad shovel, and let the hands hang down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will now be realigned.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is dislocated in any way, it is necessary to place under the joint a piece of equal woolen thread, then apply a plaster with a mixture of powder from the mill, with incense and egg yolk, over the entire shoulder and around it, then pull the joint gently, and tie the string to the plaster, and press the hand against the collarbone, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he move the dislocated part little by little, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it will heal faster; and then move it again after a few days or seven, and it will be cured. If it remains stiff and is not softened, it will heal.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is firmly out of place due to moisture or any other reason, it is necessary that you apply cautery at three points, as described in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and after seven days the dislocation still does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm above his head, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is either cut, stretched, or damaged; and know that the joint will never be firmly in its place again.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the worst, and the limbs, or behind, if it is done by a blow, and stretching of the hands, and is held in another place; and treat as long as it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after healing comes cracking in the member, and late movements, if the patient uses it often, until the cracking is relieved, and it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation cost
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the jointure cost is relieved by a few things, and it returns; if it is despoiled from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not completely healed, because we see it well and feel it well; and it heals according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased part with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is injured, and cannot bend the arm, or touch the shoulder to anything.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in such a way that the apothema does not come again, because if the apothema comes back, it will be difficult to bring it back; and by chance it cannot be brought back entirely from the rear part; it is worse than other dislocations, causes greater pain, and by chance may lead to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is possible when it can be brought back, you extend his hand with both of yours; and his arms are spread out, and the hands moved gently according to the cost around, inside and outside, and bring the joint to his thighs together, or at the base of his palm, until he returns to his place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and presses from the base of the palm the joint that is out of place.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, apply a strong extension; and let the minister extend his arm, and tie him with a double long and wide strip, so that he does not move at the extension. Then turn each part of the arm, after you have wrapped the bandage around the joint. When you see the joint in place, add a little oil to soften the joint, then bring it back into shape, until it returns to its place. And when it is in place, apply dry plaster with egg white, form it, and bend the arm towards the patient's chest, leaving it for several days, then loosen it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not properly secured, repeat the splint and the bandage, and leave it for several days, until it is firmly placed; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if the patient feels pain after the joint is reset, and it becomes stiff, bathe and gently rub it, applying pressure until it is relieved; or place a grease-soaked woolen pad on the joint, leave it for a day and night, then remove it and give the patient a bath; and when they are washed, gently rub the joint, then apply the pad again, and repeat this process two or three times until it is healed; and if you notice, use fine moist warm wax with butter and strain it over the joint; it will return to its original state.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand joint is misaligned and its return to position is light, more so than other joints. Nonetheless, it needs to be carefully realigned, immediately upon its dislocation, so that the swelling or hot abscess does not set in.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the realigning is such that you place the afflicted hand on a table, extend the patient's fingers, and observe them until they are even, so that the palm rests upon the joint's surface, holding it in position until it returns to its correct place. However, you must check if it is back in its proper location; then, place the patient's hand with the back side down on a table for extension and realigning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, let the patient lay his back on his hand on a table, and look closely at the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is good; otherwise, if the strain of soothing compresses on abscesses does not cease, and it remains thus without repeating.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place for any number of days, then the joint remains twisted; and it does not harm the patient that the hand is bent, and nothing can be extracted: then know that the nerve or artery is cut; unless there is no other mechanism by which to extract it safely, and perhaps there is nothing else worth trying.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, if you put on the plaster as we have said, then pull it and leave it for a day, then loosen it and leave it such.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no fracture, then apply hot water moisture, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	on the dislocation of the two joints of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Under no circumstances should the joints of the hand be dislocated at both ends, either on the back of the palm or on the sole; then, pull the joint and release it until it returns, then hold the top of the joint and bend it towards the side where it is separated; leave it for a day, and then repeat this process; do not tie it, as we have said, but loosen it during the day and move it, and then relink it; continue to do this until it is tight, and also do so if it is dislocated on the sole of the hand, following the same method until it heals.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	dislocation of the spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine or the neck is dislocated, and there is no cure, the patient often dies quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the patient's movements become involuntary, they cannot control them, and often, a limb becomes weakened, such as both legs or one arm, or sometimes even both arms; and occasionally, the spine becomes bent to one side—this is called "scoliosis". The treatment for this is to reward and correct the scoliosis if it originated in childhood; if there is no cure or remedy for it at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from a fall or from impacts or similar things, the old methods of treatment speak of in great words, but they offer little benefit to all; however, I have abbreviated them according to my understanding and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the stiffness that comes to the penis in front, no one has a remedy; and also that which comes straight to the second side, and it is only the one who properly comes to the back, as I say, that can be cured. And let the patient lie on his face equally in the first position, and stretch him tightly from below so he does not bleed. Then take a stick and make an impression in the ground with your head, and another at the other side, and tie a string around the parts of the patient's body that are afflicted, one to the head and the others to the feet, among the two sticks; and they should be well secured, the stick as we have said, and let the midwife place her palms on the forming spine until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a table three feet long, remove the wall from behind it, place the patient on their side, and turn the head of the table away from the wall; then place the middle of the table over the spine, and put both legs of the table on the other side of the table, pressing firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see it moving, do it in a circular motion that comes back to your hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And take two sharp sticks, one of great length, and insert them through the side of the patient's arm, leaving two others outside; between each stick, dig a space as long as your palm, and make in each stick a hole for the rotation or turn, so that they are firmly stuck in the ground, not moving; and between these two turning sticks, place one smaller stick to return the turns, also of the length of a palm, so that each minister returns his stick to its whole length, and the master makes the spine equal as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, apply a drying plaster with plenty of heat, and then the compresses, and then the stick of a tablet three fingers long, which will own the joint of the stiffness and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the patient's mild relief, as long as it is healed; and if any thing comes about at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the stick that we have mentioned above; and never once should anything be administered, and never does the appearance appear in the back spine, and one must think it is dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, for which one must not have any presumption: perhaps death would come.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of dislocations of the spine
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You know that the joints of the spine and the joints of the shoulder only cause dislocations, unlike other joints; and the joint of the spine is misaligned according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside, less misaligned in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within itself is such that when you join the affected leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and opens up the sick knee more widely than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their kneecap; and it is the swelling around the abscess on top that causes this, because the bone in the thigh comes over here.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who is approaching death, it is that this event is contrary to what has been said before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of someone who is about to die, it is that their leg is weak according to what is expected; however, do not bend the knee without pain, and if they want to walk, they cannot do so before, and they hold in their urine, and the ankle swells, and when they look, they pass over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of someone who is dying from behind, it is that they cannot spread or bend their knee, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the thigh is in a position opposite to the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	They reset this appearance of dislocation if it is such that you reward it since the dislocation is ancient and lingers according to its nature, if there is no cure; and one must not let him have any presumptions.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it's of the four types of dislocation, you must act swiftly: return the joint to its original position inside and outside, and adjust it to the right and left; then it may heal on its own and no other treatment is required.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it doesn't return in this manner, you must then use a strong minister, extending the leg strongly to two hands or binding it at the knee; and other ministers extend their hands from above in such a way that they press the patient's hands down onto their knees, then tighten a soft band around the calf; and others hold the head with a rope; and all pull together simultaneously, lifting the patient off the ground once, and holding them suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to all three cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If it is not, it is necessary to take care of its appearance. When the dislocation is in the wrong place, it is advisable for you to place the patient on their healthy side, then tie the limb at the root of the foot, and the joint that is above the angle; then stretch the tie upwards towards the angle and towards the stronger part. Then have other assistants grasp the patient's arms, embrace the large joint of the afflicted foot, and extend it to a different form; it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in the manner we have said, then you should tie both feet of the patient together with a strong, soft ligature on both heels and both knees; then extend the sick leg two hands more than the other; then hang it over a post, and let it hang two arms' length above the ground; then command the assistant to embrace the top of the thigh, and have another assistant hanging with the patient, who embraces the thigh, for the joint will now come back healthily.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when dislocation occurs away from the body, if the patient lies as we have said in the case of gibbosity, then tighten the ligature properly on the sick leg and also on the other side; then place two hot coals, one at the head and one at the foot; then insert a hot coal between the thighs of the patient, in the middle; and surround him with moist towels so that he does not feel cold, then extend each assistant towards him, and have them equalize the dislocation with their hands.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it does not return, place it on a table and press it as we have said in the previous section, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the affected leg forcibly, as I have said; and ease their pain by placing them on the healthy side, then press with the other hand, and stretch it down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to stretch the affected leg down, nor to lift it up towards the sky, but rather, it should remain as the hip was dislocated backwards, as we have said earlier, gently on both hips; and place it on its face, and extend the joint as we have previously said, and all should press on the joint against the table; and at this point, when the patient extends their legs, they will be even. Then tighten the bandages and apply a poultice, and wrap a strap around it so that the hip does not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then untie it and apply a poultice again; and gently make them walk, as long as the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From the dislocation of the knee.
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The limb is dislocated in three ways: internally, externally, and backward; but not forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not yield to the knee, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place their face on your hands, and rest their foot on yours. Then take hold of their kneecap in both hands, and pull between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the kneecap; and another assistant extends their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it yields slightly at the knee. And apply a poultice, and straighten the leg at the knee, and bind it together firmly for three or four days, then release it; and do not let the patient move about, until the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at all extended, apply a strong stretch as we have said in the treatment of the spine, as long as it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	On the dislocation of the talus bone.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The talus bone is neither completely dislocated nor fully restored, either internally or externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and there is tension before the dislocated part; the reduction is light, and one should gently extend their hand to it when it is slightly dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is slightly dislocated, you should make the patient lie straight, and hold the leg away from the body with the hands above the ankle; then take the foot in your right hand, and twice in your left, then stretch it upwards, and bring the foot back nicely to its place; and do this twice as we have said, pulling and stretching the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, you must begin again with the treatment, for it will return; and if it cannot be brought back like that, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and insert a firm stick between his thighs, and bind him tightly so he does not injure himself; then have the assistants hold the healthy leg from below, and others stretch the dislocated leg to its place at the ankle; then each assistant should equally position the mirrors at the dislocation in the hands, and another assistant straighten the healthy leg at the knee, and the dislocation will return firmly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when the bone has set, apply a plaster and bind it tightly, pressing the leg to the foot and securing the straps behind the ankle so that the bonds are not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the straps have relaxed, untie them on the third or fourth day, and the patient must walk after four days; and if he improves before this time, it is not fortunate that he will no longer heal.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess forms, it is necessary to soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, while it is fresh.
des dois	Of two things
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the eyes are dislocated, if they need to be nicely extended without effort, it is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any other part of the body, besides the neck or foot, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back or on a table completely straight, and place your foot on what opens up from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns; and when it is even, and there is nothing open, put a wooden block under the sole of the foot, then pull firmly, and leave it for three days, then loosen it; and let it rest, until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	From wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and we want to restore it, often the patient dies if they are not treated properly: so do not be presumptuous in their care, unless you are skilled in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and do not be hasty or tardy. Begin by applying hot apathy to the wound, and leave the patient in God's hands if there is no hope of recovery; but if there is hope, then immediately realign the limb as the dislocation heals; and while the limb is healing, apply warm apathy to the wound and care for it as appropriate from dehydration. If there is fracture and small broken bones with dislocation, cure them as we have said in simple illnesses; and be careful not to enter a path of fear, as I have said, for this will guide you according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your arms and body.
Amen	Yes, here is the line
