O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, dear children, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine, its fulfillment, and have finished it through its explanations and statements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this for you with this treatise, which is the beginning of the work of hands, namely "surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And since the work of hands is treated differently in our region and is strange to all, the science is lost and cut off, and there is nothing left from its roots except for small descriptions in books by the ancients about what the hands have done.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed, and knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	I believe I want to revive it by organizing this treatise according to the method of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will bring together the shapes of cautery instruments and other tools for the work with their appropriate adjustments, as needed.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has languished.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who wishes to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, must know the judgment of the members, their shapes and connections, and the separations of parts; he should have knowledge of bones, nerves, blood vessels, and the number of organs, and understand the functions of moving and resting veins.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And Hippocrates says that the name without meaning is empty, and the work with it is little.
et meismement en l’art de main.	and especially in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, will surely fall into error and harm others.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	since I have often seen many of those who undertake this science and abandon themselves without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I have seen a foolish craze that seizes the scrotum or neck of a woman and affects the arteries of the neck.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	because so much blood comes out that the woman dies in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And see another wonder where a stone is treated from a man's eye, and the stone was large.
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	if it carries with it a piece of the bladder, and he was bitten inside three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him; I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if it were not removed, he would surely die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And see another wonder where he took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound.
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the ignorant doctors tighten the break on the wound as if by strong force, and leave no room for the wound to heal, and they leave it thus at the end.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he commands that he does not dislocate it at all;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and waits until the leg is completely swollen and sore, and it comes to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I am called to come to him, and I hasten to go and dislocate the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I saw it dislocated, it was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But any attempt to correct it was already confirmed as corrupted or the member could not be healed.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and does not cease the corruption of pain through the member until the limb is completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I also saw another wonder: the abscess became worse, and then it was inflamed due to the evil nature of its mastery.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For the chancre, when it is free of melancholic humor, one should not use iron to treat it unless it is in a part that can be entirely removed, so as to eliminate what is corrupt.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this reason, gentle reader, it is necessary that you know that the art of healing is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, work where there is danger in many ways;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show, in each part of this book, where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For this reason, it is important for you to guard yourself, so that the foolish eye cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take up your weapons in courage, and approach your sick gently yet firmly, and use the best method, through the grace of God, you will come to salvation and be saved.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and let go of the fearful diseases of sorrow, healthily.
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and remove your weapons of doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other, gloriously.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen does not speak in any of his warnings:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take any ill disease too much to heart, unless you are called a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are about fire cautery and the use of harsh medicines, and they are ordered from the head down to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and the shapes of instruments, the tools for cautery, and everything necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter deals with cutting and piercing, and the use of suckers and incisions, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar procedures.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and it describes the chapters arranged and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar conditions.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is ordered from the greatest pain down to minor discomfort, and describes the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore, remembering the work, it is necessary that I mention the quality of the aid and the harm of each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of help, and its harmful effects, are the longest discourse and most subtle science, and secret answers.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and about these things, many of the wise spoke, and agreed upon this.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and I will be satisfied with few of my words, for I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that fire cautery universally helps every complexion where it has substance, whether it be of two complexes.
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	This is to know: a hot complexion with material cause, and a dry complexion with material cause.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a hot and dry complexion, combining material causes, they devised something and said that fire treatment is great aid.
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the other ones said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that fire treatment is not useful for a disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	Because nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with heat for a disease caused by heat, nor by dryness.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and he who does the opposite of cautery provides great help for hot and dry disease that comes upon the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of a man and its moisture with the heat of fire, you perceive that the flesh is fresh.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in every case, no one should intervene unless they have tested it themselves, and who knows through long experience the chapter of cautery, and the diversity of the constitutions of men, and their dispositions and the causes of their illnesses, and the time and space.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	we have no fear, especially of cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all agreed and were convinced about the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, child, that cautery joins fire, which is a secret of healing, and indeed it is much gentler than burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and brings no harm but to the member that is afflicted, and does not affect any other member.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Burning medicines pass from one part to another by separation, and bring to the member painful diseases with no healing.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and perhaps the patient recovers.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	He does not waste it for its nobility and the goodness of its nature, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found by experience and through the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it was about the truth of things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and therefore I excuse the length of my words, for I do not like to deprive you of the secret that is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives diseases from the body, as the philosopher demonstrates.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	or consider it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know this, my son, that there is agreement among them as to when cauterization should be performed and the appropriate tools chosen.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmful substances causing pain are removed by the help of cautery.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and indeed, cautery itself is necessary for pains that cannot wait for the time when greater harm does not come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think, dear child, as do the foolish people;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the illness that is cured by cautery has no recurrence;
et il le dient ensi;	and thus it is done;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not at all as they should take care, because cautery is only a remedy that alters the complexion, dries up the humors that cause pain, and acts more quickly than other medicines because of its virtue and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible for the illness to come, sometimes according to the temperament of the patient and the place where the illness resides and its nature.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and in him are accumulated excesses through the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless cautery is administered to remove these excesses and moisture, as with cautery for pain and similar conditions, and such pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	but this rarely happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand at all why cautery is called the last resort of medicine, and it is indeed so.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cautery is valid after medicine; their intentions are false, and cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer treatments in any disease and they do not work, then let us use cautery, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it becomes clear that cautery is indeed the last of medicine, not according to the opinions of ignorant people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that gold cautery instruments are better than iron ones, and they did not consider fire to be hot enough except for the quality of gold and the high value of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the fire of cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true, as I have tested it, and I have found that it is indeed harmful to no men.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and fire cautery is more valuable than metal, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	However, when you heat gold instruments, you are not sure if they are heated through due to the color of the gold, and once heated, they quickly cool down.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if they are heated too much;
si font au feu;	they turn black from the fire.
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus, there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use fire cautery because we have made it suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	You have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, so that the path may be lighter to follow.
dou cautere olivaire	Oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Fire cautery is useful for moisture and cold on the head, and it is effective in cases of disease called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes and ears, and for numerous dreams, toothaches, throat pains, and especially in all diseases caused by cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar ailments.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine that cleanses the third or fourth (nerve) channel, according to the virtue and age, and the habituation of the patient to pain.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make the patient's head comfortable.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	and then make the patient lie with their head between your hands, and place their hands on some weight.
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes.
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and when your two tools have come, take the blood from the wound and heat the cautery called "olive" (olivare), of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	and place the sign (or mark) of ink on the dislocated joint, and move your hand down and pull it in, repeatedly disturbing it.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then gently release your hand, and if you see the bone move slightly,
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it move, repeat the cautery until you can see the bone as I have told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	After taking a little silk thread, wrap it around and make it soft cotton, place it on the wound, and leave it for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	After that, place the moist cotton on it.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave it until the burning is gone.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterward, treat the wound with the dressing called "tetrarmation" as long as it remains healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the ancients said that the longer a wound remains open, the more it purifies itself.
et por ce si aide mues.	and for this reason, help is sought.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one must not leave the cautery so long that the bone is burned, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it will heal.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And he should be told to leave the cautery alone and press so hard against the bone that it opens as wide as women do when they give birth so that the humors can escape.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and the wound should remain open for a long time.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	After the operation, one must cure and dress.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me in every way, except for those who have no other choice.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I must leave this;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the tissue is weakened by continuous solutions of moisture, as we testify in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and also when the joint of the patient is weak by nature, and the initial appearance of cautery is safer and more mobile for me, from which I derive great benefit.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When chronic pain persists for a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochie", as well as purgatives for the head and eyes, and poultices.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one performs the cautery as we have said above, it is ineffective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Beware that the patient's joint is of strong nature, and that it is not too sharp.
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Then cauterize deeply, as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After that, cauterize each corn of the shoulder just below the bone, as we have said above, and cauterize the one called "vasselz".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and hold the limbs where vents (suction cups) are placed.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and gently hold the hand so that you do not see the bone.
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The sick person feels too much great pain in this cautery more than in others, and I will speak of that later.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is necessary that the cautery of the horns be more subtle than that which cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is its form:
dou cautere dou chief	For fire cautery, instruct the patient
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When there is sudden pain in a part of the head and the illness extends to the oil (or possibly referring to swelling or inflammation), and the condition is purged with various medications, and other treatments as I have mentioned in the division of illnesses, and none of these help:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Then he performs cauterization according to two manners, that is to say, with hot medicated herbs and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	He performs cauterization with hot medicated herbs if he presses a sweet almond, removes the skin and wraps it in cloth, then makes an incision at the site of the pain in such a way that you can reposition the almond under the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it is repositioned, if he holds it well and tightens it, leaving it that way for twelve hours.
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	and then free it and treat with honey for the wound, leaving it thus for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then place a cotton cloth soaked in butter over the wound until it heals.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment, as long as it is healed;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you find yourself in need of any of the burning medications that I have written about or the proper treatment of burning medications.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the fire cautery with this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a clasp where there is a little curve, and has a small appearance.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it on the painful joint, hold your hand and gently turn it, until half of the thickness of the heart is burned.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and let go of your hand so the artery does not burn, which is depleted, and allows abundant blood to flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After applying cotton wrapped in string, place it on the joint for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then I cover it with moistened butter, and then treat the wound of the limb until it is healed;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare" (scalpel), be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine that is not ancient.
de emigraine	migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a migraine as we have previously said in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cautery mentioned above (scalpel) is dirty and does not serve its purpose, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and thus, by the joint that causes pain, draw a line half as long as a finger, and once your hand is in place, hold it so you do not touch the artery and do not go past the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and guard the jaw that stops when chewing, so the nerves are only focused on the quiet and no spasms come to the patient, and beware of blood flow from the artery once it is cut, as cutting it carries great fear and especially for one who does not know how, or has no experience.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and leave the wound halfway healed;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to retain blood when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it clots in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the illness, and the patient suffers, cauterize both joints as we have said, and treat the wound until it is clean.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in this chapter for the extraction of the artery, using a cauterization tool with two blades.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this is the best cautery of them all and most helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	about the pain of ears due to cold.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold, and various solutions and other remedies as we have mentioned in the previous section have been tried without relief, then apply this cautery called "point," which is shaped as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After puncturing around the painful ear or both ears, hold them slightly apart and tilt them upwards from the root of the ear, having marked the place of the joint.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and make X punctures around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	afterward, treat the joint while it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	Of mouth torture" translates roughly to "Du torture de la bouche" in
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	The torture that must be cured by cautery is limited to those that move with fluid, as we have said in the sections about illness.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not perform cautery on conditions that resemble dryness and pain from nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you cure this resemblance of torture that moves with fluid from dry spells and purging in the head and gargling, and it is not effective, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the base of the ear, another slightly above the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and place the cautery instrument on the part that opens up clean, and make a burn in the top of the ear just below the edge of the skull, and another one on the forehead at about the same distance;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the cautery on until half of the heart is burned;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it resembles the knife that we have placed in front, but this one is a bit more subtle, and it is necessary for the knife to be slightly thicker.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing, reset it as I have previously said, while it remains healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it as we have said, but the patient does not benefit, and has no fever, then make four cauterizations.
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	On the two horns of the head, I apply heat to the head, and I treat the limb called "vessel" as we have previously said, and do no cauterization on the mouth of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and so be healed as we have said before.
de litargie	The word "de litargie" appears to be related
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large doses of herbal remedies to purify the mind;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	after washing the head of the patient thoroughly, place the plaster made from naphtha on the occipital region as described in the treatise on plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the method of cauterization:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if you do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If it is healthy thus, it is good.
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if it is not, perform three cauterizations with hot iron on the head down to the collarbone, and leave two large spaces between each cauterization.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and treat it as the others, and if you see it tighten, and the patient suffers, perform a cauterization in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and it is necessary, to the others on both horns, and cure as long as it is healed;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cautery be called "olive," as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from the cold at the top
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	The head should be cleaned with earth and water as we have said before.
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after cleaning the head of the patient, then apply the cautery to the head and each horn, and behind, and three times on the spine of the neck.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you have more skill, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly, and the disease is severe, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and leave it until the most intense heat is burned, and then lift your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the treatment until it is healed, and then apply the cauterization known as 'olivare' that we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should only use fire cautery for those who are phlegmatic; it is first necessary to purify the brain with years and other remedies as we have mentioned in the section on the treatment of great pain and suffering from medicinal errors.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a young child who cannot bear the pain, give them gargles and chewing, often cleansing the brain with good meats;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After the king has entered the chamber, and we have done the cautery as we have said before, and cauterized on the vessel, and on each corn.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient suffers greatly and is in pain, we do cautery as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the limbs, on the spine of the back and neck, and cauterize them with an olive according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is afflicted, perform a delicate cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When, due to melancholy, there are excessive or corrupt moisture and a thick flux, then perform cauterization with hot irons as we have said for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if, due to melancholy, the excessive fluids decline into melancholy and the body of the afflicted patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain is purified, as is appropriate according to the rules of division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After the king has entered with the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	After making the twist of the bandage well done, just as if you draw a circle, place it on the head.
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the patient should be crossed, held firmly from all sides.
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	after applying the poultice, rub it with butter from old bees.
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and heat it gently over fire, so that the patient can bear it.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after emptying the circle inside out around the head, and leaving it to cool down;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this for the patient each week once with another good method, as long as they are healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you need to cauterize it, make several incisions across the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	this method of cautery moistens the brain increasingly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then place a moist cotton ball in butter and goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes come first under the signs I mentioned in the previous section, then begin and give to the patient something to drink, a purifying medicine for the head, and protect from all moisture, and make him sweat or take a bath while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	afterward, he commands the patient to raise their head, and performs cautery around the head, and does two cauteries on both temples if the downward flow of blood from the nose is in both directions together, or in one, if it is only in one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and cut with the cautery all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, making the cautery long according to the width of the forehead.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and guard against the discharge of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, stop it with a cloth as you know how.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you, in the extraction of arteries and the cauterization of incisions, how to stop it.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and never should one cauterize or burn the skin between the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	two sides of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and flow in the veins, cut the arteries that are visible on the inner side of the eye.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and we see that it is cold, phlegmatic surplus, so apply the cautery that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter to the eyes:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I apply the cautery to the head, and I cauterize both temples, and I cauterize below the bones of both eyes.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if it requires more, cauterize carefully above the eyebrow with all the small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Let the body weep through the eyes.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you medicate it according to what we have said in the previous discussion, but it does not benefit, then give the patient three doses of bitter cochineal.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After the king (or the doctor), apply the fire cautery with olive oil as its medium.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and perform two cauterizations with the "clavalis" cautery on both sides of the teeth, slightly removing the hair.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and be careful of the artery, do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil (maybe referring to skin or a wound) is softened by illness and moisture, then use this cautery which is called "olive.
de coi ci est li forme:	Due to which the shape is:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see that it is necessary to perform cautery on both sides of the wound, make them as long as the hairs;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not remove your hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that is not yet oil (i.e., unripe or not fully developed)
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Never does it happen that the hairs of the wound are turned to ash, and they prick the skin; and cautery is performed according to these two manners:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	that is to say, with fire or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	Or fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even.
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they grow even and aligned, then place the patient into sound health.
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	after signing on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as strong as it fills with wonder, and be it the beginnings of the sign among the hairs.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then I mix moist cotton with egg glue and musk from the iris in oil, then heat the fire cautery with which this form is made:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing the shape you have marked several times, burn the affected area gently.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of the work's healthiness are that you see the skin retracting and the hairs standing on end at the tip of the oil.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then hold your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then I apply moist cotton in butter until the scorch is healed.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the healing treatment as long as it is clean.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And after that come the hairs, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery on the same place, just as you did before.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs are singed, cauterize it while the paper is raised to its natural state and even, and do not allow the hairs to prick the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The medicinal burning cautery is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	then take French soap and sharp knife, each one, and grind them together well;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and do it carefully, if it does not cool down, then apply it to the shape you have made like a leaf from nature, and cover with paper of the eyes.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the disease persists only in one place, then surgery should be done there, and also in both places.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and place cotton oil moistened with egg beneath.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and the patient's joint should be in your healthy hand and place your finger over it, pressing gently and moving it every time the patient feels a stinging sensation from the medicine, for it also stings like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	As you have done this for a long time, if medicine fails, resort to surgery.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And once the stinging has passed, if you notice the limb raising on its own, and see the paper raised as it would be raised by constraint of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If no, then apply more of the medicine to the limb or the medicine has not opened up, as long as your work is even and your joints are in place;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place a moist cotton cloth on it in butter until the burning of the colors is extinguished, after treating the wound with the 'diaphena' and other remedies, as long as it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have to take care of yourself, watch over your work carefully so that it does not stray from the medicine at all.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs prick in the oil, then repeat the treatment on that wound which has been softened with the paper, just as you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment, as long as it is healed;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the form of the wound with great care:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that the bones of humans vary in size and shape, and according to these constraints.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and do not deviate from the correct path for him who has studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have explained in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are of no benefit, then it is necessary that you perform cautery on it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position.
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor do they wiggle their head.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	after moistening a cloth with wine or juice of parsley on oil;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	after heating the cautery instrument that is sharp:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it should be shaped like the head of a quill, assembling the tip to be the cautery.
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you look, it is pointed from one side to the other, and if you look, it is also like a tent.
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but nevertheless, this baldness is worth moving for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the fistula, it opens, and drains the pus and dries it up.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it closes again, if the treatment is effective, it draws out the bowel.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	after applying the hot cautery, hold the hot iron over the affected area of the body, keeping your hand steady above it so as not to cause any movement.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and apply the cautery to the fat of the oil, and the corruption.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you start the cauterization close to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If this does not help, apply the cautery again, and if you need to, do so multiple times, and leave it for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	after which he applies moist cotton soaked in butter, and treats the wound until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then apply a corrosive medicinal ague as long as the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and the treatment according to what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that no one from the past spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Cut open the fistula and expose the place;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	after inserting into the opening, take a fine instrument with which there is this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and it makes the quantity of a drop of blood;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand firm or the instrument tightly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the blood does not flow to its place.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to put cotton soaked in oil on the patient's wound so that it heals well:
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	He plunges deeply into the wound with his finger, and it heals through a wonderful cure.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the ulcer is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If this is not the case, it is necessary to administer heat or cold, and bring the ulcer back into the body according to what is appropriate for its own place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks appear in the lips, known as 'poil', especially on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds as we have discussed in the previous sections, and the treatment does not benefit, then use a small surgical knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	and places the hospital in those crevices until it reaches the source.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treatment, cover it with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess forms in the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or at the roots of teeth, after putrefaction and rot, it becomes inflamed and turns into a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said before, but it does not benefit.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then it is necessary that you apply cautery according to the quantity of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the extraction or perforation of the fistula, hold your hand tightly until the heat from the iron reaches the bottom, and do not release it.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do so once or twice after the treatment of what we have said before, as long as it is healthy;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is treated thus, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if that does not help, it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupt bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	no movement of the joints
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and treatment with medications is ineffective, then place the patient's infected tooth in a healthy mouth.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after applying the heat for cauterization, watch for the following signs: in this manner, you place a bandage over the tooth.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and then apply the hot cautery to the patient gently, holding the hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	after releasing the hand, repeat the cautery according to your wish;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	after filling the patient's mouth with salt water, leave it for an hour and rinse with hot fire.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner, the teeth that were moving are fixed firmly, and the gums softened and restrained, and the moisture corrupted and dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When dental pain comes from coldness or frostbite, and medical remedies are ineffective, then cautery is required according to the following two methods:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and with butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	The butter cautery is such that you press butter into the wound, and then end it with a metal spoon, either of iron or gold.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	after taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a stick, dip it into melted butter, apply to the painful tooth gently, and hold until it cools.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and thus do this often until the virtue of the butter reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see that the moistened wool and cotton in the melted butter is effective, apply to the aching tooth, and hold over a hot iron until the heat reaches the elevation of the painful tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	He uses fire cautery if it is such that you insert a iron or steel needle into it, and it is hot enough so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, from which the shape is formed, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, because the pain will be most intense that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is important that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the haste of that cautery, and then quickly removes it.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And perform the cautery on the part of the body that you wish, according to what you are able to do;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the form of the cautery tool:
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrofula is of cold moisture and is not obedient to medication, then heat the cautery iron with this, after which it will have openings for the smoke to escape from the cautery to the other part.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and then apply hot cautery to the abscess once, as is required, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small due to applying cautery according to its quantity, leave it thus for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and then apply moist cotton with butter until the burning is healed.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing, bandage the limb with linen and tents until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture conquers the channels of the body, especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be emptied first by solvent medicines.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After the fire cautery at the root of the throat, be sure not to go near the throat, and do not swallow any strong tastes but a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After that, perform another cautery at the joint of the collarbone and spine, and it is this cautery called 'clavicle' from which we get the form beforehand.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the joint as we have said above, as long as it is healthy.
de la toust	from the heat
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and every illness of the промon (a term for a specific body part, likely referring to the joints or muscles) are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or stiffness, and it is an old illness, then make .II cauteries (two types of treatments) on the affected areas.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cautery apply between the two joints.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and this cautery, called "clavile" according to the shape mentioned above, should be performed.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, perform cautery by pricking all the cautery that is called 'points' from which the shape is as it is in the ear disease;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and the points should be just XXX, or as deep as necessary.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment, reset the limb according to what is mentioned above, and make the cauterization in three stages according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because cautery is lighter, because you do it three times.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the joint
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterwards, remember the patient on their back and on their side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	after that, open the channel that is within the abscess with your left hand's fingers;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is disaligned within, then apply the fire cautery gently so that it takes on the right form.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the heart as much as it feels, and the figure of the cautery should be three cauterizations together.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this reason, the cautery is made with a cautery having three prongs, so that the figure of cauterization consists of six cauterizations.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerves vary according to the fineness of the wound, and this is the shape of the cautery with three prongs.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never adjust this nerve, for which there are eight burns.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After applying the fire cautery, place crushed herbs on it with a string.
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After resting the patient, do not move the limbs for a long time until they are completely healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated from above, this happens rarely, then apply cautery to the thick part with a hot iron, or use many cauterizations by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	Because the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach, causing it to lose its color, and catarrh multiplies within it, and usual treatments do not help, then the patient should be careful on his back, extending his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	Then, afterward, perform three cauterizations. First, remove the skin with a knife, taking care to cut along the entire length of the cautery. Second, make incisions on both sides in such a way that the cauterized marks form at three angles, and there is enough space between each mark so they do not stick together when healing.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and they should burn so that they impress both parts of the heart, and let the shape of the burns be according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	and if you have a large burn in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and whoever is afraid of this burn, burn by pricking and signing on the stomach in a point according to the quantity that you see fit;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then burn it all over the burn that is called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment we have previously discussed, as long as he is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	As for the liver, it suffers from sharp pain and moisture and a great deal of phlegm, as long as it is strongly deviated from its natural condition due to excesses.
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is treated as we have said in sections, but it does not benefit them; it is necessary that the patient be mindful of their condition.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and the signs of three cauterizations according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, driving out the vapors, opening where the pain in the side comes from;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and let there be enough space between each cautery, the thickness of a finger.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and the cautery should be as long as the body, and do not apply too much pressure with your hand on the entire cautery.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and burn only the middle part of the heart, and the patient should be upright on their feet.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, lie down, extend his legs, and ease his pains.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish to cauterize these wounds with a knife, being subtle and skilled in the art, be careful not to burn the entire heart, for you would cause great harm to the whole body.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and that it does not come to a boil, for the heart is very delicate in this place, and the knowledgeable ones to see it.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you must know if it is within the tissue of the liver or in the gallbladder:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If he is on the bed, the patient feels great pain.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if he is in distress (or "in the throes"), he feels an extreme pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And during this treatment when the pain suddenly increases, it is necessary for the patient to rest on his head.
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then apply pressure around the vein or abscess, and then heat the iron cautery which is similar to a flame, so this is the shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize with a hot iron until the colors are burned, and come just to the point of syphilis, as long as the pus is still burning.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the cure according to the treatment of the flux until it is healed.
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is not advisable for this cautery to be used by anyone who has not studied deeply the art of medicine, and whose hands have never successfully treated these illnesses.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can move it boldly, but I still think it is better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	The "discation" or "dislocation" treatment of tears (pleursin
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should make cauterizations with the roots of aristologue, and in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a long root of aristologe (a medicinal plant), the largest you can find, dry it, and make it as thick and as long as your arm.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and soak it in oil, then hold it over the fire, and cauterize between the shoulderblade and the collarbone, and make smaller cauterizations slightly descending in the part below the beard.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and make cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining slightly behind.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and cauterize the heel, and another one on the stomach, and between the shoulders, and along both sides of the lower heels, removing the cauterization between the shoulders.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press my hand, but hold it open as if smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And they say that no ancient tells of any man using fire cautery resembling a razor, heating it, and placing it between the ribs, as it comes to this abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and suddenly the pain increases, as we have said about the severe liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is great fear, or the sick die now, or a fistula appears that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse according to the divisions of treatment we have mentioned, and it does not benefit, then they (the healers) resort to three ways of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Dislocate the bone in such a way that you make three cauteries, or four, following the length of the bone, according to the shape of the liver cautery we have mentioned above.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press my hand firmly to all the cautery, and let the patient be careful on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another method of cauterization is to heat the iron with hot coals, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and take care to remove the splint that is placed over the fracture, or where the patient feels pain moving from left to right, and make sure the elevation matches the direction of the bone's length, and the cauterization according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After burning the two nerves, make sure the colors are pierced on both sides, then apply hot cautery, and thus you will have three.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, cauterize all the cautery at three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has festered for a long time, this is more difficult to treat than other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	The term "dydropisie" appears to be a
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not effective for edema, except in the manner known as "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you cure it according to the ways we have said in divisions, and your treatment is not beneficial, then you must make four cauterizations around the wound, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the heart, two behind the back on the spine, and one at the anus.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and so the cauterization should be close to the specific heart beat.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After leaving the cauterization open for a long time to allow pus to drain, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cauterization.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing would be hastened, and the two intentions would be aligned with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the cauterization for the abdomen should be like the nail that we have shown before.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and if it is for the back to be olive-shaped, according to what it has been previously placed.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the stones
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in a hydroptic patient, filled with yellow pus, it is necessary to cauterize on the back between the little finger and the ring finger.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and hold your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, so as to close the citrus wound, and be the cautery according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After that, make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip with the point of the knife;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and make the cautery long, one on either side of the knee and the other on the leg.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauteries to grow long without dressing them, so that they heal from within.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the dressing of the other wounds that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the injury
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When abdominal pain arises from cold and moisture, the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by any means.
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient in great pain and of strong virtue, so make a great cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken beforehand or cautery of the stomach, to the circulating cautery;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and I cauterize around the anus gently with a subtle cautery, and I cauterize on the thighs.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each place, and three small cauteries on the stomach to lessen the great pain, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	On the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When hemorrhoids are at the foundation or in one or more places, and they are old and composed of corrupt cold and moist humors, and they are treated as we have said in the divisions, but it does not help, then make cauterization:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	On the spine of the back, whoever is completely devoid of strength, gradually and carefully moves in a triangular motion, and with two incisions from the side, he should cauterize the wound.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and you see the face swelling, then great cautery should be applied to the stomach, as it is said above, and another on the liver, and another across all the organs with cautery nails.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, reset the joint while it is still healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you have finished everything, if you feel the heat of the cautery that seems too sharp, and then apply it thoroughly to that entire wound;
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and let your hand be still so that the cautery reaches the vein's origin, from which comes health.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there is much heat in the wound, cauterize each one as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the beneficial treatment of wounds while they are clean;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you use a large hot cautery on it, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	From the badly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we shall relate in its place, such a disease arises that can only be healed by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a vein becomes fistulated, and is inflamed, filled with putridity and corrupt moisture, you must try every subtle remedy, and ensure that you know the full strength of each attempt.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the cautery until it seems sharp, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that has entered, and repeat the cauterization as many times as necessary until the dead and corrupted tissue is completely burned, once or twice or three times, depending on the amount required.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and be careful not to burn the sensitive nerves and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the fistula is in the wall of the bladder and the intestine, be careful of these joints, and make no fires except on fat flesh, and consider that it is not permanent.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After healing the limb as long as it is healthy, and if the joints are loose, and the bones have been pulled apart for a long time, then know that the joint is completely healed.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the bones have not been pulled apart, know that the joint is broken and the bone is crushed at its base.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus, as one of these things we would say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When sharp pain and great swelling come, and it does not respond to treatment for women, then you must perform a cauterization on the affected area on both sides, using the cautery iron that we have previously mentioned.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and so we cauterize it in the middle, if there are three cauterizations in a row, and they will bring greater aid.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then it should be cauterized in the upper part, where the urethra begins, and this on both the right and left sides, making each cauterization as long as our thumb.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and then cauterize behind the back, as needed.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and let the cautery be done according to the shape mentioned above.
de la marris	Of the pain
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the weather is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are withered and their ends delay;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, great pain is felt;
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the anus, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the cautery burn, as we have said.
de la hainche	de la hainche" translates to "of the spine
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When sticky moisture descends to the chest cavity and for this reason it becomes mute in its place, and the sign is that the affected limb appears longer than the other when measured together.
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and it is found that the internal organs move, so it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the chest at the cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the organ around the chest as it returns, so that the chest is within the circle.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if they are cauterized like those with which the stomach is cauterized.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cautery is not present, make three cauterizations from the large olive tree, and let these cauterizations be just as effective as all the others.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as long as it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain arises in the chest due to cold and moisture, and the patient suffers from great discomfort, treatment as described in the previous section is not effective, and the illness is chronic:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Then it is necessary for you to cleanse the patient of bad humours, such as foul pills or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After that, he performs cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the method of cautery is according to two manners:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	this is to say, burning medicines and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which some are as follows:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the wound of the hamstring in three places, cauterizing them triangularly according to this form, and make them deeply and widely, and allow between each cautery a distance equal to that of two fingers, and let them be olive-colored.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	never should one cauterize in the middle of the hamstring, which is why there are three according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	and if you see that the cautery is like a circle as we have said before in the dislocation of the hamstring;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but make it in such a way that the circles hold all the hair, and every little part of the heart is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the method used for sciatica, when the pain persists in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it extends to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations here where the patient feels the most pain, and one cauterization on top of the ankle, slightly to the left side.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and it should be a cutting cauterization, and the thickness of the heart should be burned.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels the pain extending up to the two bones of the foot or near the ankle, cauterize that area in three spots or four, and this cauterization is called "point.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if it happens again, it must be done more carefully;
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is in the knee towards the thigh, it is done with a sharp or circular cautery; and be very careful in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery too long, burning the nerves and large arteries, and causing the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I myself have seen many who had cauterized the ankle of the foot, and left it until the leg was completely swollen, and the ankle as well, and it became pierced and corrupted throughout the entire foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal solution, he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, apply cautery to one and to the other in this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise ones say about the cauterization of the spine: this is how it should be done, take a hot iron as thick as a finger and make incisions, either crossed or one after the other, with a distance between them equal to the thickness of a fingernail.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and intertwine them across both parts, and they should also be equal, and have one well-made iron;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	and heat it until it is entirely red and oozes pus, then place it on the diseased joint of the patient, and turn to the healthy side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and cauterize it once the cautery is dry, and leave it for three days.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then apply a paste of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of dressing, as long as it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albuscasim says that we use this cautery little because of the fear of its regard, and we see few who use it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and yet these are good cauteries, which a strong person can endure, and the place where it is done.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	He uses the cautery of burning medicine if you make an instrument to intertwine with which you lower the edge of the door, and it is either of iron or steel on a long wall, and at the top there are two of us, and between each one has the quantity of thickness of a finger.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and they should be open above and below, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After that, place the board of the chair on the sick person lying on their side, and quickly put your hand most over the board of the chair.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After pouring between the two circles of hot awes (a type of iron) heated over fire, leave it for an hour, and let the patient endure the heat and burn from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	Because it has the same effect as fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the burn has passed, take a clean hand with the instrument and raise the limb with the soft awes, leaving it thus for three days, and apply butter until the black from the burn is removed;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let it remain three days in purification;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds as long as it is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, apply the instrument as it has been done in the hip, accordingly.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the way of hot water, and I have written it in treating for rectifying medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and hot ashes, as much of one as of the other, crush them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	if he has a small opening, deflect it so that the tip of a tool can enter.
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and place it in another well-sealed pot, and add alkali and salt, and gently heat it until there are two layers of powder on top, as you would carefully press it into your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and leave it until all the water and liquid have evaporated from the sealed pot, then take all that remains of the liquid, and pour it onto salt and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And thus, it will be a great aid and comforting in many works of medicine and other cauterizations on other parts of the body.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it performs the same work as fire, and is useful in other medications where cauterization is applied well to the wound, such as honey, anacardium, and chalk with soap; all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure for which a nobleman was freed from the pain of chest and sciatic vein, and he said that no other cure was done, and he was completely healed once this treatment was carried out, and he bathed as he teaches below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And it is prepared in such a way that you press fresh and dry laurel leaves, grind them finely with some fat, and apply it to the wound and on the thigh and leg where the pain persists, and bind it.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and leave it for three hours, or as long as the patient no longer feels the pain.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then make the patient take a bath or a warm drink until the body is slightly warmed, and make them lie down, and the pain will disappear completely and they will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire treatments with such remedies, except after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it provides great relief.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and the cautery must be performed in this way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take another cloth and grease it with old oil, and place it in the hollow between the big toe and the other one called the fossa.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking dried goat's dung, set it alight until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the wool, leaving it until it is stained.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and repeat this process again, and do not stop doing so as long as you think the pain has ceased;
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this method of cauterization is called "keyhole cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	Of the great pain in the back.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When great pain comes to the back, whether from strain or impact, or due to excessive evacuation, or from some similar matter that appears expanded and cold, no cautery is valuable against these symptoms other than for those who suffer from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	After the patient has been voided of foul pills or other similar substances, one should apply this on the back, where the pain resides, three lines marked with a sign of a cross, and in each line, V cauterizations or more, according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and the cauterization is done according to the cautery which is called "points";
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, make three cauterizations or four at the middle of the bone according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This illness often comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight and painful throat when they swallow, and they feel weak.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you feel the last, deep pain in the back and, appearing differently from the other pains.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this (condition) and you observe it being cured, cauterize it with a hot iron according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	The cauterization should penetrate each part of the pain equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the pain with a hot iron that pierces two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treatment, keep the limb healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply heat to any stiffness that is nerve-related.
de la dolor des jointes	of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When the pain of joints is caused by moisture that spreads through each member of the body, and when the pain comes suddenly, they call it "podagra" properly, and when it is due to cold and can't be cured with medicines, it is cured by cautery in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make a burn around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary to press on the face with your foot, make a cautery all around with something called "point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, make cautery on each knee with three or four cauteries from every side, making all cauteries olive-shaped.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	and if you have more skill, do more, but don't hold your hand too tightly until the specific heat is burned in.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	and if the pains are in the hands, then do less around the bones, two lines at most.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if no pain remains, do less on each joint and on the skin of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come up to the waist or shoulders, cauterize each part and do good governance for the patient, taking medications.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you apply good care and purge the fluides, it will be healed by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the sinew
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a rupture occurs in the legs, and the bows descend to the knees, it is new, so when you see it healing, do not interfere with that day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and it uses things that cause the stomach to relax, so that the intestines descend from the stomach.
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after making it lie on its back between your hands, instruct it to hold its breath until the bowels are repaired, and arrange them in your palms, and sign with your fingers across the rupture on the bone of the wrist, and mark it at every joint as if it were half a circle above the body.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then heat up the cautery with which is this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and exudes tendrils.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	then reset the bones to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the healers should place their hands on it so that they do not return to the previous state;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and open well the thighs of the patient, and place beneath him cushions and supports on the thighs, and others on the bed which hold his hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then place the cautery iron on the affected area with your entire hand, and hold it straight until you reach the bone. If you do not touch the bone the first time, repeat this process several times until you do.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and be careful that the boil does not burst when you apply the cautery.
que tu ne le brulasses;	so that you do not burn it.
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and so that the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cauterizer of children be subtle according to their size, and for grown people as great according to their measure;
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days, cure the shoulder with butter until the burn is healed;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after the treatment with other remedies until it is healed, and lay the patient on his back for forty days until the wound is completely sealed;
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary that these movements be left for a long time, so that the boils do not appear when he goes to other rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, a well-made bandage should be applied to him and left for another forty days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and he should have good rest, work little, and guard against excessive drinking and eating, as well as too much noise.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he follows this teaching, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will now describe the treatment for cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When ruptures occur in other parts of the body and are recognized, and you see that they do not grow any more, apply cautery to them from cautery according to their quantity, and burn one-third of the depth.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the cure according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients said that one should cauterize with a three-angled iron according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the site of the hernia with a sign, and make a line across the width above the rupture; then another from below, and hold your hand firm over all the cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cautery is lighter and easier.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain arises in any limb, whether from falling or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the medicinal cure is ineffective, then it should be cauterized with the cautery known as "the point," and the cauterization must be done according to the length of the limb and its smallness and fragility, and its twist, and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if it is healthy from the first cauterization, that is good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	if that does not work, repeat the cauterization on another part, because such is the custom that it should move to the neighboring limb, so you must perform the cauterizations until the patient is healthy.
de meselerie	From illness
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The wounds are aided in no way by cautery, especially the illness that arises from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	You should cauterize the wound, be careful if the illness is in its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, without delay or staying, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the patient, then make cautery on the head.
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I apply the heat to the head at noon, and to the other side towards the forehead at the end of the hair.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and then on both sides, and behind on the scalp.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and leave it long enough for the cautery to reach the bone, and until the scabs come off so that the vapor of the thick humors can escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize the mouse according to what is before it.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	and if the infection is scattered everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it is clearly evident, so you must cauterize these wounds with the cautery we have mentioned above, and cauterize them deeply, and cauterize on the spine of the neck, and cauterize on the spine of the back, and greatly on the groin and another delicate place, and on both shoulders.
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and on the sides, and on the tendons of the legs, and on each joint of the hands and feet, and in the pits of the hands.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and guard the nerves that are on the bottom of the foot from burning.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never perform cauterization on the bones of the hand or other bones, such as those of the stomach or liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that the more cauterization is performed, the greater the help it provides and the better the outcome.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	and know that the patient feels no pain from cauterization, as the healthy one does, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be great and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, apply wheat flour with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling appears in any member and is cured by medicines, oils, and bandages, but there is no improvement, then the doctor should perform cautery on the affected member according to its size.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and the cautery should be performed slightly inside the heart's chamber.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound as long as it is not healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And never should cautery be performed on the hand, foot, or back, at the point where the nerve controls the member, and thus if the swelling is removed.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and nevertheless, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the passages of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	Of albars (or albaras, a medical term
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is raging, and the medical arts are of no avail, then cauterize with a hot iron a little bit, according to the amount of danger present, until the white is removed, and it changes color.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then apply a cure of meal and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and collick sap and alder sap, each in its own portion.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and mix all together, bind them with a cloth, and keep them elevated until they are healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of a cancer (chancre) by cauterization.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a wound appears at the beginning, and you wish to stop it, cauterize it with a cautery that seems to form a circle, around the entire wound.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	Nevertheless, the wise say that one should also perform cautery in the middle of the chancre;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	However, this does not seem good to me, as I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never had any success with it before;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and the more appropriate thing is that it be cauterized around, in the cautery called a "circle," as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	from the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When anyone has a disease called "adubelati," and it does not end in death or because of the excess it creates, or due to the severe pain of the illness when the patient is aged (i.e., too much), and there is little blood, or because of time.
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see it hasten to death:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then cauterize around with small cauterizations by pricking:
aprés le laisse ensi.	afterward leave it thus:
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	Because it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing through all the cautery, make the cautery so hot that this is its form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this illness called "adubelati" until the cauterization has reached the heart, and it is done in such a way that the patient feels relief in this manner so that the flow of putrefaction is stopped.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, until it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	Heal the fire with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another type of illness is called "corrodens," which is nothing other than a corruption of the member, as it attacks the members just as fire does the dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in a limb that can be treated with fire cautery, then heat the cautery nails slightly and greatly, according to what is suitable for the limb or the disease.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After cauterizing all parts until you eliminate all corruption, and nothing remains of it, everything that is corrupted must be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and apply oil to the cauterized limb suffering from broiling due to fire until all burns from the fire are eliminated, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds that cause pain.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if after three days, healthy hair does not grow, that is good.
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if that is not the case, then repeat the cautery on what is remaining of the corrupted limb.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this mixture is sometimes treated with a hot liquid instead of fire cautery.
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but fire cautery is nevertheless of greater help, and I have already described the treatment for the hot liquid mixture in the previous section.
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the vessels that come as pieces
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that a pain arises from a defect which we call "close" according to our intention, and it is a great fault which wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is according to two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	For fire cautery, heat the instrument like a shear, as hot as it can go, made of good iron to hold the nail from all sides, and have sharp edges.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After heating everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and leave it thus for three days until it begins to fester.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then make a poultice of wild sage leaves ground with rope, leave it on all night, and the nail will come out and be pulled from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the shoulder with a warm compress until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are burned by fire, and many times it happens on hands and feet, then you must apply hot water cautery.
et est en teil maniere:	and it is in this way:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a needle of iron or gold, or a quill from a raven's wing, and place the nail and the thread on it, that is, the pliers for warts.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and place the needle around it so that it surrounds everything, then apply a little hot wax, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the needle reaches the root of the nail, and can find the hot water channel all the way to the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and the patient suffers a little the biting of hot water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it thus, and it will pull out at the root entirely.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	First, do one after another, until you have eased all those that are in the body, then treat the injuries which cause pain.
li cure dou trembler	It cures the trembling.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When anyone shivers from cold or has a fever, it is necessary to make four cauterizations on the spine at the back, or three cauterizations between each spine.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and make one cauterization on the foot, and another on the stomach with an olive cautery.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	if he lets it shake, and hastens the health of the cold illness.
des pustules puans	from pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never is it apparent through external defects or pus-filled blisters that come from highly corruptive matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	it is necessary at first, when they appear, to perform cautery on each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a subtle cautery with a stick of myrtle, whereby the point is seized by fire, or with the root of an aromatic plant distant, or with lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And never should one cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow worse in advance, but are healed of the excesses from which they come.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times, severe consequences arise from the blood of an artery that is cut at the wound, or during the incision of an abscess, or the cauterization of a member, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is a very serious matter to stink.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And yet if this happens to anyone, hasten to place your finger on the wound of the vein, and pull very strongly until the pain subsides completely under your finger, and no more blood flows.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then place over the fire various olive oil cautery, small and large, until they are all red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then take, according to the size of the wound and the place where the artery is visible, a great or small amount of salt, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood stops flowing.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if a sudden burning occurs while you are lying with your arm above the vein and the cauterization is complete, quickly take another cautery from the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	and do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood stops flowing;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and do not let any further harm come to the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and know that when there is no bleeding from the artery, one cannot properly feel it, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of the three ways we have said:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not properly treated, or by a strong thread, or by medications placed on it that have the power to stop bleeding.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and it becomes locked and stretched.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers relief tightly binding them with cloth or placing hot things on them, or similar, will not benefit unless he does it properly.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to none and he has no medication at hand, he should place his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is felt over the wound and the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move it, but apply cold moisture often as it is very cold until the flesh is frozen and swollen and numb.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and prepare remedies in advance for those who need cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	We begin the second book of surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter all about diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicines, and we have explained their purposes, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterization.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have placed this chapter on the most common diseases, and I will follow the same path in this chapter so that those who wish to find it more easily may do so.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, before we begin, it is important for you to know that this chapter involves greater risk and fear than the first one on cauterization, and therefore requires more caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things.
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	Because many ways of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	if they come from those who were so afflicted by their illness that they died gently due to the severity of their condition and the great torment of their suffering.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And from these one must be afraid.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And of these there are some who give up hope, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am weak.
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the illness is cruel.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	You should not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more great care in your honor than in your greed. Do not act rashly but wisely regarding what is certain and what you can safely acquire.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use divination and indication for the cure of your sick patients so that health may be restored.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you gain good reputation, glory, and long-lasting fame.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear child, our lords give you good understanding and rectitude, and if you desire the holy inspiration from his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter for you, in considering by chapters, according to what is before or the chapter of cautery that I have devised from the head down to the foot, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	dou chief plein d'aigue" translates to "a head filled with water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and when the head is squeezed too tightly.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and it never comes from a known cause that one cannot explain.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and to all those that I have seen, death has hastened.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and for this reason, it seems to me that I must give up the work in part, in some treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw children whose joints were filled with water, and the head swelled each day until it could not be supported.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture was so great that it became a wound, and this moisture is gathered underneath the bone near the lymphatic vessel between the heart and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and if the work is such that moisture is between the heart and bone, and the abscess is small, you must make a wide cut in the middle of the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and it should be as long as the moisture runs.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and here, the form of the sharp instrument:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the openings of the skull comming apart in each part, and there is a sharp, strong pain when you press your hand inside, and it does not return to its place.
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If it is necessary for you to cut into the head, make three cuts according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After making the cuts, tighten them with bandages and powders, and then apply wine and oil, leaving it thus for up to five days.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then untie it and dress the wound with bandages and compresses, leaving the head equally tightened, and provide the patient with dry meat from a pouch of moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another method of incision is to observe the size of the abscess and the collection of pus.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	because never is it before;
aucune fois derrier;	never behind
aucune fois en destre;	never on the right
et aucune fois en senestre.	and never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Then cut open the abscess deeply, and drain the pus, and make an incision according to your ability.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and be sure not to cover the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and draw out the blood flow, so that the patients die from the rapid onset of bloodletting and moisture evacuation.
de reume	Of the root
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it happens to anyone a disease called "cataract" as some call it or worse, and the illness is ancient, and the cure of medicine does not help, then the last remedy is the cautery with which one severs both arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	Therefore, when you see them cover their eyes, the patient must turn his head back.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after rubbing the shoulder with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then gently pull the patient's collar to its full extent.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	then look at where the vein is located, and the joints on both sides are behind the ears, and they are properly positioned.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	then mark the joints with a signet ring, and cut one and both with a sharp scalpel, reaching as close to the bone as possible, and do this from the wide end upwards.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, remove the spatule from beneath the artery and cut above it, also cutting as it should go through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, it bleeds continuously unless something holds it shut from above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	and if the artery does not open when pressed, it is necessary to measure the distance of three fingers, then mark with a signet ring and cut through to the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and that one should apply heat to the wound if it is necessary, perhaps 6 parts, or possibly a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	then examine the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if it remains on the bone with a sharp tip without pus forming, and if no abscesses appear, then strain the wound and bind it, and apply treatment as necessary until it is healthy.
de emigrainne	from migraine headache
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old migraine headaches come with catarrh due to moisture in the eyes and sockets, and cold perspiration, and other similar symptoms, and all medical treatments are ineffective, then we should drain the arteries of the eyes and apply cautery, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the method of extracting them is that the patient pulls out the hairs from their temples, and locates the artery which opens in the temple, as it opens well due to its pulsation, and is hardly closed outside, for there is no man too strong.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is reduced, pull the collar tightly from any rough fabrics, then rub the limb with a coarse cloth and immerse it in hot water until the artery appears clearly visible.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spatula with its curved shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then gently scrape the skin until you feel the artery, then hold it with pincers and carefully remove the strings that adhere to each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is thin, return it to the tip of the hook and cut off that part according to the quantity of the two joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it does not heal without great pain throughout.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And draw out blood from the vein of six parts, just to three.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you bind it in two parts with a strong double thread of silk, so that putrefaction does not come before the healing of the wound and prevents complications from blood.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	then cut off the excess between the two threads at that very moment, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with a cutting cautery tool just to the bone, as long as the chips are removed.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and this is the mother task, if the patient has fever and is of hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	Because cautery is helpful in ending moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	for this is of greater help with moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Or, for the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the wound with dry cotton and apply tightly fitted bandages.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are unbound, it is necessary to use dry medicines that produce heat and tightly fitted bandages until the wound is healed.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and without any delay from the artery as you do it, if you hasten to cover with cautery, or employ the juice of vitriol and press it in your hand so that the wound is immediately cleansed;
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you do not have this at hand, place a cold compress on the wound until it is frozen, and then apply hot water as needed to ensure proper healing.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and the one that is more mobile and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery from both sides, but the cuts should be well-spaced to preserve their heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	Because when the instruments are too tight, they hold back their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And it must have between the two knives a space of sufficient width, and then when you have marked with the tongue both sides, and put the hot iron upon it until it reaches the bone, cut the vein in two places.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and they must be separated between the two parts, for this cautery is not fully fused from one end to the other.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears from the eyes flow into the veins that are on top of the head, and no benefit comes from the medicines used, and you see the face of the patient becoming round, and feel their forehead trembling as if from chills.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and its oil is hot and moist so that the hairs of the skin fall out, and the skin is scorched by the heat of the tears, for this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called it the "contused cure," and this is what you do for the patient who has this illness: he lets his hairs grow on his forehead, then you make three cuts on his forehead equally according to its length.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and one of the cuts should be also deep as two others across the forehead, extending down to the nose, and the other two should be made along the sides over the skin, and beware of incising the arteries that are on the sides over the skin.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	And move your hand away from the continuity of the two jaws, and each wound should have the quantity of three fingers in width across.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and take a piece of sponge and cloth to wipe the blood, then use the sharp spatula with two parts from which this shape is:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision that is made on the forehead, just below the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape all the flesh that is between the two cuts to the entire satisfaction that is on the bone, then make another cut from this one until the other second, and then extract this spatula forcefully.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you insert the instrument called "cultellaire" (a type of scalpel) into the first incision, it should be very sharp on one side and soft on the other; its shape is as follows:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	and place the sharp side of the instrument towards the opposite edge at the center, and the soft side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to their roots until the incision is continuous up to where it opens the heart, and then make another slit in the middle until it reaches the other side.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then extract the blood equally, and press the wound to express the blood taken.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then place a strip of fine cotton in each slit, and cover it with damp cloths soaked in wine and oil and wool, and ensure that no pus comes out.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and apply a strong infusion of sage in olive oil, then use a basic dressing with rose oil, and other remedies to heal wounds, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	your joints.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When a person has acute catarrh habitually, and you see the eyes become cloudy and small, weakening vision, and the eyelids burnt,
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair falls out, and the head becomes painfully hot, and the patient sneezes;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Then understand these accidents that these matters and this cleansing come only from many veins, and the moving cure that is, it is thus.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And instruct the patient to press their forehead, then make a deep cut across the forehead, and another one very wide.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin from the split in the left temple to the right temple, and make the cut up to the bone.
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and move your hand away from the nails of the temples that move when squeezed.
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then separate the two edges of the split and place old cotton and linen on it.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then lay him on a blanket moistened with wine and oil, and guard against hot pus.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When it is removed, it is necessary to rub the bone until it begins to heal, then apply drying remedies that help healing.
En teil maniere:	In the same manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of wheat flower and three parts of cologne, mix them to make an emberment.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and administer these remedies to heal the wounds thoroughly.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From ear discomfort
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	Everything that breaks off inside the ears is one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or seeds, or animals, or stone from the mine, or similar things as to make:
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seeds, such as beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or things that flow away like water, smooth and clear, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	If anything, such as a stone or any other object that does not fit properly in the ear, causes pain or does not grow inside the ear, place the affected ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see a stone, and it exudes a little drop of dark or yellow oil, then proceed to extract it.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and it causes sneezing from congestion, and it stops up the nostrils when sneezing occurs, and place pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and stretch the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Often, this treatment brings about fever.
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come out, apply gentle extracts with small pincers, which is its form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it jumps out with the pincers, that is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if it does not, apply an extract with a delicate, small-toothed instrument;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it still does not come out, make a wire hook and bend the tip of the hook towards the ear canal, and stuff the area around the hook with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the hook.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then mold it to its proper form, for often it comes out as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come out in that way, take a sharp instrument and carefully make an incision, and insert some cotton inside.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then press the lump against the stone or anything else, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if none of the things we have said work, hurry to split the ear so that the abscess hardens and does not move.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the method of the cut is that you first make the patient safe from the pain in the head, and extract blood according to its strength, then place the patient between your hands and restore the ear to its original position, and make a small cut at the base of the ear where the fat or tissue is attached.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and make the cut as thin as a moon, until you reach the bone, then remove it according to your skill, and suck on it gently with your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it while it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is a grain that is embedded and swollen, then administer extraction.
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot be extracted, then administer the delicate scraping according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and perform an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not attempt this if you think the grain is moist from earwax, as long as you have made many attempts.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract it gently with pincers and suck, as we have said, so that the extraction is light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case where something breaks off in the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing to expel the foreign object, and to open the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lay something on that same ear, whether there is a foreign body or water.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps through fire, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If this is not done, take many pins according to the length of your thumb and fingers, and warm them slightly in the fire.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and insert a plug into the patient's ear, and try from another side, and place another stone on top of the stone in the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and continue this process of stone against stone until the pain completely subsides, and thus it will completely disappear.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see, take a thin wire, and insert one end into the ear, and heat the other end with fire until the thinner wire is burned.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then make other adjustments of other joints until the pain completely disappears, as we have said before.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	When extracting a small foreign body, such as a tiny bug or similar object, treat it as we have described in the previous section.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is large and can be felt, use tweezers for its careful extraction.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and it is the easiest thing to remove, which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	When extracting worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section and how to deal with distensions, the treatment is not effective; it is therefore necessary that you examine the ear in sunlight.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If no worms are opened, but they are treated with fine pliers, and if they do not open, take the cane from which their form is as follows:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be tightened from below and widened from above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then suction along the entire cane.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Make sure often until all the veins are open.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey to come out, then cauterize around the cotton thread as I said before;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not protrude as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have tried in incision of worms, and you will find them or treat distillations;
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if distill your oils and medications into the ear with all these instruments, in such a way as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And whether it is of silver or golden threads, remove them from small incisions and above others to distill;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press from below the distillation with a well-made silver instrument, and if you see it, take a razor and wrap cotton around the tip carefully.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medications in the cauldron, and the cauldron be in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then put the razor completely into the cotton and press your damp hand firmly until the oil is distilled or slightly from the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and it makes the patient feel deep pain, and so the distillations are heated in the fire just as they are in the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and ensure it is not too cold, for the medicine would then be ineffective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From ear discomfort
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born with any perforation of the eardrum.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and the same thing happens to adults due to sudden injury or a foreign object in the ear, and this blockage never fully clears in the ear unless one can see it.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and never let the wound become infected, and the sight be good.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	When this happens, and it cannot be seen, the lack of proper treatment leads to more harm. In such a case, it is necessary to place the patient's ear in the sun.
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the swelling clearly, where this tissue has formed:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And make cuts both before and behind, all around, so that it does not damage the ear.
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the operation is on a new or old part of the ear, and you have fine pincers, hold it gently and cut slightly until that part is completely severed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	If the inflammation is deep in the ear, take a fine, sharp razor, warm it slightly over the fire, and insert it into the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the operation is causing great pain in the ear, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then place in the ear a band according to the size of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Make sure no day passes until the wound is clean, or take a tent and moisten it with rosewater, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary that you take the tent and move another tent moistened in cerate made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then dress it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the occurrence of blood comes, soak a sponge and drape it with cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that remove the flow of blood, which are treated through distillation.
de la char des papieres	Of the work of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	Make sure that when they come off in papers, the roots are moist and dry, it is necessary that you extend them with pliers and tongs, and cut the top with a spatula from its roots.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then place the hot glass on the affected area.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if, after removing the outer skin with a delicate lenticular cauterization, the cauterizer makes another incision, he must be moved.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and often they heal, but nothing remains of their roots.
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized with fire, their roots are burned and do not grow back.
de la gresle	from the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times come to paper certain things that appear twisted in their form and hardness, and for this reason, this disease is called "grapes," and it is a gathering of great moisture on the paper above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	The work is as follows:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	take care so that the grapes do not move from one side to the other, and this is a light thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	make the incision deeply, then carefully peel from each part slightly, then take it with pincers and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	if you cannot cover it without piercing the paper slightly, so as not to disturb the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if the fracture is large, and it has a joint, treat it until it heals.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, do not use excessive force, because the joints will soon restore it and cause harm.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the pain descends within the ear towards the top, turn the paper against it, and grasp the pain with tweezers, then cut and press from both sides.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is separated by the incision, it does not matter.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the ice is broken, leave the salt water oil to heal the vein of the one who has been wounded until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Xerophtalmia is a fat that is deposited on the surfaces of paper, and this occurs more often in children than in adults, causing them great distress, leading to morning cataracts, and preventing them from looking at the light of the sun because tears flow to their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and for this reason they close their eyes again, and sleep upon them, and their cheeks become moist beneath the hair that has grown out of the skin and appears covered with the oil from within.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the limb with your hands and feel the extreme pain between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	and the manner of the procedure is that the patient places their head in the hands of the healthy person.
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take the linen cloth, and prepare a tent in such a way that it forms a circle according to the quantity of the discharge from each part, and then place it over them.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press your hands on both sides so that the bones meet within the circle.
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make a groove in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula, not wider than the wound made in the vein.
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and cut the skin perfectly until you reach the bones.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in different positions, pull out from the groove, according to the shape of a white fatty piece.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Take then from there a whole piece of cloth torn between your fingers over the fire, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is even.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and ensure that you do not adjust the gap, that you reach all the space up to the oil, and do not blow on it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the gap does not open at the beginning, gently widen the gap a little bit if it starts to open.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	then extract it as we have said, then moisten the cloth with oil and water, apply it to the limb, and gently stretch it.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if with such people who grind and apply something to corrupt the moisture that is stuck.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it as long as it is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the hot abscess, treat it with external soothing as long as it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When papers (skin) grow hairs that are not natural, they become inflamed, causing just as much harm, and lead to types of illnesses such as rashes and softening of the papers, and scaling, due to the destruction of the hairs.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and the cure is according to four manners:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	or by cauterization with fire, or by using medicines according to what is presented in this chapter of cauterization, and it is done through incision and stitching, or by using bands, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient with the illness in your healthy hand, then turn the paper from the oil to your left hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	if it turns out well
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if it does not turn out well, then pierce it with a needle through all the threads above it.
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and be sure to remove the edge of the paper where the hairs grow, and pull out the threads above all the paper, and turn it over to the razor.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	Then, making an incision in the skin, they remove the hairs, adjusting them from root to tip, cleaning all the mucus, from the large tear to the small.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then, extract the thread and place beneath the paper a small piece of cotton and cloth, then mark on the paper a shape like a mitre, but it must be according to the amount that you see the paper rise, which is measured in all directions.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if, at the part where one has to cut, they need to use a great deal of paper, according to how soft the paper is.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then making a cut across the entire surface of the two lines that you have marked, begin with a large tear from the outside to a small one.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let one of the cracks be near the natural hairs, in thickness like a root, then bend the knife into one of the two angles towards the heart, and then peel it all off.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then bring the two lips together with a stitch from a fine needle and all of the blood, and dry the excess of the fabrics on both edges without any sticky substances, if you are able to do this.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if this does not help, then after some time, leave the stitches and threads for three or four days.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then dress the wound without stitches or constricting things, for the paper becomes loosened at the healing of the wound and the gathering of it, but stitches are moved (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	and if in another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and it is that you sign the paper with a figure which is also like the shape of mint leaves, as we have described, at three points according to the form below:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then take hold of what overcomes the small muscles equally according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the pincers firmly, and the matter is not even, take a needle where there is thread, and tie it around the shape.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and twist another thread through the large tear, and the second thread through the small one, and gather the threads equally between your fingers.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then gently hold your hand equally, and press all the skin where you have marked it, as we have said, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and treat it until it is healed.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess forms at your incision, apply wax and similar medicaments to soothe it;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and never should the hairs of the paper (skin) be cut:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but stitching one to the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of dogs is as follows:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and you should convert the paper and make it inside according to what I have said, then make two chains by art, and two fine liens as long as the paper and wide with the spatule.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and cut as the parts of the thread where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then carefully join each other over the top of the paper from the oil, and pull the two chains from the two parts formed.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and leave it thus for no days, and the skin that is pulled will die and wither and heal, as long as it remains like this.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it is delayed, if the fever takes hold with great strength, then cure it as soon as possible while it is healthy.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is deeply infected, and if it opens up and the pus comes out, and the hair cannot grow back.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and this is the shape of the two threads that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	the work involves piercing the skin with a fine needle, threading a soft and thin silk thread through it.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then join the bones together subtly, and make sure the length of the fils is a palm's breadth.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then arrange in the wound another thin thread of silk briefly, and tie the ends tightly with the main thread.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	then place the patient's head in a healthy position.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and make sure the sun is removed so that the work is revealed, for it is a delicate and small task. Then insert the needle into the entire wound at the root of the hair gently, piercing it into the paper slowly as you draw it along the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	then extract the hair up to the root, and push the hair back into the root if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	then extend your hand until the hairs grow fully out through all the root in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the root is treated and the hair does not grow out with it, then pull the root from the inside out along the entire thread that you had ordered, until the root comes out completely through the opening above and you see it with your eye's vision.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	So then, if you remove the chase and the thread, and close the wound and leave it for two or three days, until the hair grows back into its place and the scar heals.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	and if the hairs are small, then accompany them with the long hairs of natural growth, and raise it along with that or leave it, as long as it elongates and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	regarding the inflammation of the wound
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease called "aleacrati" or putrefaction comes to the wound, it has two manners:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one is natural, and the other is unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it occurs suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the method of working in it is that you split open the wound, separate the lips of it, and put linen strips inside, binding it until it is healed.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and it is not advisable that you use drying and constricting things in the treatment of it.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the illness will return worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but I work with softening things, such as fennel.
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the rose water or other and flax seed are cooked, and the diluted vinegar in neither of the eyes, and it wraps a bandage, and treats this one.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the true treasure of your remedy is that you take care not to let it harden according to its former shape.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and these works that we have spoken are not only remedies for this illness, but also to prevent it from returning according to its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the matter that comes into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is a dislocation, truly called "fracture," is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident arises from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar things.
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the way of the procedure is such that if you pierce a needle with a double thread, and insert it into the wound, and make it enter from the left side near the right eye, so that the thread comes out in two parts on both sides of the wound.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then the wound is covered with cloth, and the patch is large enough to cover it.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the paper returns to what is appropriate, it is good.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If this is not done, take a razor and place it in the fissure, turn the paper, and make two cuts on either side inside the paper.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and the cuts of the two fissures at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and make them form one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter "I Greek".
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then cut that one, according to the thickness of its edges, from the paper, then adjust the two parts carefully, and sew them with a thread of wool.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply the remedy we have mentioned about soothing and softening medications, as long as he is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cauterization, it is necessary that you make a clean split beneath the skin and flesh, according to what is mentioned above.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then separate between the two parts of a tent, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the skilled masters have devised many devices from all sorts of means to restore the natural shape.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for the work and the use of various instruments in many arrangements.
dou soudement de la papiere	The phrase "dou soudement de la papiere" appears to be a fragment of the
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this sewing is done by inexperienced hands in such a way that the paper on top is smooth with white oil and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it slightly from below.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and stretch it with clamps, as you carefully handle the fine spatula, neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient does not suffer from the excessively sharp spatula and the oil is not damaged.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and make your cut, from which you scalpel the affected part, gently, so that the skin regains its natural shape.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and is healthy the entire affected area, and never immerse it in dirty water, but rather use clear, clean water, and raise it with sweet water and a collar.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then place a layer of linen cloth between the skin and oil, and cover the oil with wet wool in abundance.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after the third day, use a soft collar and sudden applications until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	from the nail of the finger
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	You know that the fingernail grows according to two manners:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	It is nerve-related and appears hard and satisfying to touch, while another type is not nerve-related but seems like white, frozen moisture that, when touched with iron and treated like pincers, cannot be moved by anyone.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and both appearances begin towards the large tear duct, growing smaller and smaller until they cover all sight and all light and the movements of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the method of incision is such that the patient places his head on a healthy surface, then opens the eyes.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and hold the paper in your hand, then curl the finger like a small pair of pincers, and stretch it upwards.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and insert a horsehair, or a hen's feather, or cow hair, and tie a strong thread to it.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle slightly and insert it through the nail, piercing the entire length of the needle, and tie the nail with thread, stretching it upwards, and scrape all the hair around the edge of the nail with a thin blade, immediately after applying the prune and silk to the hair root up to the head, then cut the remaining part at the base of the nail with a delicate spatula, leaving the nail in its natural state without any cuts.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and never extend the nails to the bone, only with the file, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then the skin is scraped off the entire soft part, which takes the shape of:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	and be sure that the soft part does not touch the thin flesh and tear it, and that the instrument is not pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision, pour a little crushed serpent's stone (brojed seil) into the oil, and make a collar of lightning stone, and leave it until the next day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then focus on the treatment of it, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	If the nail is not well attached to the nerve, and you cannot insert the needle, many times this type of fingernail issue requires medication treatment.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow as I have described in the dissection; and if you see it covered, open gently the wound of the sick person, and take a light spatula according to this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And gently lift the nail from above, and if you see that it turns white and the pain increases quickly, then distil some saliva into a collar made of litargire (a type of mineral) and red dye, and apply the mixture to the wound until the next day.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then recommence the other work according to this same operation, until it is entirely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing contradicts you in the oil, such as a hot abscess, then apply it, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is completely cured.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh causes pain in the eye due to great damage, suspend it at the corner and cut off only a part, not all of it, so that no more tears come.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	then distill into the eye red collar made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	on the flesh that is born on the iris
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	Some men's eyes never turn red, they cover the pupil and rest on paper, twisting them into a blackness that resembles a balm rose.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the work is such that the patient places their head on the healthy one, then opens them up, and pulls together all the parts with suitable hooks, and supports it with strength.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then take the first part, and go all the way to the end with the razor, being careful not to cut into the skin during the work.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and let the incision be careful and precise as we have said in cutting the nail, and with small movements, one removes the nail, as the form demonstrates after this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is completed and all the flesh cut away, apply oil from crushed silk or distil a red collaret and similar corrosive medicines, and place on top of it a hot compress with wool to ensure the abscess is warm.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if it does not improve and the pain intensifies, and you doubt that the abscess is hot, leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing remedies to ensure the hot abscess.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work as long as it is healed, and thus make similar cuts adjusted to the oil by this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But nevertheless, it is necessary that you attend to each weak part of the natural way.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and of the unnatural way, in the act of doing;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand to any of these acts until you see that this member suffers from the act.
des voines des eulz	veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These are red veins that are covered over the eye, they steal from the sight their work and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	The first task is to observe which part is affected, whether it is a bone, muscle, or joint, and there is no other disease outside the swelling.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then take hold of it in this manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position, then suspend the veins at every point according to his wisdom, and let the veins be delicate and doubled according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And they should be two incisions by degrees within the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then gently press the veins, and wash out the blood hour after hour, until you see the veins disappear from the flesh.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and be careful not to puncture the skin with the spatulas, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your task so that you only succeed in removing the veins.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you have done this, distil in the oil a mixture of green and red to corrupt that which is stuck in the sebaceous glands.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you cannot gather all of these at that hour, make a poultice over the oil with soothing things for the pain of the joints, and leave it for no days until the pain is eased and the fever is certain, then continue in this manner as before until it is healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	and this is the form of strength:
de la fistule de l’oil	from the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	It considers those as "fistules" named:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	As you treat it with cautery and medicine for the burning pain as I have previously said, and it remains unhealthy, there is a danger within it if you pierce the abscess, leaving him to die there, and remove all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, take all the instruments mentioned here to shape it.
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called the "hardest point," and it should be made from fire to the very tip of the hardest point, and it should be pointed like a limet in this present shape:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place the corrupted bone on your palm, then twist it between your fingers, and press with your hand for as long as you know that corruption is removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this once, then return the limb to the use of drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the joints are healed and firm, and the inner part of the bone is healed and remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew or become abscessed, and no bad accidents come to it, then you know it is healthy.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If there is no other remedy but to bring the fistula back to the opening of the new wound according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and it is that you discover the bone a second time by iron or medicine, and when it is exposed, take the forecast according to this form, and let the iron have three angles, and the point be thinned up to the top as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then place it on the deltoid bone, move your hand away from the wound, and repeat the entire process until it pierces through the bone and causes the patient pain when they keep their hand on it;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the joint with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh hardens around the joint, if you see the matter in the new tissue;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the opening of the vein
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the joints open widely and cause no disturbance or reduction in strength, it is necessary to keep the patient still.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then apply the healthy treatment, then put on suction cups without causing harm to suck, then place oil made from acacia, aloe, and incense and saffron on it, and then strain the oil and apply the poultice over bandages and cloth.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the way of the bandages is such that you should press the bandages sufficiently soft and double each one in four (IIII), and then place them one upon another according to the quantity needed by the limb.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then stretch from above with a firm bandage, and recommence the applications of suction cups to suck without causing harm;
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the suction cups and leave the limb stretched day and night, and if it becomes stiff, it is good to stretch it much.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	then dislocate it after the day and night have passed, and if you see the oil repairing, that is good.
se ce non;	if not, then
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	if the splint, cloth, bandage, and leeches are reapplied while he is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	disruption of the woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When the veil or cloth covering is torn, it should be opened up and filled with papers as if with resin grains, which is encouraging to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	So if you see it, the work is such that you push a needle into the root of the part as far up as this, then push another needle where it has a double thread from the part of the arm.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and pierce it, leaving the first needle according to the position.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then cut the thread with the double thread and tie a part of the wound around it, and tighten it well, then pull out the needle and apply the other moist lint in abundance.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and let it grow until the hair is long with the root, then treat the wound with comforting things until it is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and never should the wound be restrained with any part of a cloth circle until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the pain is greatly apparent, if you pierce it with a thin spatula that comes from oil, and draw out the albugineous moisture and straighten the joint, and enter again soon.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the oil's fat
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease called "alcunnati" is only due to a gathering in the blood, resembling swift water flowing down, but it is not true water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of performing the operation is that you place the patient in a sitting position with the affected part elevated and straight, then take the head in both hands, and move it until you see the gathering of blood rising towards your fingers.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then it should be completely sealed, and the light should not descend or recede, so the patient can see things as they normally would.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend on its own, know that it is acute, and the descent from the bowel is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	if you delay the patient in your hands, then take the delicate spatula and make incisions on the corny tissue following the continuity of the conjunctive with the corny tissue and the crown, as long as the bowel persists.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is removed, distill it in hot acute oil mixed with honey, or boil fennel and honey, then apply another remedy until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	des aigues de l’oil" translates to "water from oil" in English
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have experienced the forms of cuts in division, and what is necessary to pierce;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if in work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you place the patient between your hands crossed, away from the light for the sun, and tie the healthy oil tightly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then place the paper of the oil in your left hand if the limbs are on the left, or in your right hand if the limbs are on the right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then take in your right hand, if the joints are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the joints are on the right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	then take the tip of the instrument and cut through the crown with a single, swift movement, starting from the thickest part towards the smaller end of the canal, then twist the instrument called "almagda" vigorously, and turn your hand as it pierces the inner layer of oil, and feel that the "almagda" reaches the empty space.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and it is necessary that the length of the "almagda" be precisely equal to the distance from the tip of the prune to the end of the darkness.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and this is the crown of oil;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	if you see the bone on this paper due to the clarity of the cornea, then place the instrument directly on it or in the water, and express it from one side to the other.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he feels a sharp descent now, if he sees the patient before him and the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After resting for a little while, and if the water has risen through the second passage, place force with the instrument, and when it is firmly inserted and does not rise, gently extract it by turning your hand back and forth.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put back in sharp a little piece of silk thread, and remove from these oils inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply hot oil or any other moist oil, rosin, and an abundance of wax, and wrap with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, put a fine cloth over with much heat.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the mixture cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are many people with too hard eyes, it is necessary that you press the instrument called "alberit", which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then pierce only the joint tightly, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then apply almagda as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and upon completion of the work, prepare for the patient a comfortable bed, so that he sleeps on his back in a dark place.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and he must be careful with all movements, consume light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his condition for three days.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then release it in the same dark place, test its sight, and make it see nothing, and then put back the bandage for seven days.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and it is not advisable that you do this during the treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary to lighten it, because acute pain rises suddenly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	if an abscess forms after seven days, then release the oil in front of the seventh day and follow the treatment for those who soothe the abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when he is calmed, if he loses vision and puts on his face an eyelid to cover any light, and is thus in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	Then he goes out of the house little by little, and returns to his own affairs.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and he knows that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from Iran, who told us that in their peaceful lands they make an instrument that extracts water, but I never saw anyone like it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and perhaps it's a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the appearances of the forms of magic, for those who do not know them will see them as different.
et soient d’arain proprement:	and they should be properly arranged:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the center of this same subtlety be in one place, and the rear in three corners acute.
de la char sor le neis	Of the pain near the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	No creature ever born or formed with diverse joints will seem to be a scorpion made of pieces.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if it has such as he has charmed with fox-like coloring, and if the charm is of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In this case, where the wound is sore and not yet healed, you should make the patient rest their afflicted part between your hands, facing the sun.
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open the patient's nostrils, and apply the warmth to those wounds, and treat them fiercely.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then hold what you can bear of the thin, sharp spatula on one side, as long as you know that wound is entirely healed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open it with all the delicate, light instruments until nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and without worrying, or an abscess forming, if it is cut as necessary;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if these are malignant abscesses, act quickly and cauterize until the pus is drained and all openings are healed, then apply new ash and wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the wound opens again and moisture reaches the mouth, knowing that it is clean;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if the moisture does not pierce as necessary, knowing that there is an obstruction in the bone above, which prevents the tools from cutting.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Then you must insert a thread slightly thick, and be careful with your hands, and leave enough space between each one, either more or less.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and place the patient's teeth with the thread in their mouth, drawing gently until it comes out through the breath.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and often children learn this practice, and it is easy for whoever wishes to do so.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head with one hand coming through the breath at one side, and the other hand holding the opposite side of the head coming through the mouth, alternating between them as we do with thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do as much as you know to purify the wound, then treat the child, wipe away the blood, and moisten the wound with Egyptian ointment, and put it back on the body as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Apply the ointment for three days or more, until the ointments have penetrated all that is still stuck to the wound.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put on a clean bandage for no more than a few days until it is healed, and if it needs further treatment with medicated ointments, do so.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the shape of the instrument to purge the head, from which the oils and medicines are distilled:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	and it should be of silver or gold, resembling an open lamp, like a candle, and lead it thither.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you make a closed candle, and it is the instrument full of medicine for purging the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and it has many parts on the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Of the pain near the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a pain appears in the head due to a sickness called "telis," which swells and grows worse, as long as it is a visible thing to look at.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and for this reason, it is necessary that you grasp it firmly at the beginning, and remove all bones, then apply the burning cautery or medicinal fire.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if it is delayed in grasping it as it swells, take care if it becomes hard, of a poor color, or lacks sensation.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	do not touch it with iron, as it is an enhanced abscess, for when you grasp it, great harm comes to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is of a soft consistency, not filled with pus, and you can completely drain it without pain, then dry the wound thoroughly and treat it with things that heal and soothe.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and wounded
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the flow of continuity comes to one of these powerful cartilages, it benefits little, indeed, for no man.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is therefore necessary to pay attention when this occurs, so that if the wound is fresh and filled with blood,
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then tighten the two lips with a stitch, and treat it until it is healed.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are separated on both sides, it is necessary that you cut away all parts of their core while they are healing, then sew together the two lips with a stitch and tighten it, and apply powdered dragon's blood and crushed incense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and place a piece of plaster, strong or other plaster that binds, on it and leave until it falls off by itself, then treat the wound as long as it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The method of stitching is as follows: you assemble the parts together.
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the stomach;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	At first, the abscesses in the veins appear hard, similar to grains of various sizes, both small and large.
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	then you must turn the abscesses and cut into each one, taking them with pliers and cutting into each part.
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply the leu (a healing agent) after the cut with vitriole (a caustic substance), until the wound is cleansed.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then apply the living oil of asil, and heal the wound with dry things until it is clean.
de la char des gencives	from the treatment of gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times a growth appears on the gums, tightly attached, which the ancients call "albus".
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	it is necessary that you hold it with pincers, cut off at the base, and let flow the pus or blood;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then place on it vitriol powder, or other restrictive and desiccant powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if it returns after the incision, this happens many times, if the wound is opened a second time, and cauterized.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after the cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the shapes of the instruments for covering.
des sordens	from obstructions
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Never should they be assembled at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, the edges of which are ugly and rough;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and never should the tooth be black and yellow and rotten, as long as the corruption comes to the gums, and it stinks.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	If it is necessary that you hold the patient in your hands, and his feet be in yours, and you remove any bones or scars visible, until nothing remains.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and thus do with blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other hues, as long as they are fresh.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if one removes what is at the first cause, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, then read again the second time and the third, until everything is removed.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that the tooth requires diverse tools to extract, according as the work shows, for the saw used to cut out the teeth has different shapes from those used between them.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these shapes and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is important when treating a tooth causing pain to take your time and apply gentle pressure as much as possible, for one should never do otherwise.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	for it is a hot substance, so one should have no excuse for applying too much pressure.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then, when the patient is constrained from drawing out the pain, it is necessary that you be certain about the aching tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the patient suffers great pain, and believes it to be from a tooth or gum infection, and has the good tooth pulled.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and yet the pain does not leave them for this reason, until the evil is completely extracted, as we have already tried on these patients.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are certain of the tooth's pain, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth very strongly with a tool to protect the gums from all sides.
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then move your hands or the subtle pliers bit by bit, as long as they are well positioned, and then firmly tighten the pliers.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and place the patient's dislocated joint in your hands between his knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth properly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take none of these instruments and push it gently from each side, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	and if the bone is broken and disintegrated, it is necessary that you fill the space with cloth, either at the wound or the opening.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if it is squeezed gently with pincers, so that it does not break when squeezed.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is necessary to carefully cut around the gum to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Be very careful not to break it, and if a part breaks off, return the fragment to the patient; due to the evil of the root, he will experience greater pain than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And be wary that you do not act like the ignorant healers who, through their haste and boldness, break the body's balance, and do not heed what we have said.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but they bring about this great illness due to the roots that remain, or because of the imbalances that they create, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the swelling is severe, wash the affected area with wine or vinegar and salt.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and the bleeding that ensues, which often occurs, can be alleviated by applying the juice of crushed vitriol.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if this does not help, then cauterize him.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shape of the instruments, with which you will first mute the teeth, should be long and sharp with thick handles, so that they do not bend when pulling the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let the tools be of good quality, so that they do not bend when pulling, and made of iron well-forged, and toothed for secure grip.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root persists when pulling, it is necessary to place a moistened cotton ball or butter (on the day or the second day), until the swelling subsides, then apply pliers called "algefri," which give the tooth the appearance of being cared for.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and they should be made inside as if with a chisel, and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out of these claws, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and put the instrument called "althali", which is a plier, whose form is as follows:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	and it should be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root comes out, that is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	if not, with all the tools, the shapes come as follows:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument with two prongs, its form is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are used in the treatment of teeth, and this instrument that resembles large pincers, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	and this tool should be strong so that it does not break, and remember that many tools are inside.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not mentioned;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the most skilled surgeons create their own instruments, according to what their works and the illness show them, for there are certain diseases that the ancients did not teach any instruments for, and if one breaks a bone or other part, and it becomes stuck, and he seeks the instruments that I told you about, with gestures that help form this:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	and they should be large and well-fitting to hold the bone, so it does not escape, but can be held and removed;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the limb to suitable medicine for this, and if there is decay in the bone, even if it is small, use all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth does not appear according to the body's natural course, and its shape is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth has grown after the other teeth, and is not in the correct position, and cannot be filed or polished.
adonques lou raie;	then the tooth should be extracted;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is attached to the tooth, take this instrument whose form resembles a small beak, and make sure it is very sharp.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And take a small knife and hold it in your hands for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it from one side as the shape allows.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is also like the limb from which they make arrows;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and the tooth, little by little, gently in his hand, so that it does not move until it is completely healed;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then at the end, there is no cutting, and the teeth are too sharp and damage the tongue, so it must be leveled until it is even, so that it does not damage or impair speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth hurts
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the teeth loosen, either through hammering or pulling, and the patient cannot chew what they want to eat, they should be treated with restrictive medications, but that is not effective.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	If they need to restrain it with a thread of gold, for the silver's thread turns green and rots, but gold never changes.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the amount of space between the bones.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you need to align the bones, take the thread and loop it twice between the two healthy bones, then place the dislocated parts between the healthier bone, as many times as there are (dislocated) parts, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side firmly.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then recommence the covering up to the part where you instruct, hold your hand gently and firmly, until it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and let your finger be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	then cut the pieces of thread with pliers, assemble them, and insert them between the healthy tooth and the one with the abscess, so that it does not damage the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then leave it so tight as it can stay, and if it loosens, the threads will come out, if released from another thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it were to stay still and serve thus all its time, and that's the shape of the teeth and the figure of the correct arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two muscles, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth is dislodged, it must be gently put back in its place, one by one, as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and do not allow anyone inexperienced and frightened to intervene; never should the shape of a tooth from a dead animal be used, and it is placed in the missing position, and held tight as we have said, and stays still and serves thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	Cut the skin around the tongue's surface.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	No illness is this one that comes from beneath the tongue or its origin, except thus.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or due to a deep wound.
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient with difficulty, place his head in your hands, and extract his tongue.
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cut the large nerve, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is stiffness or pain, and it's a sudden wound, pull the hook and cut through that ligament.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and ensure that the cut is not too deep, for the artery below.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done this, lift the arm with the red and swollen liquid, or cold water, and then place a cloth under the limb.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and cover it each night so that the limbs cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if blood poisoning occurs, then apply a poultice of crushed vitriol to the limb.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if it hurts him, if he is cauterized with slow fire, which is good for him.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then apply other remedies as long as he is healthy,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see it is red or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it turns pale and there is moisture, then dip the spike in, and with a thin spatula, remove it from both sides.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if it does not give way under your work, pour vinegar ground into a paste until it is stained, then return to your work until you have treated everything thoroughly.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift the limb from rest and relax it, and treat other treatments as long as it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	From the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Never does a hole open up inside the throat called "godath", and these are properly called "laryngitis", and when you treat them, as we have said in the previous section, and they remain unhealthy, be careful.
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If it is an abscess hard with a small, dark colour, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the prevention of pus.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but leave it until it turns black, and then remove it, or it would break on its own.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if it is of white colour with thin roots, then have ready the instrument to cut it, but first ensure that the abscess is cool and at ease.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and stretch his legs to their full extent, opening his mouth wide and gripping the lower jaw between his hands, pressing the tongue down with all the instrument's force, from which comes its shape.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and be of silver or subtle gold, just like fine knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Cannot you press the tongue down with all this instrument, and see the abscess, take the awl and screw it into the gum, pulling it upwards as much as possible.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and do not try anything with threads, then cut it with the instrument, from which there arises a form resembling strength;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	but nevertheless the instrument is curved in one place and another, very sharp, made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, if it is like pliers, then this is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	and it has notches on one side and is smooth on the other.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have cut one of the strings, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, rinse the patient's wound with hot water, cold water, and clean air. The discharge of pus occurs if the wound is rinsed with hot water, or cooked pomegranate skins, or mint leaves, or similar things, until the infection has been washed away.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it as long as it is sound;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	and never does it produce other abscesses in the throat than the two mandibles, so treat them accordingly as the two teeth are attached.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was new inside her throat, that is to say, a small abscess.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and had a great deal of swelling closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained in that state for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so swollen that it had pushed two ribs through the two openings in the throat.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I hastened to do so, and inserted one needle, then drove it through with force, and extracted a great portion of bowel.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then repeated the process on the other side through the opening with another needle, and opened the mouth and pressed the tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	after inserting the needle into these abscesses, and extracting a portion, only a little blood came out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and thus the airway of the woman was opened from the throat, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and it made the abscess reopen again, and filled back up the vein I had drained, as long as it was very large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	then I secured it and cauterized it inside the throat.
ensi demora sens croistre;	so it took time without growth.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and I withdrew from these parts, and only God be the judge after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the eye returns to its socket, and it is swollen and distant, it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is removed from a large and round object, it is called "uve".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have said in the previous section, but the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscess has subsided, and it is subtle, then it is necessary to drain it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and the one that is round and compact is not too distant.
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is red or of a dark color, then it is necessary to carefully make the incision on it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the ill patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is necessary, when you see this, according to the manner I have said, of cleansing and lengthening, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument of which we spoke earlier.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then insert the hook into the eye, remove it from inside, and cut with the first of the two instruments I spoke of during the incision of the two stones.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not cut off more than the excess beyond the natural limit.
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	because if you do not handle it well, it will cause pain to the voice and speech.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use the same method we described for incising the second mandible, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you use a tool for cauterizing the sensitive parts.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The method of cauterization is very hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient places his head in a healthy position, and then presses his tongue with the instrument described in the chapter on cautery (fire treatment), using sharp live coals, so that they are neither too thick nor too thin.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and in using this instrument, by which there is formed:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And let the patient have a mirror or some object to apply the medicine, as if it were the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the patient should lie on their side, so that the saliva and mucus from their mouth can drain the medicine, without it going down to the throat, and it remains clean.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then take your hand, holding all the medicine, and press it onto the eye for a quarter of an hour, until you see it relax and the pain from the medicine is soothed.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and insert the instrument entirely into the wound over the cotton until the cotton is saturated with the fluid.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often, as long as the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and after three or four days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to redo the cauterization with the medicine, when you redo it, after the cauterization, wipe around the eye with cotton soaked in butter and change anything around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let him be raised from cold water, and cure him with gargles until he is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This cure is safer than incision, rather than cauterization.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take plenty of calament and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and similar herbs, and combine them all or some of them in a pot, add water, and boil.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and into the pot put a shovel-like instrument according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And whether it is of silver or gold, and if one of the joints is squeezed in the mouth of the patient until the vapour rises to the eye through the nose, until the eye becomes numb.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	after the swelling often recurs, while the eye is dry, and be sure not to do this at the beginning of the formation of the abscess, as many complications can arise.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not make any movements except during the decline of the hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not available, take a straw and insert it into the patient's mouth with a piece of cold cloth, so that the mouth does not get too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	Because the heat of fire does not allow moisture to accumulate in the mouth, it is a good cure that brings overall healing.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Often, it causes a burning sensation in the throat from bone or fish spine, or any other thing.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	So it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you may observe the thing moving.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And if it does not open and is withdrawn into the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit so that the food may be cooked in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	in case the thing goes the other way through vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patients swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of cauliflower, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and it passes through the sponge, and then it is regurgitated;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it reaches its place, if it is stuck, then it should be pulled forcefully;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come from what we have said, take a plunger tool according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	and the tool should be curved at the tip so that it can more easily enter the throat, and hold the head slightly elevated.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, so that all parts do not come together, and do not push any bones inside.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and it is important that the patient pushes on the tool, because if he does not, the object inside will be stuck.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If the bottle is swallowed, pull it out with all the instruments equally as far as possible.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the mucus in the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Never should medicine be given without examining it, as I said in the previous section, through the treatment of medicines.
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and if it does not help, then look in the throat of the sick person towards the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the wound, pull it with all the small hooks or subtle pincers that are suitable for it.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if these are not suitable, take a horsehair and insert it into the throat of the patient, then pull or gently tug on the hair; do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has fever all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in slowly, moving the tongue with your hand frequently.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and if he feels a sudden cold, then it is certain.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not give way as we have said, then the patient should be given the instrument used in fumigating the eye.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for it will become easier without targeting.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the method of fumigation is that you heat a pot with hot coals, place a perforated cover over it, and in this opening, insert the instrument.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	then he applies the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes it, so that no smoke comes out, but only the steam.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the steam will now separate, and if it does not, the fumigation should be repeated many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and the patient will suffer from thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, but not drink water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then it is better for him/her not to speak against this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument with which the blood is treated, if it can be seen, resembles curved pliers for entering the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and it resembles the beak of a bird of prey, and has the hardness of lime, so that whatever it takes hold of, it cannot let go.
et vez ci la forme:	and consider the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many signs of an abscess are, as the memory comes to us from one side or the other in this book, and they differ in perforation and incision.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and this is in two ways; one is by its own likeness, and from that which holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for the joints where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess of the upper part is different from that of the lower, and the abscess of the fleshy part of the limb is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if at abscesses one must not pierce while the bowel is still alive according to its completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if of such (abscesses) it is necessary to pierce when they are hardened and do not die according to their completion, as with abscesses that are in delicate joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	Because when an abscess comes from damaged joints, and it is left as long as it is rotten around, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Or, if the abscess is in the principal member, and you delay piercing until it is dead, it will harm the principal member.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	if you remove the foundation, so that it is pierced in such a way that it dies.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is not advisable that you pierce an abscess without completing the healing process, otherwise, if the one who removes the foundation does not heal completely and remains inside, a fistula will develop.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and it will not heal completely.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is necessary that you know the right time for piercing an abscess when it has healed completely; this is when the pain is relieved, and the fever departs, and the pain and redness diminish, and there is a smooth recovery, and other signs.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is necessary that you make the incision sit more dependent on the abscess, and there where it opens movement.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and the incision should be deep into the flesh, and if the abscess is near the surface or in the joints and tendons and arteries, and everywhere it is even, without any curvature.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And for abscesses that are in soft flesh, it is better to leave the incision until it is completely healed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it in front of that, the flesh around the vein will become stretched and filled with a lot of filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance, the edges may harden and become deeply embedded within it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if at any abscess that is pierced according to the thickness of the flesh, as needed by the member.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And you must treat them with small incisions, small openings.
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large incisions, large openings, and many cracks according to the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if with such abscesses it is necessary to pierce the heart, then cover it.
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has become dry like the skin, and is stiffened, then it must be treated like the buboes:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if they are of such a nature that they are cut in three angles, and if they are of such as are also cured with myrrh, like abscesses from attacks;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if they are of such as require a large incision, or other sized cuts and similar treatments.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those that have no head, like a superficial sore, it is necessary that you pierce it deeply;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is necessary when the abscess is large and has great tension, and you pierce it, if you do not draw out all the tension at once, but only a part;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then stop the abscess until the other day, then draw something from it;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	do this many times gradually until the bowel releases entirely;
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	most often the patients are of weak spirit, or pregnant women, or small children, or old, frail people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For sometimes the spirit jumps at the outcome of the bow, which might cause the patient to die, and you should not be alarmed by this.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	therefore avoid this chapter with great care, and when you have perceived your abscess, if the wound is clean, and check if the abscess wound is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a clean cut, apply these attempts of linen or old cotton;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess with many openings, you should insert a tent into each one so that they come together.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have managed to remove a part of the abscessed skin and close it, you should fill it with old cotton or dried linen rags without moisture and bind it for three days.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the bone, and the treatment of healing as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the infection spreads to your work, then apply cold water and ice, moisten the bandage, and lay it on the affected area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the bleeding persists, apply government and cure, and the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter or the veins and abscesses are very nervous, then you should place these moistened cloths of wine and hot oil upon them.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in such a state, and the vein is fleshy, then you should place moistened cloths of water and oil, or wine and fresh oil, up to the third day, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then release the abscess and wipe it clean and treat it as necessary, so long as it is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And it is necessary to know this universally in the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	for it has been said to you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and now let us consider this chapter.
des soros	from blood
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or there are many small abscesses that come from the heat of the head, and they are like threads, as well as the sinew of a chicken, and they have many similar appearances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are thick and such, where there is also moisture as well as pulsation;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and if it is of such that are hard and difficult to cut, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the thigh is such that you should test all instruments called "intrusive" with which the following form is obtained, something it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they make a hole from above down long.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, if nothing remains in the skin that contains the moisture, because it repeatedly returns when nothing is left.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	then immerse cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, with water and rope, and apply to the wound, and leave until the other day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and they will correct those who are delayed in healing.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then begin the bandage again, as before, on the second day, and third, as long as you know that it does not delay healing.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound with healing remedies as appropriate, as long as it is clean.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess remains firm, as per this form, for a long time;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and immerse them in water, and scrape them from all sides, and put all your effort into drawing out the pus from the wound where it lies.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if it causes him pain, do as I have told you.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Also, treat an abscess that is painful, and cut it and cure it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut the abscess first and moisten it if necessary; for it is filled with little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if none of these abscesses or joints have moisture, and it is one of these deep abscesses that I found on the shoulder of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess as hard, sharp, and white stone that cannot be broken.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if none of these helps, one should also make a wound as if from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other cases of abscesses occurring in the head or neck, those who come as leaders of children and affect the roots of the ears, the opening should be kept completely open for as long as possible to allow the pus to drain.
et les cure si com il covient.	and treat it as appropriate.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess appears in the neck, and it discharges pus, and causes pain, and never comes elsewhere on the body, and it is full, and twisted together.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each ulcer is properly within its cavity, just as the neck and abscess in the head, as we have said.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the appearances of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others of a malicious nature that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that one which you see of good disposition when touched, and resembles the color of healthy flesh, is quiet from every side and has no signs of inflammation in the collarbone or in the artery or in the duct, and is not too deep.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	it is necessary that you cover it from above, and strip off the skin from every part, and the two lips of the heart be opened at the same time, if you need to, as we have said in the chapters on the head.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	And move it little by little, and be sure not to touch the nerve or vein, and do not cut with the spatula or saw, so that the hand does not slip, and do not look too far ahead, lest you touch something you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you touch the vein or artery and it does not allow you to act, then apply vitriole (a caustic substance) ground into a powder that stops blood, or any other powders that prevent clotting, and close the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and leave it until the abscess is calmed down, and the wound is softened, and begin to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the patient is stained with blood, he returns to your work, as long as you complete it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then seek your finger's sign if there remain no small bumps, if they are clean and smooth.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein at the root of the bump, it is not enough that you only remove this bump at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and leave it to fall without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	then apply the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then dress it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you clean the entire scab, it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them now, so that there is no delay due to the size of the scab.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you need to understand how to deal with the root of it, and pull it out, and cut it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrofulas that hold an excess, cut there where it appears to die.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and the cutting should be done as previously mentioned, depending on the situation, then it is administered with bandaging and similar things, so that it corrupts none of what remains from the corruption.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is clean and free of infection, if the healing bandage causes pain, as long as it remains healthy.
de squinance	squinance (n.) - squint or astigmat
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients spoke and discussed about the incision of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is written in their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those with a squint, it is necessary that the fold in the throat, called the epiglottis, be avoided.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and no help is done through them, because all the veins and the pores of the sick are hot in those who have an abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both jaws.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the urethra's channel, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss caused by strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we should cut it in three or four small slits diagonally, between the two circles, or according to the size of the slit, not into the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if these muscles are suitable for cutting the epiglottis, so that there is no scar, and the vessels are long and thin.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is timid, it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to the entire bone, and then cuts the heart until it reaches the chain.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the tissue as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the throat's blood vessel that jumps out from the place which is broken, and by the loss of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and keep the wound open for a time.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed and there is doubt about the strangulation, gather the two edges of the wound together with care, and cut through just beyond the cartilage.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medicines that promote healing as long as they are clean.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says: One should not proceed with this until the throat is completely closed, and the patient is considered dead, lacking all breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he will breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and for this reason, the ancients instruct to keep the wound open until the ill will of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they command to sew up the wound and treat, as long as it was cured.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a damsel took a knife, and inserted it into her throat, cutting part of the tongue from the side of the mouth.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to heal her, and I found her also as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was coming from it, and realized that it had no power or passage to the outside other than through the throat, and the veins were emerging from the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and stitched the wound, and treated it until it was clean.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and having no further use for the damsel until her voice had returned, she later resumed her proper position.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I say that in the operation of the epiglottis, one should not be afraid.
de la grosse gorge	from the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	A cystic abscess is called a "neck hernia," and it is a large abscess with the color of an arrow, and it occurs mostly in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	and it is according to two manners:
naturez, et accidens;	natural, and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	naturally, it has no engine.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental is according to two manners: one is similar to a tumor, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that arises from an artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and fear is present, and one should not attempt to make fire outside in the open, but rather in a small space, testing and examining every opening.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you let it grow out as much as a new grass, and it does not give way to any force, if the bone breaks, just as we break bones of others, and treat it with all care, if there is no pain.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	surround it closely, and treat it as appropriate, as long as it is completely healed.
des nous	From us.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of doing this, which I will describe in detail.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is necessary that I explain the distinction between our methods and those that come from elsewhere.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that it is caused by heat and fever as long as the ebullition has not passed and the putrefaction is complete.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then rest the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With no new heat, fever, or pain, and it retains satisfaction, which is its own sac and is according to the condition of the body, and begins also like a wound, and becomes large.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to their appearances, whether fat, moist, or of a certain color, as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	You should, when you approach the treatment of a new patient, that you test and inquire first about all the instrument called "entangling" (entromissoire), according to its form as it appears in this chapter or the following one.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of inquiring into abscesses is that you press more or less moistly on the abscess, and move your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the center, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then extract the instrument, and be careful that no part remains inside.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture is running across the wound, what color it is, then do as I have said for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and after the insertion of the probe, no moisture enters, knowing that it is full, so make it cross-shaped, and take it as pincers, and gently scrape each side and protect the wound where it lies so that you heal it sound with new tissue.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot heal it sound, then take it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	Because if nothing remains, it will return to the body many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if a little remains and does not cause you harm, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound, tighten it, place hot soothing poultices on top, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it happens to us, when we cut both lips of the wound, and the treatment of those who cause harm.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the pain is intense and other remedies fail, use the juice of vitriol ground, leave it on for two or three days until the wound pus forms, and let the fever of the blood subside.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to cover what has been exposed from the wound.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See here the shapes of the instruments used, which are of three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	great and strong and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three quarters which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three ways:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	great, strong, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like needles used to pierce sorceries, made of gold, or iron, or silver, and the ones that are yellow are more effective at encircling fistula abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the opening's size.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the incisions are very similar, as you can see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	great, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if the incisions have two curves in three ways as well;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if there are those who have three curves, and they are also of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if there are others who have two curves, and some with only one curve, and they are of three kinds;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all of this is necessary for their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The leader of these, which are made to be sharp, and there are some that do not cut well from both sides, which scrape the skin, so that one cannot cut into the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and from these intrusions, the stitches are removed in several places, so that the patient does not lose them when opening the abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	great, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and do not use them on any part of the body that is not muscular, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar areas.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and never does one use another small instrument, resembling the soles of hands, according to this form, to stop the blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it never rests in its place which is beneficial for veins, arteries, and always returns according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Never do the breasts of any man swell when they begin to be corrupt, as long as they appear like a woman's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and remain idle and weak, and anyone who wants to cure them should be careful according to this form in this line b until g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape off the fat, and apply medicinal fire, then bring together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healthy;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and hold the eyes steady, relaxing them due to their great weight, as it happens with women, making a kind of split in two ribs, through these similar openings;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one holds the other at the end of each, ensuring the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have mentioned about stitching and powders, as well as anything necessary for the treatment, while it is still healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if he is not healthy, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood flow, it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive dressing.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until it absorbs the moisture and fat, then treat it as soon as it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	from the abscesses of armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that come from beneath the armpits are hard scrofula or have nodules, and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B to line G.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, apply old cotton to the wound and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with suitable dressing until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, then do as we have said for cutting out scrofula, and if the wound sinks in, apply cautery as we have mentioned before.
de la routure de l’artere	from the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is bloated and the skin above it is closed, this often leads to abscesses, and likewise occurs in the swollen vein with an abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if you recognize it thus, as it is for an artery, then cut the abscess long enough to open it;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your hands, if it feels strange;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is for the vein, there will be red swelling visible;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is deep in the flesh and full of anger and other parts, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary to avoid iron treatment, and he who has a strong pain should also avoid it, and for him whose artery bursts open through the skin from above, cut deep into the flesh.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then operate on the chest as one does with wounds, and carefully remove the artery from the tissues while it is still exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then insert a needle from beneath and pierce it through to the other side, gripping the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you regarding the extraction of the two arteries located in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then point to the place between the two links of an instrument until there is no pain remaining in it, and loosen the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then administer the treatment with caution, as long as the wound is open.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply this treatment with care, as long as it is clean.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is the size of a vein, it is necessary to hold your hand over it, from the abscess to all the skin, then insert the needle through the flesh and pierce it, and use a double thread so that you can pull it out from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then, as I have told you, take the abscess, or one of the parts of the bone to the joint;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, if it rebounds another needle into all the parts of the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tightens the threads in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then, cut the abscess until the surplus part comes out, then cut off the surplus from the center and leave what is bound.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place on it a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then administer treatments of bandages and poultices until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	Of the abscesses of nails
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, so too do they appear in nails when they are damaged or subjected to excessive strain, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this occurs more often in joints and limbs where there are displacements, which are abscesses, and their appearance seems to be the color of the flesh, and they are in various positions with pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when they tighten it, the patient feels pain, and is not completely healthy in that part, but the pain radiates from the heart.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and it must remain still from all sides, neither moving forward nor backward, up nor down, and the one that is in joints should not be covered with iron.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	in case they contract
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and whoever is on the head or forehead, makes the skin split with a spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	if the abscess is small, if you have pliers, cut it at its base;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, if he suspends it at the corner and scrapes off the skin, then cuts out the bone and reassembles the wound with stitches, and treats it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	Des grosses boces pendans" translates directly to "pendant large mouths
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	It never appears in the stomach or anywhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its similarity to roots, and it has thin, large droppings.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and it has small and large droplets.
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I have seen at home those who had them in their bellies that were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, had a delicate root, and were constantly moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I collected them and found in one eighteen ounces heavy, and in the other six ounces, and the work of the incision is such that if you watch, the patients are moist, and the colour of the articulations is white and moist and of delicate root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if it is collected with a wide spatula, and they are in your presence, perform the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For cutting often brings too great consequences of blood loss, and if it without your notice, then hasten to cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient afraid and filled with fear of the incision, take a well-made thread, tie it as we have said, and leave it for a day.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	then restrain it, and do not stop pulling the thread until it dislocates the joint, and thereby achieve relief.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are thick, be afraid to dislocate them especially for the stomach, but you can still dislocate half of it, then cauterize it so that it does not return.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then treat the wound, and ensure you do not cover the part that is red, painful, and full of pus.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess magnified, and I will come to the treatment of this ulcer afterward.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the bowel is blocked.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the lump arises from cauterization of a wound or an incision on the soft tissues, and it is located on the belly and not in any of the bowels, as happens in other openings, or due to blood clotting in veins or arteries as described previously, or from abscesses;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is through the opening of the soft tissues and through the discharge of the bowels, then the abscess has the color of the flesh, and it is slightly painful without much discomfort, and it opens up in various ways.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to an intestinal issue, then it is more diverse, and when pressed by the fingers at its opening, it returns, and sometimes becomes constricted, greatly expanding at the bath entrance or through hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor thing, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, it does not constrain.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it is due to blood, it opens up in these signs: abscesses large and hard, and are fixed according to quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work involves observing whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery, a vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary, you must leave the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter about abscesses, both for the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the bowels, you should instruct the patient to raise his leg and keep it straight, then tie a cord around all around the abdomen.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then command him to twist slowly between your hands, then enter the joint that you have marked throughout its entire range of motion, then pull half of the abscess above all the great hook.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie it around with a strong thread or firm silk string tightly, and make sure the bandage is securely in place.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then open half of the abscess extended over the bandage, and insert your finger index, pressing inward to explore.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you feel it is firmly stuck to the bandage, loosen it gently, and press outward on the intestines away from the abdominal wall.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you feel the boil, if it is taken at the right time, and cut off the surplus.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the arteries or veins run counter to your work, then return to your task and take two needles, and force them through the flesh, and push both needles back in the same way you made the incision;
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then strain the abscess in four directions over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the flesh until it heals, and draw out the dead flesh by yourself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	You apply the knife when the swelling is gone and manageable, then treat it as we have said, and heal the abscess.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as appropriate, and bandage the wound.
dou chancre	The first sentence translated from Old French to English is
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have spoken in the previous section about the appearances of ulcers, and how they must be treated with medicine, and how one should avoid iron treatments.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and let us speak of the ulcer spreading in a dangerous manner, and exercise great caution in its treatment, and advise the patient that when an ulcer is in the flesh or can be cut out like an ulcer in the mammary region, or in the foot, or similar places, it must all be removed as soon as possible.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and old, you should not even approach it, for I can never make it whole.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	no one can ever make it whole before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And for the works when it is in the air or can be removed, as we have said, do not at any time purge the patient of black bile.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make it healthier if there is evident fullness, then perform the work on the patient's good limb to carry out the task.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then apply your knife to the ulcer, and cut it from all sides, and the bone from all sides, leaving nothing intact.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	let the blood flow completely, and carefully press the wound with your hand or any object, and if the discharge of blood makes the incision on the artery or vein contraindicated, then cauterize it as soon as the blood stops.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with another remedy as long as it is healed.
de ydropisie	The term "dydropisie" appears to be a
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have previously discussed the similarities of hydrops and described how the assembly of fluid is formed in each case, the signs of each condition, and the treatments that are effective through medicine or iron.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is only slightly dislocated;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one must not use iron in these two instances:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	that is to say, tympanitis and ypopharacy, for it is a deadly thing;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	so when you treat this appearance of edema, called 'ecrites', with medicine, and the cure does not benefit the patient, then consider if they are weak or have another illness besides edema, such as intestinal trouble or similar conditions.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	if he does not touch with iron, for there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient of great strength, and he has no other illness but hydropsie only, and is neither too fat nor too thin, then thus must you act:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	lay the patient down on your hands, and have the attendants press the belly towards the bottom, pushing out the water to the lowest part of the pain, then take the spiny spatula according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And make incisions from both parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	with a point, but not so deeply that it can reach the intestines when inserted, and cannot tear:
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then look if the dropy (edema) is present near the intestines.
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	you must then cut through the bowel, three finger-widths deep, from the inside towards the outside on the little finger side.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the edema is due to ill health of the liver, then your cut should be on the left side of the bowel, three finger-widths deep.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is due to mucus, then it should be on the right side, and it is not advisable that the patient lies on top of the cut so that excess fluid does not flow into that weak joint.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pour it out, and lift your hand from all the slime between the skin and the flesh as if you were scraping with the size of a fingernail or in any other way.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then pierce the flesh until the slime is completely removed and dry, which is when the pain ceases, then pull out this instrument and it should look like this.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	and it is similar to a small silver chain, made of fine gold or light bronze, and has a small hole at its base.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and from one side, three openings;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and from the other side, two; and another from another.
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and it is cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision in which the scribes cut the feather.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top of it is the groove, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it now sinks onto the instrument.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	Empty the body then, half or a third, for if you empty more than is necessary at that hour, perhaps the patient dies due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls into a coma, or draws near to death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the disposition of the virtue in the patient signifies, and his pulse.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then take the instrument and hold the water, which is now retained by the cauterizing iron that seals the opening on the affected part, of which I have spoken, and pierce according to this manner.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then continue with the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and take a small quantity of water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do this every day, and be careful not to force it until it heals but with a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you have doubt about the patient, and you give him too much water, whether through burial remedies or hot sand, and by sweating or a bath and in the sun, and dyeing with wine;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and apply drying medicines as long as he is healthy, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after draining the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	from the obstruction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born who does not have an opening in the penis, or if the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary for him not to pierce through all the very subtle spatium according to this form,
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then take a subtle hole in the bladder and close it and hold for three or four days when he wants to urinate, then open the closure, let him urinate, and then close it again.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and if by chance he does not remember, because the strong flow of urine does not allow the closure to be kept closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the opening is small, it is a sign of a weak bladder closure, as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the hole in their bladder are cursed, because no one is born with a hole at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they close their penis.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot move because the material cannot reach the joint, and it is a great illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the method of performing this procedure is that the patient lies on their back, then the doctor makes an incision at the base of the spine and also cuts across the chest as if it were the size of a quill, so that the opening reaches the depth required.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be careful of the bloodletting that occurs frequently, and if it happens, apply pressure to stop the bleeding and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	from the pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times this inflammation comes to the leg, and it appears as a terrible scar;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and it has malignant and benign forms;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	you must press them gently, and clean and dress them, then apply moist cotton in an Egyptian dressing;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then continue the dressing until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, with putrid color and odor, it requires cautery treatment.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cleaned it, and the inflammation is deep in the leg, with some part inside the skin and some outside, then it is necessary to remove the inflammation that is inside first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is healed, if the treatment deviates.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you cure it together, unless the joints of the bone are thoroughly secured, blackening and corruption will come to the limb and socket.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	so it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster of honey and flour made from pomegranate bark and vinegar, and continue treatment with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a feverish event occurs, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	Fire cautery is helpful when the patient's condition is improved together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	This is to say, concerning blood clotting and corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the part of the penis is corrupted and retreats, it is necessary that you push or draw a plug of cloth into the penis to drain the patient.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the hair becomes dry at the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, leading to either a wound or an abscess, it is then necessary that you scrape off the dried skin with a sharp instrument, until the layers are separated and the part of the penis is relieved from all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is a difficult thing to devise, then you should scrape it with the spatule at any point close to the head of the rod and the blade.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then separate the edges with a delicate linen cloth soaked in cold water, so they do not tear immediately.
de la circoncision	On circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a complete healing process like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	however, when we perform this operation of our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best and lightest work for their salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they do not practice it in their laws, and we have acquired knowledge of it only through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have sought out most of the masters and wise ones who perform circumcision around the anus, and have learned from them all, a new technique.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	if the veins were different because there are two layers, and perhaps one is cut above and the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	or if he re-covers it, the pain is doubled, and the cleansing of the wound around the anus is not assured for the point of the member.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and to the cleansing of the nail, perhaps the fire escapes and corrupts the work, causing the wound to heal, and often they grow back in such a way that no further cleansing is needed, which I have witnessed.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the cleaning that is done with force on every link of thread, I have found the benefit of experience, because the forces cut exactly as well from above as from below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, cut it evenly through all its parts;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but make sure the thread is well twisted around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and let it be the gentle manner of the first operation, so that the child, if he hears, believes that you are only tightening the thread around the stick very gently, and then make him forget in all possible ways.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then make it stand straight between your hands, and restore the strength between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see any of the tools.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then take your hand to the staff and blow on it with your breath, and hold it up until the end of the staff is in place.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	then thoroughly clean it from the dirt that is gathered on it, then tie the joint with a doubled thread, and bind it to another limb with a new ligature.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it in both hands at the second tie, with the little finger and index finger, and cut between the two threads, then gently lift the end of the staff.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the cause.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and sprinkle it with a powder made from a mixture of cooked egg whites tempered with rose water, preserved with good rosined oil and fresh herbs, and leave it until the next day, and treat it with another remedy as long as it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The method for purification is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	both feet should be clean and cut, and the toes should also be as long as the rest equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The mistake of purification is when the veins are cut open;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Then it is necessary that you extend it with your finger, so that the veins do not form an abscess.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and hold it even, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then use tweezers to hold it and cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they remain for three days, and what is under the stick is swollen, leave it until the abscess is calmed down, and gently peel off the skin.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	if the cup is as you can see, and you keep it from the part of the stick, it will not harm him in any way.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Treat therefore the sudden wound from gunpowder, which we have spoken of in dealing with powders, and if the cup is made of hard material, and it goes above beyond measure, it will do no harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure it therefore, as we have said, while it is whole and healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is a sign of stone or frozen blood, or bowels, or a blocked duct, or similar conditions, as we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	and if the urine cannot be passed, it is because of a stone in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, so it is necessary for the patient to bend over on their knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and they should place the feet on a chair behind them and extend their stomach from above the back, and restrain the patient sideways as much as possible.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then it is necessary to constrict the bladder neck at the level of the stone above, so that the urine can be passed.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer the extraction of all the instrument called "syringe", whose form is:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it should be made of fine, light silver, like the feathers of a bird;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and the length of the handle should be one palm and a half, and it should be thin at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the method of urination is as follows: you take a double thread, attach it to a small ball of wool or cotton at the end, and insert the threaded end into the syringe.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut off the excess of the line and the flesh just above the chief of the vein, then anoint the vein with oil or butter and egg yolk, and place the patient in a reclining position, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis downwards towards the buttocks.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	then squeeze the syringe before reaching the bladder, and let the patient feel the flow until it reaches the empty space, and this is not done correctly if you do not follow these orders, for the direction in which it flows is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then take a thread and pass it through the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out forcefully, and let the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and repeat the process until the bladder is empty and the patient is comfortable.
des maladies de la vessie	From the diseases of the bladder.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scabs or inflammation come to the bladder, due to an accumulation of putrefaction, you should draw out water and medicines using a device called a "clepsydra", and it is shaped as follows:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	it is closed, and if it opens again:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	from one side, and from the other, as you can see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the hair that is used for cutting the medicine should be such that it effectively numbs the pain without addition, if we can extract the moisture and apply as needed.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see your medications in the bladder, place the head of the knife into the moisture and extract with gentle pressure from the one who is inside.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	if you extract the moisture with the knife, then press firmly on the one inside.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	if the moisture enters inside and comes into the bladder now, so that the patient feels it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of a delicate enema by which the bladder is enemased:
si est ci:	if this is so:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	and it is of silver or gold, and is the highest part;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and take it from the heart where the veins burst;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture you intend to use for the enema, then wrap it between the two breasts formed by a good double thread, and heat the mixture over the fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then soak the head in a cleansing bath on the thigh, then press your hand against the bladder to all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle of it, and punch a round hole through it.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then insert a strong thread into these openings, reassemble the circle as you would a nut and bolt, and place inside what you see fit (oil and moisture and water), and secure it with the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do as you did with the bladder, pressing it with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have previously discussed the methods of cutting and extraction, together with all the medicinal remedies;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and I have said the distinction between surgical cutting at the joints and all the signs, and in what kind of cutting we must perform carefully.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs more often in children, and this is a sign of acute bladder infection, similar to the sharpness of water.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and I open her widely, greatly alleviating the patient's pain, and repeating this process many times until it becomes harder.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and it attacks the foundations of these stones.
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and it is gentle healing for children until they are four years old, and it is much more painful in the elderly, and it is halfway between those who are young and old.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and the cure is lighter for those who have a large stone, than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient through a cleanse, in order to draw out all impurities from the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often obstructs the effort to cut into stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, and straighten them, and move them to the side, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and it never moves up again.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then make him sit between your hands, with his hands resting on his thighs, so that the bladder is tilted downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then take it (the bladder) and feel inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	if you feel the stone in the passage, then hasten now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not yield to pressure from the fingers, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is weak, or your middle finger, if the patient is younger and fully grown.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and press it into its base, hold the stone, and when you feel it in your hand, if it's at the neck of the bladder.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press with your hand, and the stone will move away from where you feel it, or where you see it cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the patient to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to extend their right hand upwards, and with their left hand, remove the skin that lies beneath the stones in the area where the cut is made.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	then I squeeze the sponge thoroughly, which gives it its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	and make an incision between what is between the buttocks and the base, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and be straight on the stone, and your fingers should be together at the base or on the thigh, and cut across with a sharp blade so that it is wide enough to accommodate the stone without being too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	in case the pressure on the fingers at the base causes it to move suddenly without effort;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and he knows there is stone or it has edges and corners.
si est griés a issir;	if it is caught while emerging;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if it comes out of a sore, resembling a gland, and red, with a thin discharge.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	At such time when it has edges and corners, make the size larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not yield, you must use pincers that are also like a file at the tip to extract the stone so that it does not escape.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	you must remove the sharp instrument from its place on the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot do it thus, if the wound becomes large and very painful, and if there is no discharge of pus, but only a straining of vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there are more than one stones, you must first remove the largest one at the neck of the bladder, then cut it out, and afterwards deal with the smaller ones if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, they want to pull it out, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things often happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	if he dies, or urine comes again through the place where the bones cannot join;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but nevertheless, make every effort to extract it or clear it out with pincers, as long as you treat it piece by piece;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bandage it, and place on top a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then resolve the patient's complaint on their collarbone, and do not loosen the bandage for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, if a lot of warm oil and water comes out, then apply healing ointment and basilic treatment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if abscesses appear in the wound and cause corrosion, and blood clots form in the bladder, and due to this, urination is blocked, known in such a manner that without warning with the urine.
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	so then press your thumb on the wound and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and it will decay.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then open the wound with heat and vinegar and salt, and aid it in every way that you can, as long as it remains healthy.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and it is necessary that all the wounds you treat, tie both legs to him, and apply the medicines on the joint.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	and if the stone is small, and it is located in the urethra, deeply embedded, and urine cannot pass through.
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if you treat it as I say, cutting him many times, then the size [of the stone] is excused due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tested this myself.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take the iron at the front according to this form, and fix it at three angles in one stick.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	then take a thread and tie it around the urethra behind the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then gently turn the drill into the stick until it reaches the stone.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the drill back to your hand in the stone little by little, as you can pierce the stone from another side.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	if the urinus (urine) comes, then press your hand against the part that is stuck from the stone inside the stick.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	if it is broken and jumps out with the urine, it cuts the patient;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this for any reason, then remove the stone from inside and place it outside on top of it, then cut the stick across the stone between the two edges, then pull it out forcefully, and loosen the ligament, and cleanse the frozen blood in the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it while it is clean.
de la piere des femmes	of the women's stone" (referring to kidney stones)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	Very rarely do stones occur in women, and if they do, the treatment is difficult, and it is hindered by three things:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin.
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second reason is that one cannot find a woman well-versed who exposes herself to men, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third way is that, perhaps, one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of healing.
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth way is that the skill of the woman is often more excellent than that of the man, so it requires deeper incisions and great care. If need be, one must appeal to a well-versed mistress, and if she cannot be found, then any skilled but chaste seamstress will suffice.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and it presents a wise dance in the life of women, where a woman who knows a part of the art, and commands her to do what you command her from the examination of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and carefully consider if this woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then she must remove her hand or finger and seek the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, despite the constraint of her finger, she recommends that she remove her finger or hand with the patient, and press her left hand on the swollen bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If it is cut, it is necessary to move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder down to the thigh, until it reaches the root of the thigh.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh, finding the soft center where it is most movable, and feel the pain in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move it far from the stone, either up or down, but make the first cut small.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then push the blade into the cut, feeling the pain as deeply as possible, and know that there are many ways stones can be removed.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	This is to know, both small and large and sharp, and smooth, long and round, and which have roots.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	knowing these similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the wound does not heal, mix powdered vitriol and apply it to the place, holding it for an hour until the pain is relieved.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, as long as the stone is hard, and have the tools I told you for extracting stones from people to assist you in your task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if the wound is from an artery that has been cut, apply powder to the place and press with tenes and bands, and do not repeat this, leaving the stone and not pulling it unless the patient might die.
puis cure la plaie.	then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the eyes open, return to your work while the stone is still hard.
de hernie carnouse	herniated cartilage
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Rameal water is nothing other than the assembly of moisture or white of egg, which is beneath the skin, containing the heat.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and it is called "syfac", and it is never properly in the membrane of the egg, if one considers that it is another egg.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and this is the skin around the egg, between the white of egg that we have mentioned.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and this happens no more.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness in the organs, and this material expands.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And it never happens from striking against the bones, and this moisture appears in many forms.
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it changes to jaundice, or lacks red, or becomes black, or clear white, and this occurs more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this collection, for if it appears entirely white as we have said, then the abscesses are red, deep like an eye, and do not open the bones, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the wound bed, the abscesses are red with a portion of the flesh, and because of this, one thinks it is another wound.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white part, it smells good to him.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	then when you see to know the color of the moisture, try to test all the inside thoroughly, from which the form will be as it is now.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows then, after the introduction, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to his ability and the replenishment of his body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then place him on his back, on one thing slightly elevated, and cover him with many sheets.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit him on his left side, and instruct the attendant to sit on his right, and extend the staff towards one of the two ribs on the heart's side.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the scalpel, and cut through the skin of the ribs from top to bottom at the elbow, and make your incision entirely straight by cutting through the ribcage until it turns a satisfying white, carefully removing the flesh according to its natural inclination.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	then pierce the swelling with a sharp instrument through a large opening, and drain all the fluid, then apply your bandages, and the swelling will subside.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the heart of the swelling, but only the swelling itself.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	cut it all or in pieces, carefully along its side, for if you do not cut it cleanly and precisely, the fluid will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the foam jumps out of your control, make sure it stays in its place as you complete the work with the swelling.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then join the two books of the skin at the seam, then treat it as other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the fever corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you bind the vessels that are suspended, in doubt of the flow of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	then cut the skin from all that is suspended, extract the fever, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the arrow is assembled into two parts, together forming two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	if you treat the other part just as you did with the first, then wipe off the blood, and apply a clean moistened cloth with rose oil to the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and apply another moistened cloth with wine and oil, and place two bandages over it, and cover it with double-layered cloths, and tie it tightly according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths, make them of sheep's wool according to this appearance and sew them together at the neck of the pants, one on each leg, close to the crotch and at the wrist.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other side of the head, on both temples, it should be entirely compressed in the bowstring's loop.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and under no circumstances should this cautery branch be applied with a hot iron, but rather use a delicate surgical knife to make incisions into the skin, and warm it as we have mentioned before, so that the white part containing the blood becomes exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if the cautery is taken according to this form, and the white part is pierced in lines, and then it is carefully removed with this hot cauterization.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And the doctor, in all ways you can, as long as you stretch everything.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is safer;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and be careful of the flow of blood, and control the movements to avoid complications from the work's intensity;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything goes against you, such as an abscess or complications from blood flow, or any other issue, treat what goes against you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to endure this work because of its horror, then perform perforation as I have told you, and make sure that when you are certain through the signs that we have mentioned, the dislocation is caused by moisture, so leave the patient in a raised position.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then incise the abscess from the base to the entire surface of the spatula deeply into the flesh.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and make the perforation wide enough for all the pus to flow out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then place cotton on the joint, tie it, and allow time for the remaining water to drain, then treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if a white cloth does not allow the water to drain from the wound's opening, you should insert a feather or the tool used to draw out water from dropsical parts, in order to form it as mentioned above.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and carefully examine the wound, and know that if water returns and accumulates after six months or so, it will be as before, and in this way the patient will spend their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the abscess of the cowls
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	You know that in the treatment of this branch, it causes greater fear, which is why I think it's better to leave it alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I therefore say that many abscesses come where there is a hard mass, especially in the bowels.
et c’est par mout de cas.	and this is the case in many instances.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is to know of superfluous acidity and ague, which is spread through blows or impacts.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the flesh.
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and it does not cause any pain, and the abscess is serious.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and in some cases, there are several abscesses that are dark, painful, and of a bright red color, and they do not come from new veins or the opening of arteries.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from an artery, if it is known by the arrangement of the hot abscess when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it is not appropriate that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	What is made of vein inflammation is known by its arrangement in the sensitive expression of the fingers, and can be very well cut into this shape, and into other wounds.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the core of the inflammation, then heat is in the top, and the raw is white and pleasing, and releases the suspension from all parts of the inflammation.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the bone is already healed with these new scars, then it is necessary that you treat the bone and its fracture.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is infected or in the veins or inside the vessels, then you must remove all of that pus, and treat the fracture properly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the place of the wound is behind, it is necessary that you remove all the blood, and extract the foreign body, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, immediately apply moist wool to the wound, then oil and wine, and continue to treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the abscess of the cowls
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess surrounded by a similar wrapping to the borion (a type of skin lesion), with the softening of tissues, and it causes the patient great pain when it forms.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and the treatment for this illness is also very delicate, just as we have mentioned above, and nevertheless, we will tell you about its work, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you make the patient lie on a clean bed, then hang the suspended bags of herbs below your hands, to all the vessels close to the wound, and cover them with master cloth, and stretch them tightly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	then with a sharp spade, cut widely through the vessels, as they are exposed, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in deep tissues.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then he inserts an needle with a double thread, and sews it to the first place where the bone came out, and then sews it again to the other side.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then straighten the bones correctly, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound as with others, using bowel (or perhaps a similar organ) to ensure neither of the openings is obstructed;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for if there is no pain, and all the vessels come together, it is necessary to drain the openings for all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, they dry up and cannot help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the sinew
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The remedies of this plant are obtained through incision or by spreading it open, on the belly in the area of the angles, so that the intestines descend from that opening to one of the orifices.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this opening is either from the incision or from the spreading open of it, and these two methods come from various causes.
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or from percussion, or jumping, or roaring, or the lifting of heavy sadness, and similar things.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is from spreading open, are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and it is even until near the whole length, because it pleases to straighten the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the incision that it brings a sudden pain to the start, and various abscesses appear beneath the skin close by, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the flesh from the force of the incision.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never remove the bandages with the intestines still inside, as they are trapped and cause great pain to the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, which are dangerous, it is important to be cautious.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the work is that you command the patient to straighten the intestine back into its place within the wound, if it can be returned.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then be mindful over his collarbone, between your hands, and soothe the hips.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then press above, and remove all the skin from the legs down to the long hair.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then insert into the book of the stomach hooks according to what you need to open the wound, and be sure that it is such that the eye can come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then peel off the skin that is under the hair, until the white fat beneath is completely exposed on all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then insert your two fingers as follows: after the hair, between the white fat beneath the skin of the thigh and the second fat, and from behind the egg, and between the second fat.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then move the hand on the right towards the heart, and it will turn white with pleasure in your left hand, relaxing all the tension towards the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the attendant to extend the relaxation upwards, and release that which is tight behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and press your fingers if there is any sign of the intestine being wrapped or white, stiff pleasure, and if you feel anything, it swells in the belly.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle or a thick thread made of X threads, and insert it into the rear part of the pleasure, which is after the skin of the testicles.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	After surgery, then cut the bones that appear from the skin, as long as there are four bones.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in a cross pattern and bind them with the string mentioned earlier that penetrates deeply into the flesh's skin from both sides.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the bones with strings and bind them so that no foreign objects can enter inside, preventing any abscesses from forming.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and tie the string again according to the first long string, then leave two strings of the syfac that penetrates deeply into the flesh's skin on one side.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and after all the others according to the order that God gives.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut into the part that is under the skin of the testicles, as long as it remains intact, and bend it, as we have said above.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply moist wool in oil, and dress the wounds, and use the bandage that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never should the white part be cauterized after incision, out of fear of bloodletting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens many times, and leave the bandage until it is worn out by itself;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it delays in healing, it should be raised with hot water, and apply what we have said, until it heals.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	herniated cartilage
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this condition, never have I seen anyone dare to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the elders say that it is made like a twig that joins the bone, in such a way that you bind the vessels, after cutting into them lightly from above and underneath.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cut it out and treat the abscess that opens, while the vessels still flow.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the treatment as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	No rupture occurs from attacks, as we have said, and opens the joints.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and does not let any of the intestines protrude like buttons, and if it does, it is a sign of illness, and it should be repaired every hour.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and nevertheless, if it persists at this point, it is believed to be a wound or infection, and the intestines protrude.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens through the expansion of the affected part, as we have said, for it is stretched, then softened and swollen, opening up.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the cure is through cautery, as we have said above.
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and it is never cured with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and the patient should lie on their stomach between your hands, then cut the torn joint with a sharp knife according to the depth of three fingers.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the satisfying (or beneficial) substance that is beneath the skin but not attached to it, take the right tool and place it on the apparent surface of the satisfying until it comes out.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it firmly in the abdomen, then cut both the apparent surfaces of the satisfying on the right side and left side;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the right side, and do not cover the satisfying or extend it in any other way, as I have told you in the treatment of the root of the intestine;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then treat it with wound care.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you treat the wounds, if they become infected and the wound is healthy, then...
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The treatment is difficult, and it has no appearance in the rupture, but the cauterization moves in this place, and it is closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the hard skin
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Often the skin of animals is softened in no man's flesh because the moisture within them becomes soft and visible.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, to make the patient lie on their back and cut the softened skin that has become detached from the natural skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then bring the two lips together with a stitch, and if you see that the excessive soft leather has become detached, sew it firmly with three or four stitches.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then cut between the ribs, and treat it as other wounds are treated, until they are healed, and pull out the thread.
dou chastrement	Dou chastrement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	You know that chastity is esteemed in our law, and for this reason I would rather not speak of it in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is not necessary, except in two ways:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one is that he should answer wisely when asked, and know the cure.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say, therefore, that castration is performed in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the method where we use attraction, we should make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and relaxed.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then hold them in your hand, as long as they are healed and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	On the castration of the penis:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	It is necessary that you hold the animal, and press the hide of the testicles in your left hand, then tie the suspensory, and cut each one with the knife at the place where you have well scraped them.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave no trace of any unpleasantness or subtle pleasure that is upon the vessels.
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this method of castration is superior to that which is done by cutting, because at the cutting, perhaps something from the testicles remains, which causes the animal to desire lust.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then treat the wound until it is clean.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphroditism exists in two manners among humans:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one is when it is between the two sex organs, also as the figure of nature of a woman, with hair, and never shortens the urethra.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And for women, it is also like this, having on the breastbone as well as a rod and two points.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment for both men and women is that you remove all the adjusted characters, and treat them as other wounds.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In a second manner, of men whose urine comes out through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the goiter
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tenderness is a character adjusted on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see.
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and no woman has it as strong as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary that you remove the excess of tenderness from your hand or fingers, and scrape it lightly.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not harm me too much by opening veins, lest complications of blood flow occur, then treat with another treatment until he is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and there is another affliction that appears in the mouth of the mare, and it spreads, and perhaps suddenly jumps out, and it resembles a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it the "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you cut it, as we have said about the tendon, and heal it until it is sane.
de erratique	erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erroneous is the judgment when the nature of women is not well understood, or the wound is small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is either by nature, born with him, or by accident, through illness, that he comes to be.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is through a sudden adjustment, or a subtle and specific cause, and it is done perfectly in the middle, or on the side, or underneath, or wherever it may be.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and one must carefully consider conception, childbirth, and even the timing of the flowers to be had.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of these is through the observation of dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the symptoms are immediately apparent, whether it is due to your own actions or by chance.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is a gentle pain, subtle, and close to the leaves, if you act quickly, then thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	With your two index fingers together, place the woman on her back, spreading her legs.
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then form the two leaves, as long as the subtle pain is gone, and be aware of the stupor.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool and dampen it in oil, and place it on the wound, and lay the woman flat each day, so that she cannot move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the substance is hard and thick, it is necessary that you cut it with a scalpel resembling a sprig of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the dislocation is from a fracture, then suspend it at the joint and the bone.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and use the blood-stopping medications, such as oak bark, dragon's blood, incense, and plenty of egg yolk.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then apply a wide bandage, so that the wound cannot heal.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and so do this for a long time, and apply a dry linen compress.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then he should be treated with other remedies until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when fever comes from heat, it should be treated in this manner, especially if there are abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For abscesses that are aggravated during fever, they should not be prodded or touched to drain them.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that, without proper care, can become enlarged. When hemorrhoids have been present for a long time, they tend to get worse.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have spoken about the divisions, similarities, and signs, and I will now describe those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and their complications, when they are completely in the anus, and they do not appear to be felt, can only be cured properly with fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the opening of the anus can be felt; these are the ones that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is therefore advisable to place the woman in a cold house, then apply hot compresses to the affected areas, and use poultices with herbs that constrict blood flow, such as aloe vera and dragon's blood, and similar remedies.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then immerse his feet in the wall for an hour, then place them in cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if the bleeding continues, one should apply a poultice of sumac and bark from pomegranate and gallnuts and similar things, then take oats flour and mix it with honey and oil, and make an emollient to place on their back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if she is tired, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If that does not help, one should apply cupping glasses on the back without harming the mammary glands;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	then take flax and moisten it in the juice of plantain or olive with old wine, and apply to the dislocated joint.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess has healed, apply a clean dressing to the wound as long as it is healed;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp point, so it should be covered as I have said in the previous text.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then apply the cure as long as it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	about abscesses in childbirth
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses occur in the body, such as chancres and previous abscesses, herpes, boils, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	Therefore, I should tell in this treatise about the hot abscess that appears in the thigh, which is not a true abscess but one that bows its joints.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you want to know the work of iron, look if the abscesses are active at the beginning of their appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red, then you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	then do not hasten to pierce, but make it die while the pain is soothed;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then make the patient lie on his back, and have him sit up with small cushions, supporting himself on his elbows, crossing his legs away from the affected part;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his legs be spread apart, and place his arms beneath his knees, and bind them firmly with a good bandage.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then push the bail towards the right side, and insert the instrument used to open the wound's mouth, from which comes the shape.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you insert this instrument, you first feel the depth of the wound, so that when the instrument enters, it does not go too deep and harm the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instrument is larger, it needs to cover the entire depth of the bandage, so that the instrument does not hurt.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary that he places the horn of the instrument above and turns on the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess opens and it is done gently with the hand, if it needs to be covered, it should be done at the top, with the spatule lead.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the bowel is emptied, it is necessary that you put into the wound moist tents, either in rose oil or in dry green oil;
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and take the tent of the wound completely over the margin, and place it firmly over the margin and on the inner side of the arm with clean moistened lint made from herbs or wool.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it after two days of healing has come to it, as long as it is healed;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and never lift the margin and the wound with a cleansing of water and honey, and then water or cooked roots of lily and aristologe (herbs) long.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to the healing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is closed in the inflammation, it is necessary that you be careful about applying heat, but treat it as we have said in the previous section.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	Skill is most important in midwifery that she knows the signs of natural childbirth, and these are when you see the woman hasten below, and desires to smell the ar (spice/herbs).
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then the child hastens to be born.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	so know that these children are according to the natural figure, and their issue (i.e., limbs) come out with them.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press the abdomen so that the child is born quickly.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	because as it descends onto its head, if it is attached to it, then it tightens the hair roots with proper purification.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this is what comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it never comes upon its feet, but rather penetrates the body or affects parts like hands or strikes the belly or back, and sometimes turns about by chance onto its neck, or in other harmful shapes.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	so it requires skill in the art that it be wise and subtle in these matters, clearing itself of error and disappointment, and I will show you all the shapes how one must aid it.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If a fever comes upon the head due to natural causes, and a woman gives birth severely, her strength is weak, if she lies on a saddle, or women hold her that way;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and if one's natural oil or fennel seed is cooked, then take a small spatula in the shape of which...
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and split the second layer, and cut into her fingernail as much as the moisture that is deeply embedded;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and press the woman's belly as the child descends, and if it does not descend, it is necessary to enema the woman with fennel seed mush mixed with licorice oil;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then make him breathe deeply and sneeze from the condition, and hold his mouth and nose for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	if now the child is born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands come out, it is necessary that you reset them gently, little by little;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair and raise her feet up.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then lift up the seat from the ground, and tie down the woman so she does not try to stand up.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if her hands cannot enter, the child dies, if she cuts them with a knife placed before her, and extracts the child, then reset them both equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the birth of the child on his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes onto its feet, it is necessary to push them up.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then make it even smaller and smaller, until it is level.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then press upon it with your hands and stretch it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	can he jump up to his toes, if commanded to press, and makes him sneeze from the condition;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if he jumps up, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not happen as we have said, he should turn him little by little according to the natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it becomes slightly lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come out as we have said, take a small amount of musk, and oil from the eyes, and melted gum, and grind everything in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and place it on the nature of a woman within and without this treatment, then make her lie in warm water reaching down to her ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is dampened from below, make her wear a collar of myrrh and place it around her, and leave it for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her lie on a seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose tight, and press gently on her belly, for the baby is now ready to be born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the passage of the child through its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the fever comes in this form, he should raise his hands little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then he should rest on his collarbone, with the weight hanging down below, and lie down on his side.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and he should bend his hands little by little, then take his hands and place them on his belly, removing the pillows from below until it is flat.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the fever does not subside, he should take his feet and move them forward, then raise his belly upwards, and then press his hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and let the child grow and grow;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instruct the woman to conceive while the child is still inside.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the birth of the child who comes with a large hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I know how to bring the hand back:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be brought back, then one must raise the woman and move her along.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot move, then have her lie on the bed with her legs straight.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then remove the mucus I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, but the fetus remains in the womb, then study how to bring it down by pulling on the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and pull the child out according to its natural position, make it sneeze, and command that it strain until the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the birth of the child on its chest, with its hands spread and its face turned away from its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I know that the pulse has its hand, then it presses little by little, and turns it slightly;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when they are even, he should place a mucilaginous and oily substance on them, as we have said, then he commands that they move little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, if the fire is on a seat, command it to burn intensely.
et la fai esternuer.	and it causes sneezing.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner, throughout all of this.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it manifests in this way at regular intervals, take a cotton swab and remove the moisture with your fingernail.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and it ties itself to its face and neck, if the cap of the wound is not held, it will die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then bring the child inside, as long as you have placed it properly, and tell the woman not to move at all.
adonques si istra legierement.	then gently straighten it.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the emergence of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that many times twins are born, and never more than three or four at once;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is by no means a strange thing, and often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	These are strange things, and do not live, but have no name.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they multiply, and are devoured by the satisfaction of him who devises them, who is bound to the bow.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and they never appear as naturally as all of us, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they are severely stuck, if the treatment is as we have said, and it is a cunning surgeon, then make it tight and gently do what it does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do so as it deserves for health.
de plusors enfans	from many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Never are they formed in the joints I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and they are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of their noble wisdom, and it is necessary that the skilled surgeon knows all this, for by chance, something similar might happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	if it is done according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman with a dead or pregnant child, as I said in the previous section, and there is no discharge, and you are compelled to use forceps;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	it is necessary that you know if the woman is of healthy virtue, and has no risk or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	it is necessary that the woman be supine on her back, and that her legs be inclined downwards, and raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and treat the wound of its second part, where it is attached to the bed so that it does not heal until after the birth of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with fennel and fenugreek seeds, then apply this mixture to her hands.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then gently squeeze the mother, and check if she releases any pus, making sure that it does not descend onto her head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	If the thorns become stuck in its own joints or in the neck or mouth or inside the throat or beneath the beard or on the forceps or near the ribs, and this penetration is on the surface, stick or press it gently against the bones.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that he holds the thorn with his right hand, and places the claw between the fingers of his left hand, and presses gently with his entire hand, and sticks the thorn into any of the joints we have mentioned, as long as it reaches the empty space.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the shape of the thorn:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then find another joint, where you need it most, so that extraction is even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stretch it evenly from side to side, so that it can be moved and the joints become sharp, as is the shape:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if part of it remains, and if you cannot move any of its joints with oil, press the oil into that part and pull on the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if nothing remains, then move this joint higher up and do until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes forward before the other and cannot return due to tightness, it is necessary that you wrap it up in a cloth until it heals completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	then cut it at the joint of the foot or the knee, and so it is necessary that you do with the other hand, and have both feet bound.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and stuck in the birth canal, or it has a sharp point assembled, it is necessary that you press the spiny forceps between your fingers, and do the head and extract the blood.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	You cut it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus, I myself make it attach firmly at the great natural strength.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull the bones with pliers, and the joint jumps out and is seized by force, so that it may be split, until all moisture that was causing trouble has left.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot be extracted, then break it into pieces until you can move it.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if he is bloated in the stomach or has fluid in his ribs, then you should pierce it until the moisture is drained.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the fever is on its feet, it has a light pull, and the direction to the opening of the wound is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	If he is constipated in the stomach or has a stone, then it is necessary to pull it out with a grip on the enveloped drape around the hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and making the stomach or intestines empty, until the moisture within is drained.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if any other part of the body is broken and the stool remains, apply pressure with your hand from the outside of the anus, and pull it towards the mouth of the anus.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	Then he heats the fire and plunges it in (the affected area), and pulls it out.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the wound is constricted due to hot inflammation that has come upon it, it is not suitable to work on it, but instead moist and greasy things should be applied.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and apply it with moist plasters, and immerse it in warm, softening and lubricating water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on his side, and you can make it even, then apply what we have said for the living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one cannot, if it is broken into pieces, do not leave anything of the ligament.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when this is done, apply what we have said about the incisions that come to the wound;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if the inflammation comes, it should be treated with severe restraint, and other remedies should be applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had been cut open, and I consulted another on that wound, who healed the other wounds.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, there comes a abscess in the cheek, it swells until it opens, and begins to cause severe pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called upon to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but I could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong poultice, and an bone came out, and after a few days, others followed.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly amazed, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought this was a bone from a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I examined the wound, and pulled out the bones with my hands, until the woman was in better condition;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and he should examine the woman long times thus, and then let go a little bit of pressure from the blue.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I remember this chapter only because, when the master encounters a strange thing, he knows how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the woman back to her place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	After this comes the form of pressure, with which one binds the books.
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and at the second turn, as the second joint of the limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle in their tightening, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth should be wide enough for two fingers, with a margin of wood, about one and a half palm lengths in length;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and also both limbs should be equally adjusted with this same wood, firmly fastened together, about half a palm length or slightly longer;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and this double adjustment is tied at the opening of the wound to open it when you turn both horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of pliers.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and it should have two adjustments, as you see, of one palm length, and two fingers width;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see the vagina opening fully with the instrument, lay the woman down on her back, pressing her legs apart, then tighten both adjustments together in the vagina, and hold the end of the instrument from beneath between her thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then use your hand to handle all the tools, just as you have done with the pincers evenly, according to the amount that you see open the mouth of the wound, until the pain ceases to do what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	All these tools are skillfully crafted, and they are numerous in their varieties;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	and when you see them properly equipped, the work becomes more rapid, and the results better for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not disregard the instrument if you have not prepared it, for the need for it is not an excuse for negligence.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine (a tool or technique) is used during childbirth, it is important to instruct the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze gently, while pressing your hands on her mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she jumps through this, it's fine.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If the vein is not accessible, I take a small pot, make an opening or cover, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calamine, fennel, chamomile, cassia, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all of these herbs, or none of them, should be cooked or put in water over the fire.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then place a cane or small pot over the opening and put the other end in the mouth of the wound, and hold it until the vapor goes inside the wound.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make the patient sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second treatment does not help.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if after this treatment, the pain persists and is not severe, instruct the patient to moisten their left hand with sesame oil or alum powder, then wrap it up in a natural cloth, and apply the compress again.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when they have found it, if the pain is slight and they gently press and stretch it right away, so that the marrow does not break during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but it is necessary to gently move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull.
si venra et se desaerdra.	If it comes and goes away.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the wound is tight and painful, we have said the remedy of sneezing and fumigating herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not of all that we have said, be careful not to follow the treatment incorrectly.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is important that one who has the wound in the mouth, you bind it to the thigh of a woman, and then enema with four-ingredient medicine.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if the wound becomes infected and is treated, and comes back again;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but nevertheless, if it stinks badly in the stomach and head, and causes the patient to become ill.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Then it is necessary to use suitable fumigants:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	no one of the ancients has tried fumigation with parsley and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which the woman is cauterized to stop the flow of flowers and bleeding, this is it:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is like a glass vessel, and one places the head gently in its natural form, and the base wide over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let there be fumigations over the coals, and the scabies until it is completely healed, and then repeat another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who have not yet had their foundations pierced, but nature has sealed them with a subtle satisfaction.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	so it is necessary at the bath to pierce that satisfaction with a sharp instrument, and do not let it touch anything;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place it on a moist cloth with wine and oil, and apply the dressing until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not return, insert or open a plug of cloth, and leave it for several days, and it will be removed when the swelling goes down.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And at no time does this stoppage of the wound or abscess occur suddenly;
si covient coper celui soudement:	it is necessary to cover this stoppage:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	if it is cured, as we have said of the pain of plunging.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from its origin
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that originate from beneath the foundation are called nodations, and those that come from above the foundation are larger, or in the space between the two parts, if there is a fistula or several.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when this nodulation is old, if it becomes inflamed again due to moisture, causing white or subtle pain, and these fistulas do not persist.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and they (the fistulas) are known by those who observe the patient's excretion or venting when the patient passes wind, and sometimes one jumps out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if the fistulas penetrate just below the bladder, and just halfway up the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach just below the knee joint, and almost to the top of the thigh.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus you recognize the present fistula in the fundament, and it is not present.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you push your index finger or fundament, and push a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is curvature, if you push a slight blow or a horsehair, as long as you feel the tent or hair with your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out with extraction or venting or movement, as we have said;
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	says that she does not feel any pain;
si te haste dou curer.	if you are in a hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula persists up to the bladder or up to the urine conduit, if it lets go of the urine, and cannot be healed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is felt just at the joint of the thigh, then there is a strong tendency for veins to form close to the place.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no curvature or pain around it, and if it bows slightly, but does not suddenly improve with dressing, then medication is of no use.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these persistent fissures, there is no certain cure but effort and the vain efforts of those who interfere with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In those that are neither persistent nor old, there is hope of healing through fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies on their back between your hands.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and extends the legs up to the thighs, bending the thighs towards the stomach.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then wrap a bandage of yarn, or a compress if there is curvature, as long as you know where the bandage begins.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels pain throughout their entire body, it is necessary that you press your index finger into their side, and they will then feel the point penetrating.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and if you feel the heat or cold between your thumb and index finger, then know that it is present.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if it is not treated with care, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	Nevertheless, it is possible to heal no one at all, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and with the help of this, if it is made with a delicate cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said above.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and burn the entire inside of the fistula, as much as it reaches the base;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this twice or three times, as long as you know that these charred marks must be burned, which resemble the feathers of an eye.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then apply hot, moist compresses until the charred marks disappear, and then treat with a soothing ointment that seals and soothes.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is in this state, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this, in no other way, can be healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if it tries to move between them, and does not pierce through the substance that is the foundation, and between your finger and the attempt, place a thick covering of cloth or something similar, and you will see the fistula opening where the covering touches the heart.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you cut from the beginning of the fistula and pull away before attempting to cauterize it, then after a while apply the heat to where the tenting begins.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and he will be freed from pain, and cut.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then identify those three characteristics that resemble a bird's feather, and do not leave anything out.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pain persists, and a cut appears between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	Because fire cautery requires two good things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	namely, the burning of these adjusted parts, and the irritation of blood and the dryness of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then apply the cure of moist tents smeared with butter or crushed herbs, while the bones remain bowed, and pull the burnt parts down into the bow.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound with hot, burning coals and dry medications.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	Because once it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way through to the very bottom of the body, and it is distant from the flesh, if you press it into its origin, and feel it there.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the urge to scratch, and between the skin or the itch is the web or the pest or the prickles, and it's about to pierce, if there's no other way out with faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it deep, or if you can remove the itch and treat it as first.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not force me too much, so that you do not remove the covering which holds the foundation, and the expulsion comes through the side against one's will.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then apply the remedy, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	should it happen that the patient recovers, you must remove that covering and clean it, then apply a poultice or some other pointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then remove the filth from the wound as best you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then study to restore the wound and hold the fistula in the affected part where the foundation is missing.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And never are fistulas like this:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you press the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side of the deep foundation through the skin above, then take a precise tent at the top in this shape:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And insert the thread crookedly in two places, and push the tent all the way through the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is persistent at the edge of the foundation deep within, then extract the thread from that hole, just as you insert your thumb into your foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and pull the thread from the root, and bring the two joints together, and tighten them onto each other, and leave it for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and do not loosen it, until the thread breaks through the four threads between them.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then dress the wound while it is sealed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open, try to open it in every way you can, but if it is too closed.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For if it is not properly opened, and then healed as we have said, while it remains healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	It has a form of very sharp, spiky spine from which one makes the fistula if it is much swollen and hard, cutting through one side.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand no, because one cannot copy what one must not copy, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	Of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	There are two types of memories:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	or they are within the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are both small and large ones, and sometimes blood, and sometimes many, and they are pushed out from the fundament and towards the top of the fundament.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are too dry have little moisture, and still, now or a little of citrus water or a little of blood, and have the colour of fresh flesh;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those who have them deep within the foundation, so you instruct the patient to stretch himself to move around in rooms, until the foundations are strong and the children appear.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you act quickly, and have a pen with claws, or hold it with your finger nail, then cut it at the roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if they cannot hold them for their moisture, if they take them in a drape or cotton or a piece of chamois;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and extract them at the right time, then cut them and sprinkle hot powders on them, which are suitable for cauterizing.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, and apply other remedies until they are healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot come out, if you give the patient a harsh and biting enema to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can come out firmly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	Let the patients hold their breath and keep their eyes closed, so the hair can grow long and even; if they wiggle or move, it will cause pain.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and if you press them with your finger or pliers, cut them, and then treat them as we have said, while they are still healthy, and they do not fear the incision with a knife.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	It is necessary that you perform the stitching in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	take a thin thread, twist it into a needle, and then pass the thread over the top of the needle, and pierce it from the other side, and bring both ends of the thread under the needle, making sure it's not too tight;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and hold the thread taut, then tie it off, and extract the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave some for draining the excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then place a moist cloth or oil-soaked rag on the affected area and lay it down, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave it until they heal, and when the wounds have healed, apply treatment and other remedies until they are cured.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Carefully consider the sources or foundations.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often, there is a drying up of sources (or causes) in the intestine, due to constraints of nature, and when the illness is old and no medicine avails.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you scrape off the skin with a spatula or your fingernail, which will prevent it from getting moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat it as long as it is sound, as it should be;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be healed, begin the operation again with greater force than before, as long as it is still fresh and there is bleeding.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal it as long as it is fresh.
dou fremit	He trembles.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	a flea is a small, hairy creature that burrows into the skin, causing much harm.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and it never cools down, and he feels as if he is dead from the tremor, spreading throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a feather from an goose or a strong falcon's feather, and place that feather on the tremor until the red circles cover the tremor entirely.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand over the entire feather until you cover all around the tremor, and press it firmly, and extract the tremor from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make this of a steel or iron wire according to this form, and be subtle and draw them from below and above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	I do not perceive, so as to keep the hand steady, and it moves with pressure.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, cauterize the tremor as it is before or at the beginning of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a douching
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Never use silver or gold enema, or molten lead or alloy.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and never use these small and large instruments, according to those who administer them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	He who is thus entrusted with the care of children, especially those who are weak and in pain, should be small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the bladder should be small and narrow at the top, wide at the bottom; the belly is bound according to this manner.
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and I say there is a desire or the belly should be restrained, as you see, and the excretion of feces should be felt inside.
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and it has two openings on one side and one on the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and the belly should be filled with medicines from a bladder of good leather or parchment, and it should be pricked all around in small openings, and there should be a space between each opening, then thread through these openings with strong thread twisted cruelly in X shape or similarly around, and tighten the belly as if it were a bow.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is applied, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then enema.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and it takes the form of a soft circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and apply to the enema head oil or yolk of an egg, or a similar substance, then gently bottle it.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then the healers should press with both hands together until it is entirely full, then remove the enema and have the patient lie down against the wall, and let the medicine come out as much as possible.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps through the night entirely, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use the enema for a stomach disorder and the medicine quickly escapes, then it should repeat itself until it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoid is at the anus or abscess, it should be treated with just as much subtlety as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the subtle cleansing where the skin is tightened.
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already discussed the treatment of wounds.
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	or I will tell you the treatments of hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to where they are located, and according to the type of wound, and from what they are caused.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by the use of stone, and sword or knife, or spear or staff or arrow, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that breaks through the skin, or on the head, or the leg, or the belly, or the liver, and similar parts;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, because the remembrance of them will come in their chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, be cautious if it's due to a sharp object or similar things, for the skin is still torn and the wound is deep, and you slightly doubt an abscess forming.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if it quickly becomes healthier on its own, especially if the wound exudes little blood, and the healing is on the contrary of the affected part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and the patient should abstain from wine and rich meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to heal, his flesh should be reduced, and he should not drink wine, nor eat meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and apply this to the wound; if there is an abscess, take it out, using either oil mixed with rosewater or wine that is astringent.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, apply to the fresh wound while it still has all its blood, and do not move it with air or any powder, which I will mention later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it moves again, even if any sparks are present, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like the size of a sword or similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by tenting, they should be sewed shut, as I will explain for abdominal wounds, using stitches.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it bleeds heavily, but only for a short time, then it should be treated.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	then treat the wound with medicine, and replace the skin with hard flesh, and instruct the patient to eat substantial meats, such as tests (offal) and cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	If you find putrefied flesh or skin that has not reached the bone, but is rotten throughout, cut it off and treat the wound.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if it has an artery in the wound or vein, which without cut, cannot be stopped by medications, if you sever the artery, and if you dislocate it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and it is that you apply this powder which heals so that the burn moves.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the method of the powder is thus:
pren encens une partie;	take a portion of incense
sanc de dragon II parties;	dragon's blood in two parts
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	take live charcoal in three parts, mix it finely with the wound and form a compress, until it spreads well and joins all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then bind it well, and leave it unbound if it does not swell.
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	because one cannot take medicine as long as it is fresh.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never should charcoal be used alone, unless you have incense or dragon's blood, but the fire must move the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the wound has changed or moved, especially when it is fresh, unless someone applies this powder to it.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply no poultices or compresses made of ground oats mixed with water and honey while it is still fresh.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply other remedies as long as it is fresh.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if a bone fracture occurs with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with delicate pincers.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you below about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the collar (or neck).
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound occurs on the neck and it is simple, then it has no distinction from that at the top, but if there is damage to the nerves or arteries in the neck.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nails, then there is no other tool but to let the cure happen and do not put anything restraining, for it harms the nails and makes them retract.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not apply anything sharp to the wound, for the substance of the nails is cold, and continuing treatment from outside affects the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be prepared, as if washing with soft water, mixed with rose oil, and also washed in soft water, and other herbs according to this method, and moist plasters.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, cutting it open and binding it with bands, then heal it until it is cured.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	and if the wounds are deep and infected, and filled with pus, then pierce them or deeper still;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and pus flows, then follow these steps, and apply the proper law, and cauterize accordingly.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the spine in the throat is cut, or the colors, and the flow is preserved, so that the flesh goes, as much as the color touches the bone in the throat, and do not touch the throat but return it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then the gradual improvement occurs, and do not let it for any days, then cure the wounds afterwards until it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, so be it.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are pieces of bone, if you can remove them all, and those that you cannot get, if you leave it until the wound putrefies, and becomes gangrenous, then let it heal itself;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones or a fistula in the wound, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a blow from a lance or a sword, and the wound is deep, then pay attention to the direction of the flow of blood as the patient himself indicates.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	then know that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not deep, and the blood flow is fresh, do not apply the powder immediately, nor bind it for the blood to stop completely, lest it return to the body and further harm the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but I apply an attractive remedy, and bind it twice a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you have no remedy, place much cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient lie on the wound for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if there is no coming of spasm, no bad shaking of the body, or disarrangement of the limbs alone.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the good disposition, then you know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Cure the wound with various remedies and others, as long as it is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, operate, then know that there is a fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	if the cure is as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is shallow or deep, on the front or back, then treat as follows;
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is great, of stitching;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, of powder, and if it is tightly packed in the bone, and has cut through pieces, so that the wound is exposed, and treats them fiercely if they are infected.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not infected, then leave the wound to heal, and lighten the extraction.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds in other parts, the judgments are as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	disorder of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures in the belly are great, medium, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the great wound, never let the intestines spill, or the inner lining of the intestines, so as not to allow foreign objects in;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the stitching is more delicate, and never as good as the small wound as compared to the large one, because we do not apply enough pressure to the intestines when stitching them up;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	because the intestines quickly become swollen and feel painful if not stitched properly, making the smaller wound easier to manage, because we must first reset the position of the intestine in its place before stitching it up compared to others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common stitches are used in stitching the belly, and the stitch for other wounds of the body, and there are two other specific stitches that are common to other wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	However, they are more specific with the stitch for the belly, and I will describe each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and there is no leakage of the intestines, and the thing to be stitched is easy to manage, then this is one of the two manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	For the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to the injury.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	Moisten a sponge or take a soft cloth in hot water only, or cook in water with ginger, cinnamon and cloves, and soak the intestine until the swelling is removed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and never make this wine constricting, but it should be moved to reduce the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling depart, if the intestines are filled with water or blood, and bad humors are cooked, for this is lightens the entrance to some degree.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a slight wound with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment is to move the limb, so we must not cut without great need.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument for dividing:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if he cuts deep into the flesh and does not divert it, then see the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine protrudes, return it to its natural position in its proper place, if you are able, for this is movement.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is large and located in the lower abdomen, it is necessary to have the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then put the head and feet higher than the affected parts, and also turn the patient to one side so that the painful area is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And so we must administer what I say to great wounds and minor injuries.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	Treat small wounds by preparing what you have at hand, then take in your hands a gentle ointment that will heal all the cuts to its tip, and bring together the lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	This is the common method of stitching: you pierce a needle or more than one, according to the amount of space in the wound, then leave two spaces at the top of the wound, and insert a needle or strong thread where it feels right.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce both joints through the leather with both joints of the knife, which is to cut through the leather from inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two joints of the knife in three parts.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then stretch a double thread around the needle from both parts, then bring together the two joints of the wound properly, and then leave two spaces, and insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	then tie the thread just as you did with the first needle, and continue this work according to your need for needles, until all the wound is secured.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and they should be needles of medium size, between subtle and thick, for the subtle needles take up all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter properly.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	because they need to be medium.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and one should not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin, as they can open the wound before the suture.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then remove the needles, so they do not cause the patient to bleed while sleeping, and place bands or cloth under the needle marks to prevent movement, leaving them until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this stitching method with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires only one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitch is common, and it consists of assembling the two pieces of skin and the two pieces of soft tissue together with a needle using a strong, thin thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have secured all these pieces together, return the needle to the beginning part where you started, in the manner one sews clothes.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and place enough space between each stitch, about the thickness of a smaller needle.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitch opens the wound, and I sewed a wound with one of my hands on the belly, which had been cut by a knife; the wound was more than one palm wide, and it extended from the intestines two palms wide, and the wound was in the stomach.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine to its proper place after it had remained thus for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed completely within fifteen days, and it was cured, and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And they had all given up hope that he would die, and it was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not cure him with any treatment, for I was in a place where none could be found, neither medicine nor help.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and apply a clean cloth over the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it is healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and dip it into the blood from the affected part up to this point;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the center in a straight line, if the point is lifted or the stitching or where you dipped the needle, and pierces from the inside of the affected part up to this point again;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as a tailor sews the fur, leaving once satisfied on one side and taking up again on the other, until the stitch is entirely completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second way of stitching, which Galen rightly calls, is like no other, assembling the two parts together naturally, and applying one of the ends satisfied to the other end in this manner.
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	take a needle or a piece of thread close to a mirror, and pierce only the left side, leaving both ends of the thread satisfied.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the distant part until it reaches inside, as far as the affected part.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce both parts from the distant side until they reach inside, in two other places where there is miracle on the other side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the most effective method of stitching, and the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Many dispute these words, and no one testifies to them, so one must sew the belly with needles, or thread each one.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and you should push one needle from one side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew corsets.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, it is the most difficult to sew than other rips in the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you pierce the fresh wound and all its blood, so that the arrow has moved it, then it should be pressed to stop the flow of blood and the pain.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then apply the enchanting powder over the burned area, and if the wound still burns, use any available dressing until it heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and then sew the wound closed with thread, ensuring the stitches are secure and tight;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you have no medicine, apply this instead: repeatedly change a clean cloth on the wound every day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not need other medicines in various arrangements when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound affects the principal members, it is necessary to apply a light bandage in warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the wounds, and between the armpits.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if it feels pain or discomfort in the bowels, and this often happens, they should enema with red wine, especially when the corruption reaches the intestine.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce it from within, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestinal tissue called "jeun" cannot heal when it is weary, and this is due to the condition of the veins, and the subtlety of the entire body, and the nearness of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the plug jumps out of the wound, put it back as it was in the intestine, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and has turned black, you should leave the part that is black, so that blood does not come from venoms, because there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then cut off what is between the links and hang the two parts from the opposite side of the wound until they come out, so that the removal of the plug is easier, and the wound bends.
de la routure dou boueil	From the rupture of the bowels
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in no man, for I saw a nobleman wounded by a spear in his belly;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and developed into a fistula, and from there came expulsion and flatulence.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to be subtle until it was healthy and the wound healed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it heal, I doubted that the patient would not have pain in his stomach;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there is no harm, but it waits for better dispositions, and foods and drinks.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and they should not attempt any experiments when there is a small wound in the intestine, but it must be treated in this way.
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take a large needle, then gather the edges of the wound, and when the needle has opened the mouth, place it between the two lips, so that it pulls the mouth apart.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then cut off the head of the needle, and this should hold so that it cannot be released, then insert another needle in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed.
et cout la plaie.	and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If the pain is sharp in the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, it is possible to bind the intestine with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in this way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	take the end of this intestine thread, which is well spun, and then tie it to the end of this fine linen thread twisted, then thread the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine, and rearrange it in the rupture;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this method of stitching with foreign matter is not useful except according to the path of promise and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it affects one of the vital organs, there is no remedy but subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	or whether it is a fistula, wherever it may be.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	You know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, is generally called a "fistula", especially when it is covered with hair and deeply seated.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula appears as a hard and white nodule, without pain, and is also smooth like the quill of a bird.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and it never appears clear or thin, sometimes thick, other times sparse.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	never too little, and never too much;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken of wound divisions, that any wound which is not clean, and there is no char, it is only out of one of the nine causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, because of the smallness of blood or pus;
ou por sa malice;	or because of its evil nature;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard matter inside, and on the lips, which does not allow any discharge to form;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	as there is too much bowel movement;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or their bowels are filled, and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or such medicine is not good for healing;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	because this corruption is the manner of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	because due to the proprieties of the region, digestion is slow, health is delayed, and it is weak in nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	There are veins or bones here.
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already described all these causes, signs, and the cure of medications in detail.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of a fistula which is performed by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	You should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that affect large veins, arteries, and nerves, in the stomach, or intestines, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or the spine in the back, or any joint in the hands or feet.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it occurs at the property of the main member, and has similar joints.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this nature are difficult to heal, and there is nothing but hard work and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is no fistula that does not come to the place I mentioned, and you have confidence in the treatment, and you see it take effect, take a piece of iron or steel, if the fistula is deep, as you wish.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is twisted, try a thin piece of lead or iron, because the plunger will bend and follow the curvature.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and it cuts the hands deeply and you cannot properly search for them with your fingers if you clean them through one of the openings, because moisture passes from one opening to another, cleansing them.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then cut it deeply with your knife, so you know if there are bones or nerves, and remove the blood completely, pressing it firmly, and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press, and the location where they feel it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you truly know the location, and it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or any of the places I mentioned earlier, then cut according to what I told you, and remove the foulness and corrupt flesh that is within.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then the treatment as long as it is healthy, and if the fistula is deeply placed in the right direction, it is necessary that you remove it completely, as much as you can, then apply moist bandages with astringent medicine, and keep them pressed to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then apply hot compresses with healthy charcoal, as long as it remains healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	if it is not healthy, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, remove it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve does not affect your principal limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackening, remove it until the corruption is entirely gone, then apply remedies to heal the wound as long as it remains healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it remains unhealthy and turns bow-shaped as before, know that you are not yet allowed to proceed.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if it becomes exposed and you wish to go deep, remove all the corruption, then restore the joint;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if they are thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If that is not the case, know that the corruption is too great, and you cannot overcome it.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other force but to surrender to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small, corrupt bone that you can pull out with tweezers, and if it is removed with a suitable instrument, and if there are many bones, they should be pulled apart without leaving any behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if moisture makes it contrary, there is no doubt or fear, if it is hot and moist and hard, and releases the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, apply something to the wound that promotes putrefaction, and leave it until the bones are softened around them, and then they will be more easily removed.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh bone, apply the putrefaction treatment so thoroughly that all the blackness is removed, and then dress the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a great deal of decay in the heart, it reaches almost to the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it is necessary, cover it with cloth and protect it until the decay is healed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you about a fistula that occurs in a man's leg, so that you can take an example from it and receive help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	It was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to something inside the body, causing matter to accumulate in the leg, and he had a large abscess that would not open.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but because of their madness, they pricked the abscesses so deeply that they caused much damage to the body, and it became a fistula, and many holes appeared throughout the body oozing with pus and moisture.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many people spent more than two years without cure, and there was no wise man in the art of healing, until I was called to it, and I saw his leg and the medicines used to heal him, and what healed through the holes in the body.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body of the young man turned red, and it had the color of amber.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these gaps, and then I examined all the gaps, and I found that some came into contact with each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I quickly prepared a tool, and inserted it into one of the openings until I discovered a piece of bone, which I found corrupt and broken, and the corruption reached right down to the bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I realized what I was seeing in the corrupt bone, and thought that there could be no further damage beyond what I had seen.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to treat the wound with strong remedies for a long time, but they could not heal.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I tried again, and discovered the bone just as before, and found that the corruption continued within it, so I treated it and then reset it, and focused on securing the joint.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I cannot do it until I have completely healed one side of the bone, and pulled it out from its socket, then treated it with medicine.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it became healthy and whole again, and did not wish to repeat the treatment unless due to the weakness of the patient who could not endure, or for the fear of death that I had from him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because for the complete evacuation of blood, it often happens, but it was completely healed, and a hard callous grew in its place on the bone, and it was of good disposition and caused no harm or discomfort at all, neither from going away nor from coming back.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, then it should be treated in this way:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take a ligature, and pull it at the end of the bone that is open, and command anyone to extend it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and tie I another thread of a thicker nature to the first one, and attach it to the flesh that is beneath the bone, and focus on the joint, so that you pull the corrupted flesh from below, and expose the flesh on the bone where you wish to heal, so that the wound does not become infected.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and insert splints or a table beneath the bone to cover the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is important to observe and feel the corruption, and do this several times.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if a bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then it exposes all the flesh.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then place hot coals from beneath, and then gently from one part to the other, spread the corruption, and so the healing is long from the corruption as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and either extract the bone or repair it from the other part.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then there is no other choice but to cut them.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is in the hand or foot, it is very strong, but you must inquire about this corruption how it opens.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and clean it in any way you can, but ensure the vein or nerve does not oppose you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the saw and the threads to join these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this, it is necessary to have a suitable instrument for each type of work.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	so consider the instrument you need, according to what is suitable.
dou feu	Of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The dislocation may occur due to internal or external causes.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have treated that corruption with remedies, and they do not help, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to the joint where the corruption has occurred, so that the patient might escape from death or from the greater evil of a fault in the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs of this are that the limb turns black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackening, then that corruption spreads from member to member, and takes over the whole body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if you hurry in covering it, and if it is due to the bite of some venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion or snake or similar, then that corruption is at the top of the limb, if you cover it, do not give it space to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, so that the joint is dislocated, preventing the corruption from reaching the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it extends to the arm, so that the dislocation is at the elbow;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it goes beyond the elbow, it is fatal, and there is no cure except to measure the quantity of its virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and thus do the same when corruption or pus appears.
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	If it affects the first joint, then cut after the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it affects the foot, then cut through the entire foot.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises up the leg, then cut at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to leave the patient to die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the manner of cutting or sawing off the limb is as follows: you tie it down from above and below, extending one minister (cutter) on the lower joint, and another on the upper joint, and you sever the flesh that is between the two joints with a large spatula, until the bone is exposed.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Then apply the poultice or linen, placing each layer of lint so that it does not touch the healthy skin, and bring about further injury and abscess for the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if the blood flow continues when you work, cauterizing the vein too quickly or applying any restraining powders.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then return to your treatment until it is complete, then bind the limb with a strong bandage, and dress it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you if it turns out as expected at home after some time.
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	He had a blackening that seemed to be a burn from fire, and this corrosion first appeared on his right foot, spreading over the entire foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when he saw the corruption, he would cover his foot and it would heal.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and after a long time, the corruption returned to his other hand, and it came to me, and I put upon it things that rebound after purification of the body, but he cannot stop the corrosion.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he told me to cover his hand, but I did not want to, as I had hope of rebound the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I also doubt if he cuts off his hand, he will not die, for the strength of man was weak;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he became desperate, returned to his land, bandaged his hand, and was healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have no objection to this, if one knows how to do it differently, as needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	No abscess can form in fatty tissue, and it lingers so long that it causes a great gathering of bowels.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then they will pull and pierce, and jump into the bow, and hold the bones still, just like a vase.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin that is above is as delicate as fine cloth, and will not tear all the way to the bone or nerve, and such a condition is called "healthy," and not "fistula.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so stretched that it reaches the bone, it is called a "fistula.
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the cure is that you cut the skin all around, especially when it is thin, as if with a cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not be afraid of its decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you think that the skin is about to decay and the corruption is not yet complete, and the skin is dry and tough, then apply a cleansing bath thusly:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	check if the breasts are swollen and the bowels emit a bad odor, then cleanse them with Egyptian medicine made thusly:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take ease (or caution), and oil, and litharge, in equal amounts, and place them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and enema the breast, and tighten the opening.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine in for two hours, then extract it by straining.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this several times until the breast is clean and free from impurity.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and never should be rinsed with water from ashes when this medicine is not present, and you press ashes into vine bark, pour water over it, then strain it and use the water for enema, as long as you know that the intestines are well cleansed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot endure it, neither Egyptian medicine nor water from ashes will help, if they are enema with water and honey, or have a bit of litharge ground in it.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you should enema them with honey and sweet wine, that the honey has purifying properties to cleanse and wash, and the wine provides air to the health.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this and are sure that the wound is well cleansed, then administer a purge from what causes the fever to rise in him, and make certain you apply a plaster carefully, and do it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you administer certain medications and remedies, of which I have spoken about their properties or treatment of wounds.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the wound is very small and the purge cannot enter, open it slightly with a needle, and apply a bandage of the Egyptian or basilicon remedy, as long as it is enlarged.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too wide, so that the cut and it leave so much pain in place or the wound cannot be entered, and if the opening that sags is above, then the leg or below the knee must be treated.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bowel is entirely blocked, it does not allow any passage.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you cannot close the abdomen as you see fit, then arrange it in such a way that the bowel moves to the lowest part of the leg where it can be passed, for when the bowel is entirely blocked, it does not allow any passage and if you cannot close the abdomen as you see fit, then arrange it accordingly.
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	that the bowel moves slightly downwards, and leave nothing of the bowel;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidating medicines to promote healing, and lay them on the wound covered with linen cloth that covers all the wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then apply pressure with your hands to the opening near the chest, making it wider from inside than outside, since there is more wound on one side, and put a softer dressing on the other cloth according to the size of the opening, and place it on the healthy opening to align the bowel, and do not remove the large cloth beforehand for many days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and he who is sorely afflicted with a chest wound, often needs to have the bowel opened, and knows that comes from the bowel, whether it is poison or food, or properly digested or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in this manner, and you see the effect that it has on the chest wound, then know that the bowel has already opened, and bring the patient closer to health.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then remove the bandage in the morning, or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change it for a new one, and renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast becomes bowed and distended after many days, knowing that it will not open.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons appear after a long time, do not despair of health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are some people who slowly heal their wounds, and others who do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and they bend over, feeling pain in their sides after many days, knowing that the pain will not subside.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if their pain does not subside, then use medications with moist substances and dry virtues as an ointment, for there is a great deal of vitriol, and this is the last medication.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take the final ointment, and mix it with rose oil, and add aged wine of equal substance;
puis le confit et en use;	then apply it and use it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and it itself makes the honey thick and rich, when onions are not available, take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and sprinkle them onto the honey while it is still warm from the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then I wrap it in cloth and place it over the wound, and never apply aromatic herbs or roots of the celestial plant, which is also like flour from oats and chamomile;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and use simple or composite remedies;
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	Break them, and make them into powder, and add the honey I mentioned, and use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the cure is prolonged, and this cure does not heal it, then know that the corruption is complete, and it makes an impression on the bone, or the hard members, or the limbs.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the cure for the fistula, as we have said above.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	A gangrene is an abscess that forms under a nail of the hand, or the foot, or may occur elsewhere.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it becomes infected and no attention is paid, it leads to an abscess, and the pain and swelling increase until the root of the nail is reached, and perhaps even the entire nail.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and it brings corrosion close to the bone, causing intense and putrid pain, with the skin turning dark and swollen.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment does not benefit, then you must remove all the dead tissue remaining under the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	Cautery is very helpful when the bone is healthy and the nail is intact.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail is quickly heated and begins to hurt, and the blister forms, then you must place a hot iron under the nail that has blistered, and raise it up, and gently and lightly cut off the blister, and apply burning and corroding medicinal remedies to remove all of it.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wounds as long as they are clean.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it out and treat it, for as long as the bone is corrupt, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see both bones corrupt, cut them as described above, and then treat them as long as they are clean.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is broken, twisted, and causes great pain, then you must first heal it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the nail with a sharp instrument at an angle from above, and ensure that the cut does not go all the way through to the quick of the nail, as the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, apply something that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain excruciates the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	He who is born without the hands in anyone's care is entirely flesh, and perhaps he has parts where there should be bones, and never an fingernail, and none of them are born at the root of a joint, or birth takes place in no way for any of them.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	He who is born with no new pain should not be mute, and he who is born at the joint of the bone may, perhaps, be mute.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the cut for that which is fleshy should be light, in this manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	The one that is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	if it keeps you covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	As for him who is born with or develops a deformity in the last (joint), it is necessary that you first cover the joint properly up to the bone, then dislocate the bone to a suitable position, and then treat it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The deformities that come as one must assemble themselves come either from birth, or from the healing of a wound, or from a burn by fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	You must ensure that you cover the closed one, so it should be repaired according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place between two moistened cloths or sheets soaked in rosin oil, so they do not stick together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	You insert between two pieces of fine cloth, as long as the wound is closed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If adhesion occurs at any of its edges with the palm, close this wound as appropriate.
des vils	The word "des vils" translates to
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	They are veins thickly wrapped, filled with melancholic excess, which come to many parts of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more often occurs in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry things, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you administer purgative remedies no more often than once, and then cleanse the bowel.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The cure for this is according to two manners:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One is with cups, and they drain the black blood.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other method is that you open the vein and drain it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The incision is as follows:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	first, raise the leg with hot water, making it as warm as possible, so that the pain becomes subtle, then stretch the sick leg from above the knee down to the ankle.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then open the vein in one, two, or three places with a large knife, then carefully and gently draw out the black blood in your hand from one end to the other, as much as the patient's weakness allows.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then lay it [the wound] open, and command him to eat foods that produce black blood.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are filled and harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The treatment of this is according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Lift the leg of the sick person, if there is any hair, then immerse it in hot water, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bath, then heat it over the fire, and then apply it to the vein from the top of the thigh down to the ankle or in the area around the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the joint, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears when touched.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and it appears red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white thread.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then stretch the skin from below, as long as it is lifted from the flesh, and then bend it gently at the joint, and then cut across in another place above and thirdly below.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then peel the skin over the vein while it is still open, then lift the raised edge, as you did before, and bend it at another joint, as you did first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then cut another size, or more if needed, then lift and cut at the second joint from the top, then pull and lift until the second size is reached.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then extract it gradually, bit by bit, until it comes out completely, then cut it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	if you cannot pull it out and lift it, push an needle through the entire thread twice as thick, tie and pull it, push down the bone with your finger from one side to another until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and ensure it does not break, because if it breaks, you cannot pull it out or lift it, and it will cause harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and once it is completely pulled out, place warm woolen bandages on the wound soaked in wine and rose oil;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat him as long as he is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the vision is contracted, twisted, and rolled up together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly but do not cover it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	One must carefully cut the vision if it is curved, without severing, until it reaches the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is a great burden, for if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but since it is thick as we have said, this is its form:
de la voinne civile	from the vein (in the limb)
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is located in the legs, in hot regions where there are no herbs or trees, and on land where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance it may appear in other places than the legs, and this leads to putridity that comes from beneath the skin, as if it were a serpent or worm winding and writhing within the flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein appear, it is that there is a very great swelling in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to emerge forcefully, just like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the joint is open, you must wrap it tightly with a piece of cloth from one and a half to two fingers thick, and compress it, leaving the cloth on the leg, and whenever there is no discharge, wrap it around the cloth and compress it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part of it and wrap the remaining part, but do not cover its root again until all the discharge has stopped.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	because if you cut it off, it will return to the root and cause an abscess, putrefaction, or a bad disease.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For every small thing, it is necessary that it be treated little by little until it reaches its end, and nothing should remain in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and it is never this vein when it is treated with V palms of length, or X, and a man came to me, from whom it emerged X palms in length, and when you cut it, if it bulges or becomes narrow, and pierce it through to the bottom, so that everything comes out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and the material inside should be evacuated, and then the place should be treated with medicinal poultices for several days, and after that, the cure should be applied as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And never should this vein be cut again, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or the leg, and much rupture occurs, and from which much blood flows.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers that are born between skin and flesh.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This illness is called the "beef disease" in our land because it often affects cattle, and it is a small worm that develops between the hide and the flesh, spreading throughout the body upwards and downwards, and it feels very hot from one limb to another, as far as the skin where it has taken hold, and it grows fiercely.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is caused by putrefaction of certain humours, as they accumulate and wind their way through the stomach, serpents, worms, and ascarids.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and doubt arises about the nature of his illness, for when it moves through the body, it rises to the head, and reaches the eye, perhaps re-enters, and destroys the eye.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it healing and drawing (out), one cannot be sure unless it has completely gone.
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If it is necessary, then you must place the limb above and below with a strong bandage tightly, then cut and pull it until it comes out completely in the char, and you do not remove it, if you cauterize it with fire, until it heals.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it does is when it bleeds, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or the edge close to the oil, quickly remove the eyebrow-shaped mass by cutting and pulling it out.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary for the patient to cleanse his body with solvent medicines to remove harmful humors, and to purify the flesh through hot baths to prevent putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	from the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in no particular member, but can move from one member to another.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I have shown you what I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to tend to a sick woman, and upon examining her, I discovered a small swelling in the vein of her arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and then I see, the vision arise on the shoulder, more distinct than anything else, as vivid as silver when it cuts through flesh.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain departs from its place and settles into the shoulder, and then shortly after, it spreads throughout the body, until it reaches the other breast.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then it told me that it twisted around the body again, as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marvelled much at how she moved from one limb to another, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	nevertheless, I wanted to see if the pain could move from one place to another, but I didn't observe it, as I saw in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought it was because the woman had dry skin, her veins exposed, and this stiffness appeared constrained.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and did not appear at all to those who are delicate, with moist skin and veins covered.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see this disease heal, and the patient feels the pain, if it opens as we have said, press it gently from above and below until this constrained stiffness in the joint leaves.
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the joint;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it for yourself, if the treatment of these impediments repels winds as if through foul pills, and pills of serpentary, and similar ones.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows vary, according to their appearance and according to the parts of the body from which they originate.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	Their variety is such that there are some with large points, and others with small, and some with barbs, and others smooth.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and some with two edges, and others with tongues, and those with fragments.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and those that split in any member, splitting in two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	You should focus on the primary member, as in the head, body, liver, heart, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it breaks in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appears:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	you must then be prepared for the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in various ways;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and if this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not fully extracted, do not pull it, but treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain when the arrow pierces the skull and bone, and satisfaction is felt on top of the skull, is when darkness and blinding and squinting and redness occur in one eye, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and impaired understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps it is without feeling from the nostrils or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and from the moist wound, white pus resembling a pulsation, and also like a brisk flow of blood;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears, if you hold to the treatment, pull out the arrow if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of an arrow when it breaks or moves is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were embedded in hard, not empty, tissue.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the arrow remains silent like the pulse, and there is sudden black blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	so you know for certain that death is approaching.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that the pulse never moves is that there is no foam coming from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns pale, and he breathes heavily and stops moving.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow pierces the skin deeply, it is necessary to remove the small bones.
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and it causes great pain and sorrow, and sighs.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and it moves all the shoulder muscles.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow pierces through the stomach, perhaps something from the wound disturbs the indigestible flesh.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow pierces through the belly, and there is no trace of good fate through the intestines, then there is little hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow pierces the bladder, the patient urinates in fits and starts, strongly feeling pain.
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	he knows that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs—as it feels and appears—the fingers, hands, arms, shoulders, aid (possibly referring to a specific medical term or condition), the lower back, knees, feet, and legs, all exhibit various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man at home, an arrow struck him or cut his eye socket.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I attempted it, and pulled from another side, removing the fat of the ear, and it was healed without pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And I pulled out an arrow that had struck in the fat below the paper, and the arrow was straightened, and only the tip towards the wood could be seen, and it was an arrow of great length with a blue arch, light as a feather without any noise.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The spirit was pure, and no bad accident came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian; it was an Arabian arrow with ears.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I removed the beard, and manipulated it gently as I extracted it, and the Christian was healthy.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And extracted an arrow from a man's home, which had entered his stomach, and thought he was dying;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and after he has passed thirty days, his condition does not change.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut out the arrow, disassembled it, and removed it, without any adverse events.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man with an arrow in his side or back, and the wound is deep;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and keep the arrow inside him, and do not change his natural state, nor find any harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And see another man, to whom an arrow struck his face, and the wound was deep;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and he endured thus, suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many others of similar kind.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And pulled out an arrow from the body of a prince, the king, which had struck him in the neck and was slightly inclined to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was completely extracted.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to treat her after she had been ill for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I examined her with great care, but felt nothing.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and she felt a sharp pain and discomfort deep within her right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from an arrow's point. I applied a soothing poultice to the swollen lobe, as the swelling had not subsided.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the arrow's head.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I applied the hot iron repeatedly to the wound and thus soothed it, keeping the patient in this way for a long time until he felt the arrow inside his body.
et il le me dist.	and it came out.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied strong, corrosive medicine to the wound with my hands, keeping it closed until it opened, and when I probed it, I felt the point of the arrow sticking in the flesh.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then adjust the opening of the wound with this medicine until the head of the arrow becomes clearly visible.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and after three months, the wound healed well, and then it reopened, and I had to use pincers, pulling from both sides, but it wouldn't come out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	then I did not stop trying and devising subtle tools until I found the right pair of pincers, as described at the end of this chapter, and as I manipulated it, the wound healed.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the most skilled judges believe that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I then restored it, and the wound healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Or, I have told you the quality of extracting arrows, so that you place your treatment on what I do not say, because books cannot encompass everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but the most skilled doctors compare very little and only what they see as useful and effective in practice, truly new works, and nine instruments, for the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not leave the members where they are embedded, except in two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by the place where they enter, or from another side;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and the one that comes out from the other side, where it enters into the flesh, is an arrow that never returns again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not come out now, leave it until the flesh around it decays and the way out is clear;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is stuck in a bone, it cannot come out, if left like that for no days, and moves each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, it pierces around everywhere with a fine thread, as long as the muscles around are widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is stuck in a bone at the top, and goes down to one of the bellies of the brain, and none of the accidents that I have mentioned affect the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If you cannot pull it out, but leave it as long as it remains even after a few days, for if the arrow goes all the way through, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not driven completely into the bone, and does not heal properly, and the patient suffers no ill effect for some time, the skill of extraction must be applied.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be pulled out, then apply herbs around it, as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the limb as long as it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is withdrawn into the limb deeply and cannot be seen, then press it with all your strength.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, with any suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot open the wound due to its tightness or the arrow's depth, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein to be seen, then leave it as it is until the wound heals.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and extract the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that hold it in place, remove them from both sides as much as you can, then break or bend the arrowhead's barbs until you can draw it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully, without breaking the arrow, draw it out with greater force.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, so that the limb around it is completely relaxed, then pull it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the course of fever opposes you, then administer as we have said in its chapter about treatment;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and be careful with the incision near nerves and veins, and learn how you can draw out the arrow safely, as soon or as slowly, firmly or gently as possible.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and place the patient according to the position in which the arrow entered, for it is the greatest help, and if you cannot do this, then place him as the signs indicate.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	He knows that the arrow comes from another direction, where it opens something within him, or the skin is swollen in a noticeable way.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	then cut around it, as much as the pliers can grasp, and then extract it.
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then try to extract it again until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the arrowhead is embedded in the flesh, it drives itself deeper into the flesh.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if it comes out, you must administer pressure, and if you use a sharp instrument, the point of the arrow should enter the flesh alongside the instrument.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	then press firmly, and if the arrow is embedded, drive the instrument with its pointed end inside to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you clear all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	and if the arrow comes out in the stomach, or bladder, or side, and it is close to a vital organ, you can press on it;
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and you must guard the vein and nerve, then extract it, and then sew up the wound, it is your duty.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it as long as it is clean.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles an eagle's beak, and here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape [for the arrowhead] when it is like a feather is also like the quill of a bird, to push to the tip of the arrow, as this shape is:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of pliers for pushing and pulling, if it is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are 31 veins from which one draws blood, of which there are 16 main ones, that is to say:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	II beat the muscles that are after the ears, which are called the "soft hairs";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are in the visible temples;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the veins that are in the arms of the joints, which are called "aspirations";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is on the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is on the back of the head;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two wedges which are in it;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are in the upper lip above the mouth, and these veins are called "augerich".
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins of which one commonly speaks are V in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, which is located on the left side of the body, and is commonly called by the people "vein of the head".
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the middle part is called "fast" (or "middle"), composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and the common people call it "vein of the body".
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilic is found on the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", located beneath the skin, and it is the one that opens clearly on the pulse.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the saving vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and if it rains (i.e., swells);
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and where the foot are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is removed from the ribcage on the left side of the body, and the second is at the ankle on the right side.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein called "nesse," which is at the ankle of the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg, there are three veins removed from those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The healing of veins located behind the ears is beneficial for old cataracts and migraines.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and regarding the qualities of healing, as I have said, it is important to lift the patient's head and rub the affected area with a rough cloth.
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then tie the patient's collar tightly, so that both veins behind the ears, hanging down from the head, become visible.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	place your fingers there, and where you feel the pulse below your thumb, it signifies life.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lancet, and cut through the vein just above the bone, then gently your hand over the entire vein upstream, and clean and wrap the skin and the vein well it must pass through, and let out the blood as you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then strain and hold it, as long as it is healthy;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already spoken of incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The healthy of the two arteries that are in the temples, it is worth to use ancient and dried, and accustomed to the eye, and at the corner of the eyes, hot tears.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of a good healer is such as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient tightens his neck, as both veins open widely;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the pain deeply in both sides, and then signs with a cross;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then gently place your thumb on the vein at the top of your right index finger, and insert the lance below, and press the vein at the top, and the cup, just as you did with the other two veins, and draw out the blood according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then loosen the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then form a bandage and leave it until the wound is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have spoken of their connection and extraction, as mentioned at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The healing of the vein on the forehead is just as important as the healing of the head in cases of old facial diseases, such as migraine and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and its quality is such that the patient twists his neck, until the vein opens.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called "fosseur", which has this shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	and place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand, or another tool, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then gently release the patient's neck, and tie the vein as long as it remains healthy and free from a wide opening of any flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	Nevertheless, it does not suit that the flames are too intense;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and do not set the healthy one crookedly, for the bone is hard, and perhaps break the flames when they are subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The health of the two veins that are in the arms should be treated carefully, and also for conditions such as scabs, redness, and inflammation in the eye, and facial diseases;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is such that the patient pulls his collar tightly without twisting any ligaments, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the healthy one, and make it clean through the flame, slightly long and quite wide, for there is no scar.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flame is too subtle, it may break.
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then apply the flame to the blood, as much as needed, then wrap it in cloth and bind it tightly.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The health of the vein near the nose is valuable for colds and sudden sorrows, and facial diseases such as migraines and redness that come to the face, especially when they are old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the quality of the health is such that the patient tightens his collar, then pulls his nose to your left hand, and takes the thin flame longwise and inserts it between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well enough, and now the blood will begin to flow.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not be too hasty in its application, and let the blood flow as needed, then bind it for a night, for it is often quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The holy water of the two eyes is helpful for the narrowing of the eyelid, and at the onset of inflammation, and for many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and itching.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the water is such that the patient pulls his collar away from both sides, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and if the master is standing over the patient's head, and the patient sits on a seat, then wash the vein with long water, as much as necessary, and treat the wound with bloodletting as appropriate.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then repeat the process on the other vein, loosen the ligature, and gently pull on the veins until the patient is no longer strangled.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and leave it until morning so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	from the cleansing of the veins
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The cleansing of the veins above the lips helps to improve oral health, and it aids in the healing of gum disease, lip splits, and pain and swelling around them.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the healing is such that you should have the patient sit before you and pull on his collar as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the lip and look at both veins, one on the right side of the mouth and the other on the left, and you can recognize them by their black color and the fine black veins around them.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	So then, deal with both one after the other, and if you do not know them or are in doubt, take the larger one from each part, and also make cuts from above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	From the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The treatment of the veins below the tongue is beneficial after treating the cervical region, and it is useful for narrowing the throat, eye diseases, and mouth ailments.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of the healer is such that the patient should be cut between your hands in the light of the sun, lift up the tongue, and look below each side for a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Then make both whole, but do not force them too much, for there are arteries beneath.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins through which blood flows, which are commonly healed, are treated in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or cutting through them all with a hot iron or a fine olive oil-soaked cloth, which is called "anesil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are wide and thin according to the width and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	It forms a bright red mark, very renowned, and is broad as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins with a sharp blade on those that have visible, thick blood, which contain much blood and pus.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of olive oil flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more delicately pointed, and is for cleansing the delicate veins, where there is delicate, yellow-colored blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The holy basil, which is one of these veins, is beneficial for diseases that are beneath the throat, and the collarbone, and the pelvis, and the stomach.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and the physician should treat it carefully, and wash away the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he touches an artery, and blood flows, it must be stopped as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and the flame must not be squeezed, but cut as if with a blade.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the vein does not open clearly, it is necessary that you extract it and use another one.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or if you wish to free it from the vein, draw it out of the vein into the arm.
elle apert manifestement;	she opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and apply the flame gently, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you recognize the place of the wound, it is necessary that you extract the arm, touch the place until you feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then sign the place with a cross, then bind the arm, and cut the vein gently with the flame.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and be sure not to hurt the artery when you see the shoulder swell, for that is the artery.
eschui la donques.	then avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it protrude at the top as well as the urine of a child, and the skin is red and thin, know that this is an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	hurry then, and put your finger deeply, then remove your finger if the skin remains intact, which often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	he lies with his arm relaxed, and lets it be thus, and does not move the patient.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the wound is not immediately healed, it will worsen, and there are no medicines at hand, especially if the artery opens up, as with a deep cut.
et estainche li sans.	and stop the wound from bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of fig wood, cut it, and take one half and tie it tightly to the other until morning.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if it remains unstained, that is good.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if that does not work, as we have said, with powders that prevent blood from clotting;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the staining is not overly affected by the small size of the wound or the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The surgeon of the vein should draw blood if it aids in treating the wound from its top and bottom, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and the surgeon should be aware that he must wash for the nerve that is exposed, and if he does not cut it precisely, he might damage the nerve, causing swelling and infection, and perhaps it cannot heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any place due to its subtlety, then you must use a surgical instrument to free it.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and avoid the nerve's power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if a vein is between the two bones, cut it from above.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The treatment for headaches involves drawing blood from the head, which helps and relieves the pain.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary for the healer to prick with olive oil or myrrh flame, because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not harm any nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, it is necessary to seek the gentler vein, and do not be alarmed if it hurts the first time, and try again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance, the eyes may swell up in some men, without any pain at first, but it causes no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood depends on your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about healing is that health is not restored merely by treating illness, but by preserving health and avoiding future diseases.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and health should be sought through one of the three veins, that is, the neck, armpit, or groin.
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	these being the neck (cephalique), armpit (faste), and groin (basilique).
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should heal at the beginning of prayers, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one should heal on the first day or the third, after two or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The healer who is administered for diseases has no determined hour, but whenever it is necessary by day or night, at all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and one should not heal children until they are twelve years old, nor a woman who has given birth for less than four months up to seven.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	One should not consider the old who have passed sixty years as healed.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when anyone wishes to be healed, in any way, it is necessary that he purges the bowels with a light enema, if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not draw out the excessive and harmful impurities from the main limbs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	He will not be healed who is excessively soaked in salty meats or too much fat, nor those who are weak from drinking excessive water.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and should be wary of the patient after colic, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent sexual activity, childbirth, watching and fasting, and anything that depletes strength, whether from weapons or bodily illness.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then gently draw out the humours, if they are thick, through foods, drinks, and remedies, if you have such power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then into the bath, if nothing hinders you, to draw out the blood, and heal the vein from within and around it, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and guard yourself from work, trouble, luxury, and similar things on that day.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be calm and joyful, and make the healing more effective than that of others, and rub the arm twice or three times, then tighten the ligature gently, for if it is too tight or loose, it will not heal well.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the joint with your hands, until the veins swell and you feel them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then moisten the wound with a drop of old oil, then place your left-hand finger on the vein below the joint, where you want to heal, so that the vein does not burst and cause harm.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flow like strings when healing, and if they are filled with pus, so that when you apply the flame, it pulls away from the flame, and cannot open the vein, thus one suffers from such a condition.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if they open the vein, if the wound is too narrow, then it is necessary that the healers be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	if not, it is necessary to repeat the process slightly below where it was done, for if the limbs are not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the limb is swollen and the patient fears, let it be for one or two days without binding the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	Perhaps there appear abscesses suddenly.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	One should not bathe immediately, then renew the dressing if it seems appropriate.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if it is a small opening, gently pierce the skin and doubt not that it will let out as much blood as you see, so sure are we of the same piercing itself, straight to the flame.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and open it slightly gently, so that the muscles are not inflamed.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	because this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the vein swollen, do not immediately recommence the healing process, and apply a little oil, for it lightens the body of blood, and the sticky substance that the oil leaves is helpful in this situation.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the oil in every vein you treat to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and it has a soothing and comforting effect when applied to the swollen vein.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	if subtly the bone moves and spreads when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there develops a large abscess, which happens often, especially when the vein is not wide enough to be opened at once, act swiftly, and place a moistened sponge with some hot seal on it over the area and keep it there for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the blood flow from the vein has stopped, and if it remains at the site for several days without any blackening or greening, then it causes no harm.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, place on anything cool or cold, soaked in a calamine juice, show, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And many times, abscesses and pustules appear on the sacred flesh of the basilica.
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	then place your hand on it, and if you feel the warmth is too great under the pressure of your hand, this is when such an appearance occurs.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	So be careful not to apply anything of what we have said, for it might cut off the flow without an artery.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but he should make an emollient with dry herbs to harden the joint, then apply another remedy until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each one of the pains according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the pain.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the skin is pale, let it continue to turn red.
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it as thick, leave it until it becomes thin.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for him who is sick and weak, and has the skill to extract blood, that he make a larger wound, and have wider flames.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for the weak, do the opposite, and it is more necessary to heal them quickly and often, and one should heal them by cutting across, not piercing.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this healing method is free from the decay of blood and the disruption of nerves, and it is more effective than healing either long or wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And to him whose body needs salivation, it is necessary to give a little of the juice of pomegranates.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If he is overheated, he should take cold juice three or four times a day, and if he has a cold complexion, he should first dilute the salivation with a little syrup made from grapes, or honey syrup perfumed with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and nutmeg, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints at the sickbed, after drawing much blood, it is necessary that he inhale a brew of charcoal and subtle fragrant syrup, and use other things as we have mentioned in the section or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to extend his arm and heal it later, as necessary, when it is weakened by much healing, he should pull and release it little by little, according to the amount of its continuous strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wishes to extend his arm after the first healing, and he has strong stiffness, he should heal it seven hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to heal from another side, he should heal on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For he has excess heat and blood inside the body, which causes fever.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	if it is necessary to draw out a large quantity, and widen the opening as much as possible;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	since you fulfill all the conditions for healing, and place your hand on a pulsating (vein) when it is healthy, death does not come in its place, and this often happens, when healers are negligent.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not advisable when you see the arm dislocated a second time, and blood flows out again, and the opening is closed, to press strongly on it.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If he is weak, he should stretch his arm slowly, for it would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but he should let it heal the second time around;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you should apply the tip of the flame to the frozen vein until it bursts open, then place a small piece of silk over it and gently press.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not squeeze it until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it becomes necessary to drain the blood again due to the abscess, either in the same place or in another vein or arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthier in place of the vein in the head because it is composed differently.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of healing is that the patient should immerse their hand in hot water until the veins turn red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then tie it gently, so that the vein opens well, then clean the wound now with a thin and precise movement, not too wide or too long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and make the wound wide enough, and ensure the healing is close to the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be extracted, immerse the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow out in the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if this does not work, do not push the hand back into the hot water, as it is more harmful than helpful.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are neither arteries nor nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The health of the vein in the right hand is worth for all diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	strain the hand and immerse it in hot water, as long as the vein is inflamed, if that is visible;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and hold the hand across, and if you grasp it firmly from every side, then there is no pain.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not harm the patient too much, for the nerves are entirely exposed and naked of flesh, and then apply the hand to warm water, so that the blood is frozen in the wound, and it cannot escape.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as best you can, then place oil and silk on the vein to bind it tightly, and so do for each person.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The healthy person holds the mouse with their left hand if it has a disease of the eye, and does everything as I have told you for the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sage of the soul holds sway over all illnesses affecting the body, such as illnesses of the eyes, and retention of flowers (possibly referring to a condition related to plant or petal-like growths), and diseases of the kidneys, feet, and old legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of his health is such that the patient should immerse themselves in warm water and rub the vein until it breaks, and then bind over the joint with a cloth.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and the vein is at the ankle, and they will apply much rain (or perhaps pressure) above the foot.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Sanct then make wider or larger cuts, or at the ankle, wherever it is valuable to move.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you make cuts on the foot, be careful with the nails that are underneath, and cut across as well as when piercing.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and so the flames will subside.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the splint cannot be removed, place the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the cuts need to be made for the first time, then repeat the second cut just above a little, because the wounds are salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein's lion is at the ankle's fire, and its healing brings pain to the lower back when it is hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of his health is such that if the patient enters the bath, he should pull three times on the ankle, twisting it, because otherwise the vein will not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, take the health in every way that you can, and draw through it.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is worth that you hold it, because the veins are safe, and it is much refreshed with many hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not let it heal, if any healthy thread from the wound opens or closes slowly and gently, and takes care of the nails.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and apply pressure against the blood as you see fit, then loosen the bandage, and place a piece of cotton and tighten it.
ele est maintenant sanee.	it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	From the medical treatments of the vacuum (sauce/suction).
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Suction cups are made of horns, or iron, or glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and ventilation is done according to two manners:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	or by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this ventilation without piercing is according to two manners:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	or it is with all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and the ventilation done by piercing and drawing blood is done in twelve parts of the body, so that one part is entirely in sleep at the head.
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are in the neck.
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and the others on both sides of the neck.
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the suction from under the chin.
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the suction from both shoulders.
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the suction on the knees.
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the suctions on both arms.
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the leech (suction) cups of both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the leech (suction) cups on both ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the leeching does not treat blood, but rather small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and for this reason it weakens no one, as is done with vein-sucking;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not advisable to use it in any condition arising from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if, due to necessity or illness, it is necessary to release the air, either at the beginning or end of the month, or every day, then it should be done each hour.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are such people who, when they need to release air, have a heavy head.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if they who experience relief with release have redness in their face, head, neck, and dark circles around the eyes.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, have an inflamed tongue, and bleed.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are such people who think, see blood, and feel pain and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we order vomiting after three hours during the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The healer of the muscle should help with the great pain in the head ...  that comes from these (causes), and it is not appropriate for this to happen after the evacuation of all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this treatment should be in the hands of the healer of the head, and it is not appropriate for someone of a cold disposition to use it, or who has catarrh, for it causes them much harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason, it is not advisable that the elderly or those with cold illnesses use it.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who recovers from it often becomes oblivious, and for this reason, the cup should be placed a little lower down in doubt of its oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The wind or inflammation of the neck is contrary to health from the top and base, and for this reason it causes tightness in the chest, narrowing of the airway, coughing, and congestion.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is advisable to press lightly, as if it holds too firmly, it can cause faintness or stomach and body pain.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The inflammation of the ribs in the neck causes pain in the head, eyes, and migraines, constriction, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and is contrary to the health of the sinus from the base.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is necessary that you instruct the healthy person to press his hand gently so as not to damage the artery, and no blood loss occurs.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The inflammation of the jaw is worth addressing for mouth diseases, gum corruption, and similar ailments in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and is located in the healthy areas between the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Breathing through the shoulders is beneficial for illnesses that arise from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The inflammation of the edges (possibly referring to skin folds or areas around veins) is as important to address as three major veins in the arm, because it attracts blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the healthy not to cut too deeply, for the flesh is devoid of strength, and the bones and arteries are easily damaged.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The cup (ventouse) placed on the groin is useful for draining blood from deep within and for treating internal diseases. It must be large and made of iron, and it needs to be applied correctly.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and if, by chance, it (the cup) is too thin, it will break.
et i fai grans plaies.	and it causes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The suction cups on the legs should be opened tightly, for they draw blood from throughout the body, and they are as painful as ancient rain, or pain in the joints, or in the bladder, and they cause trembling.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and they affect the second ribs, and the two ankles, but they weaken the body after long use, and cause paralysis in many positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The proper way to apply a suction cup is to first ensure it is empty, then suck gently, and place it firmly. Move it slowly and consistently, without stopping, until you see the red skin become pale and the blood flow cease.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then, apply pressure, and remove the suction cups, taking care in the placement of the bandages, for there are some with deep wounds and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	it is necessary to strike only once, and make large wounds, and deep ones.
et suce legierement.	and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the pain is intense, it is necessary to strike twice.
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	The first time to carefully extract the thick blood vessel.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the blood is very thick, it may be necessary to cut it a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to extract thin blood little by little, it is enough to do so only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want much blood, we should not do it often.
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the blood is thick, cutting it will be effective, and completing the process ensures that the veins are suddenly pierced; for those with thick, hard skin, and who have swollen pores, one should apply oil to the suction cup before and after use.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is a matter of a red-colored oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in the form of oil from beetroot, or lily, or chamomile, or any similar plant.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take amaranth oil, or balm oil, or hemp oil, or similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if one has a strong and wide wound, it is not necessary to put oil on it, but rather after cleansing with rosewater, or cold water, or myrtle water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or any similar liquid.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those with much moisture should rise from it using myrtle water, sumac water, and similar substances.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have excessive moisture should rise from old wine, or eucalyptus water, or anise or chamomile decoction, or any similar thing.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and they should not use a vacuum immediately before or during a bath, but rather after the bath, one or two hours later.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and do not sleep after the incision, and it is necessary that he bathe, when he needs to be ventilated and when he has been ventilated.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	and be wary of those who have a fever that is choleric, and if the patient lacks heat, it is too acute and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	it is necessary that he apply cold things, such as grapes, endive and lettuce in the shade, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and eat prunes, and juice of chestnuts, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion, should drink syrup of honey, and moderate, fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat nothing too much, and small birds and pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day when he feels hungry, he should drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give no one any triacle or nutmeg at any time before or after ventilating, in order to strengthen the main members.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and be subtle about it, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The suction cups that are used to heal are those applied to the liver, and the spleen, and podagra, and the belly, and the bowels, and the kidneys, and the hips, for these parts do not tolerate being struck, and they are only used to draw blood from one part to another, as we apply them to the mammary glands when nursing.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to remove the viscosity from the member, as we apply suction cups to the belly and bowels to reduce the member.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain when there is an extraction or stone, if by its attractive virtue it draws out the extraction, or leaves the stone in its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and thus it is done when one places it upon the liver and spleen when there is retention of wind, and these suction cups are emptied to suck only;
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and they are never filled with fire together, and never with cold water, as in cases of tears flowing freely, and in such a way one fills the cup with hot water or water mixed with herbs suitable for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cup (ventose) administered by fire is this:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it should be two and a half palm widths in length, and on one side there is a small opening around the middle, large enough to push an needle through, and it should be curved gently so that it does not hurt the patient when placed upon the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and tell them to place a stick diagonally of wood or iron, to take hold of a cloth, and according to the diseases and age of those who use it, they will be large or small.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the suckers of children are different from those of the old, and thinner than the fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must thus place this sucker on the member:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	take the cloth of wax or linen, and place it across the sucker through the stick that is in the sucker, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the sucker so it does not burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it over the member, and your fingers should be on the opening we have mentioned, so that when you want, the vapour goes there, and we remove the suction cup.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and draw along the line as before, and repeat often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the case of the suction cup, which is applied to treat pleurisy, and any acute condition, it has no opening or gap, and can only be applied when the part is filled with fluid, and placed over the member only then.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Without exception, only members where suction cannot be applied due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts, are exempt.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in bare skin areas, such as the hands or feet, and others similar.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the user is such that when you find suction cups in fresh water, clean and without putrefaction, if they are taken.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and place a hot needle in their armpits until they become accustomed to it, and have no wind or pressure on their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then make them well from veins and leeching, and rub the limb until it turns red, and apply blisters.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they stop bleeding and crying, if it is a place where a leech can be applied, then apply one, for this is much better afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If this is not possible, then lift the leech from its place, wash it well with water, and then dry it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and hold the eyes steady after the surgery until the wounds are healed; if a moist linen cloth in cold water is placed on them, and left there until the wounds are closed.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the wounds multiply, then apply crushed vitriol, or gall, and similar substances until they are completely healed.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you can place half-peeled beans on the joint and leave them until they adhere to the bone; this will now heal.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more skill, then take other wounds.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the veins do not want to be taken, so rub the fresh blood vein with a strong press, or you insert an needle until the vein pops, and then place them back on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will move.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are moving, sprinkle some aloe and powdered silk or ash on them, and they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	We begin the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear reader, that the strange symptoms that arise from this chapter are not found in any ancient books, nor have they ever been read or written about.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason, the knowledge is strange in our land, for I never found any good of it.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing of it, except through the knowledge of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have acquired the knowledge, and through experience, and through the habit of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, as I have done in these two chapters mentioned before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in this prologue of this book the principles of speech and the chapters where the wise ones apply their understanding, staying on the truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture, dislocation, or twisting occurs in any part of the body, you should quickly tend to the patient from both sides, if nothing stops you, such as weakness of the body, illness, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if it is too tight or too cold,
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and warm things, such as hot towels, and a horse's collar and chest bandage, and do not drink wine, do not eat any fatty foods, and do not stuff yourself with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you are certain of the heat of the abscess or the swelling of the member.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the patient returns to having a fever after proper treatment.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that we alleviate the patient from foods that cause excessive belching, or have a viscous consistency, such as cooked flour in water, and rice, and peas, and veal, and offal, and fish, and fresh meat, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For excessive belching prevents the bone from healing properly, as it re-opens the fracture more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that bones broken from old age or fragility cannot be well healed or consolidated according to their nature due to the stiffness of the members, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of young children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but there is no cure, reset the broken bone with thick fingers that open and join the member together, as much as it was before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not restrict it entirely from its movement, and for this reason, it is necessary to feed on substantial meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manners of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Because there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another when sharpening, just like the blade of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and the fracture is at a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each kind has its own mechanism, and its specific tool for restoration, according to what the memory comes to it.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and the fracture of the bone is recognized because the joint is twisted, and it opens well due to external force, and feels tender under pressure from the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twist or pressure felt, and the patient does not experience much pain, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can still have twist, crack, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You should not move it with the hand, but apply remedies that will come hereafter, and then gently tighten it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture which goes in an arc, and the two parts are disjoined, now it is fitting to put them back together evenly so that an abscess does not form from there.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if an abscess forms, it is important to let it heal for a time, until the abscess is calm.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then make it even with the muscle as you can gently and firmly, and know that the restoration of what is whole is lighter than the restoration of what has been broken.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then hold steady, as it is needed afterward.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bones there are broken pieces, if they extend from two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or to your hand if it is a small member, or to the tendons, or to a tendon and to your hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and place the member according to its natural position, so that when the parts of the broken member are out of alignment, you reset them with all instruments at your disposal, and ensure that through your work, the patient does not suffer further injury or pain.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust both joints of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it well with your hand if it seems not properly aligned to you.
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if you dress it properly and do not tighten it too much, nor press as those who cause deep abscesses and contractions in the member through their own work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the member is at its limit, gently instruct the patient so they do not move it, neither awake nor asleep, nor by turning or any other manner.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and ensure that the limb is secure so as to feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, except just at the point of treatment, it is necessary to put oneself in a position where he feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and ensure that it is set correctly, so that no crookedness comes when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb depends on what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You know that broken members are diverse in size and shape and strength.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For it has small members, as bras, legs, and similar ones.
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	it is necessary to wrap soft and delicate linen around it.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are thick, like the thigh and leg:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	it is necessary to wrap with a wide and firm bandage, for the wide bandage embraces the entire limb, compressing it evenly from all sides so that there is no movement.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then he enters lightly, making three turns or four according to the limb, and tightens your hand slightly on the entire joint, then goes above the fracture and tightens it less, so that the fracture can gradually pull itself apart.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and softens the joint little by little, as you press deeply into the healthy part of the limb, then take another joint and repeat this process from the beginning above the fractured bone.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part at the bottom of the fracture and tighten it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we said in the first section above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place it between the thick cords of linen or cloth, as even as possible, then bind it all from above with bandages, and then put your well-made needles on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	If there is an abscess or swelling, apply a hot soothing compress to it, which reduces the swelling, and leave it like that for several days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then stretch your needles, and they should be of half the thickness of a fine cane cut sharply, or made of wood used for making arrows, or palm fronds, and according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the thread which one puts on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and be also as long as necessary for the member, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then tighten the threads on the thread as you did in the first layer, then tie a new thread over it, just as in the first layer on the fracture;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the tighter it is bound, the less it will move;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is necessary that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be made of soft linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the thread is too thick, as I have seen many people make their threads from twisted linen cords, it is a great error, because the thread cannot be even if it is too fine, and it does not suit that there should be less than two threads per space between each stitch.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is troubled by the seeds of stars (possibly referring to splinters or foreign bodies) after dislocating their joints, he should place soft cloth or other bandages over them to prevent bleeding.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by breakage (of bones or tissue) and the heart is broken, I will describe its treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not appropriate to extract all the stars (bones or splinters) from a member that is broken on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	Because when the members (limbs) are large, it is not suitable to put stitches too close together, only after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your own judgment of the swelling coming down.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and now let us consider the ancient methods of applying plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and take flour that clings to the walls of a mill, mix it with enough egg, and make this preparation, neither too liquid nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of applying plasters to restore fractures in various ways, especially for women and small children, as it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another method of applying plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take some barley meal, and almonds, and henna, and asafoetida, and gum Arabic, and mix them with water (or perhaps meant to be mixed with oil or another base), as directed by Doctor X.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	mixture of mirror and aloe, as directed by Doctor V.
alechil VIIII З.;	alecin (or a medicinal preparation containing alecin) from Doctor VIIII.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make it into a powder, mixing it with egg albumen.
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the patient's skin is hot, use this plaster, as it is of good composition and gently restores broken bones, and benefits many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another method of plastering that is effective for twists:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take vinegar and wolf's dung, mix with X (unknown substance);
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Mix mirror and aloe, add seven (unknown substance);
acaice VI З.;	Use lime six (unknown quantity or substance);
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Bolic armenic X Z., grind it well, and mix with enough fire or water, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another method of splinting joints and realigning bones in their sockets, easing the pain that arises, and using a saw to cut the bone, and the fracture.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take another new cloth, moisten it with oil and heat, and place it on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Cyst splints do not restore, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses and properly removing pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another method of splinting that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dry figs, and land pavot leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plastering to restore the broken bone and thus lessen the remaining pain of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take the root of alder, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, each in equal parts.
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and grind, and mix with wine, and warm the affected members by mixing with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another stronger method of plastering when the abscess hardens during the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take the roots of alder, and flaxseed, and valerian, and melilot, and fennel, and violet and chamomile flowers, each in equal parts.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and crush, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the warmth of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates states in his book that one should not apply a hot compress to a broken member, but rather a certain type of compress made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be neither too hot nor too cold.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen states that one should apply warm, dry things to a broken member to restore it, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another method of splinting that is effective for both injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	take feathers and goat hair from humans who have been shorn, or pen feathers, and silk, and cut them equally, and crush them, and make plaster and bind it tightly.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then loosen it slightly after, and take care that the patient feels no pain, and that the bone has not moved from its place.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if it does not come loose by strong hands.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	and if pain comes to the place, or itching, feeling of restlessness or swelling, then act quickly, dislodge it and remove the splint immediately.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take a light cloth, and a moist sponge from the sea, and dip it in water, and lift the limb until the itching stops and the pain is soothed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the limb rest for an hour, then cover it with a dry cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it up until you are certain that the abscess is hot.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and rests the swelling of the affected member, and heals the bone pain, then begins again with subtle heat, and a little plaster, and does not strain it as strongly as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	as subtily as it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is closed, red, painful, and swollen, then you need to apply plaster and bind it again; just as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing improves in the member of what we have said, then do not dislocate it until after three, four, five, or seven days.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and never leaves it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals and the joint approaches its normal position on the limb.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then hold it more tightly than first, and thicken its flesh, as I have said before;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you notice the vein is more engorged than necessary, know that no healing can come from it.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	open the vein with hot water immediately, every time you dislocate it, and let the blood flow a little each day.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	by this effort, therefore, cut the vein in the limb, and use cautery as the foolish do, attempting to restore the twisted member.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	This is evil, and if it causes great fear, I see no other way but to leave it and do it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways of fractures, and various shapes, and the causes are diverse.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	For there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the bone splits completely through to the other side, as if cut with a hatchet or axe.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for this reason, this type of fracture is called "hatchet-like".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Or he uses a spear to pierce the bone without causing injury, and this method of fracture is called "absolute".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and this is the wound of these two fractures, great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a pounding, or a fracture, or a cut from a stone, or a blow against a stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persistent fracture, which approaches the bone tissue that is beneath or on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound that is closed over the bone is as subtle as a hair, and the crack is small, it is called this fracture "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound is caused by a stone or an arrow or something similar, and the bone fragment goes deep inside, and the joints are bent as when a blacksmith bends metal over a forge.
si entre li piere dedens.	if it enters the stone inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	and this is more common in those who have moist bones, such as children's skulls.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it occurs in all these ways of fracture, causing small pieces to be dislocated as if they were.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all the ways of breaking through withdrawal from them, and inquiry at close range, and by corrupt flesh that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is perceived when the bone is discovered and rubbed further, opening the black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be cautious of accidents with the patient, and if you notice any ill effects such as vomiting, loss of consciousness, extension or bending of the limb, paleness, fever, sudden warmth, redness, or other similar symptoms in various combinations, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any dangerous accidents and hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fever comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the moon's cycle while it is still fresh.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if this happens, if you hurry to remove the bone on the seventh day, when the tissue surrounding the bone is decomposed, then come the complications that we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone extends up to the membrane covering the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part like this:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and you should press the patient's head with pain, and expose the bone in all ways that you can, and on the wound's surface as gently as possible, and if blood comes out when you uncover the bone, or an abscess opens, use what is necessary to help, and fill the area with moistened woolen cloth.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and keep the wound at rest until the abscess is calmed and be sure of the blood flow.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin to separate the bone, and this is done according to two ways of work:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One method is to hold the affected area tightly with your hands, and this is how it looks:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then take another treatment even more powerful than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second method is to have many different-sized instruments, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed and made of iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and gently open it, so as not to damage the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and dense, you must drill around it gently, so as to insert instruments with care, without going too deep that they penetrate beyond the soft part of the bone, and on top of the point should be a margin or curve, which prevents the tip from going through the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and it is necessary to have many, so that each comes to its place according to the expectation of the bone, so you must take care for all parts.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and this is the form of the three types of care:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality to pierce around the broken bone is that you apply care to the bone and return to your tasks as long as you know that the bone is pierced.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then apply the care elsewhere a little later, and do so all around, then cut with incisions the space between the fragments of bone, and make it as gently and subtly as possible while still removing the bone with your hand or with any of the tools you have, such as pliers or pincers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and ensure you do not touch the brain or the heart.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone, and treated it, you must then observe the tension that is delayed from the bone to all other instruments resembling a chisel, but it should be more tense and more subtle than any other chisel.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if it does not delay any small bones, or any scales, gently remove them with the instrument.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then dress the wound with bandages and bindings as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another method of treatment is that which Galen says, which is safer.
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and speak very loudly, and that is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you expose a part of the bone, either where it is broken open or clearly visible, and when you have exposed this part, place the flat edge of this lens-shaped scalpel beneath it. This is its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not deviate from this method in any way, and it is the acute side on the second rib, so that the incision is towards the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then strike with a small mallet from above, so that you gently hit the bone all around, and be very careful of the skin that is below.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is detached from the bone, gently pull it, for it comes out with a good sensation, without pain or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not reach down to the flesh, and the bone is only broken on top, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to smooth out these asperities and shave off the scales with a fine rasp, of which you should have various quantities, to soften each part according to the severity and form of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you encounter great difficulties and then even more subtle ones, do not cease from this task until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	For each of the other haircuts or subtle breaks, you must treat according to their specific location.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and this is something that is never fully answered for those who have dedicated their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if satisfaction is achieved, it is necessary to apply a linen bandage according to the size of the wound, soaking it in rose oil and placing it on the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another cloth doubled over twice or thrice, soak it in wine and rosin oil, and place it on top of the first cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and make it lighter than you can, without straining the wound too much, then apply another bandage on top and do not tighten it excessively so as to only touch the wound.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and leave it thus for a day or two until the abscess is calmed, then loosen it and administer medications such as roots of lis, flour of times, powder of incense, aromatic herbs, and similar things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and from these things make a powder, apply it to the wound, and administer worldwide remedies without biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and ensure that the wound is always clean, do not leave any uncleanliness, nor allow it to fester, for when it festers and pus forms on the flesh, it causes great harm to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when one applies sharp, biting things to it, if it is not held steady, it causes no harm.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if no bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if darkness comes not from the medicine applied, then let that virtue take effect; it is necessary to press a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and wrap it in cloth, and apply it to the biting place.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the cure with ways of healing that are necessary, as long as he is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Knowing that the two parts of the upper arm are never broken, either entirely or partially, for they are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and the inner part is cartilage, and does not break, unless it bends or twists severely, then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should apply your little finger or press into the joint, and make the same fracture in your index finger, and hold it firmly until the joint returns to its natural position.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and make it gentle, and ensure that the patient feels no pain through your actions.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the joint and the fingers cannot be moved to reset it, you should put a slightly thick stick at the top of the joint to realign it.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is of the second degree, repeat the same procedure, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if this is not possible, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess at the wound's edge has healed, then apply to the head new bandages made of linen thread, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you may bind it from another side if the fracture is present.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and make the bands so thick that they fill the gaps between the teeth.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say that no healing occurs when the bandages are not moistened with butter, and they must be changed each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	I do not think this is correct, but it is necessary that they be moist when preparing egg white and flour powder.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then leave the band, until the bone is hard and the cartilage stiffens.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And never should bands or goose pen be applied in place of bands, and if the wound is covered with moisture, and the break persists, and the patient suffers, it will blow among them.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or make sure you see well.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses form in the wound while you are treating it, apply a plaster or wet cotton wool soaked in rose oil or a poultice of dill seed.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if an abscess does not drain, apply a poultice from outside with flour of spices and incense powder, confited with egg yolk, then place light bandages on it and do not tie the nose.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the nose is broken and shattered into small pieces, remove it with suitable instruments, then clean the cut and treat it with hot charcoal and other suitable bandages.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no wound inside the nose, if it is cured with these treatments, and he puts splints, as long as it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	from the dislocation of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only slightly out of place, and it is not broken into two pieces, but only displaced inward, then if you gently recognize it, it can be set back in place.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	If the fracture is in the right side, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient with the injury.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the fracture is in the left mandible, insert your index finger of your right hand, gently push the fracture back into place, and use the other hand to apply equal pressure.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is severe in two parts, it is necessary that you administer an extension of the second part, as long as it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the movement of the teeth causes a fracture, tying them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then apply a plaster to the broken jaw, and place a double cloth over it.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and place the cloth with a large, well-made star or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jaw, and fasten it to the teeth as best you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the alignment changes, untie it on the third day and then reset it as it was aligned.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and then apply a plaster on it, with a powder from the mill mixed with enough egg or flour of chickpea, after you have removed the dressing.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and then apply a lighter second plaster, and if the plaster sticks, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it heals.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	often it heals within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess appears, then administer what we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a break and wound together, it does not matter if any part of the bone is removed.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if skillfully using suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is tight, stretch it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and it does not delay, close the wound if it is wide, and apply suitable plugs to it, to draw out pus, as long as it is healthy.
de la forcele	from the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The force breaks many times before, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three manners:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	or it is broken and disjointed in two parts, and there are fragments, and it is the easiest to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	or there is fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work is when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the aid that is broken with force.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the others stretch the collar towards the affected part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then make the break even with both hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no bulge or indentation.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend it further, place a round, thick piece of cloth or wool under the shoulder of the patient, as needed.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and gently extend the arm, and grasp the cloth with your hand, ensuring that the break is even as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the dislocation away from the bone because it is stuck completely, then the patient should lie on their side with their shoulder supported, and have a helper press the shoulder downwards until the bone in the dislocation is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then address the fracture with your hands, and if you feel any debris, it is necessary that you cut through it.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and gently try to separate the pieces, and if the bone cannot join together for any reason, then the fracture is at one of the incisions you have.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but that you apply the strength of this instrument underneath, to ensure satisfaction.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it should resemble a spoon, and is not too sharp, and as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the extent of the work.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and take note of the joints, as you see them, and let one be wide and the other narrow, just as is the rupture of the wound that you made when treating the bone;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are certain of the hot abscess, if cutting the wound, and if its rupture is small, then you doubt the hot abscess, if applying bandages and poultices according to their quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses appear, then moisten the cloth with rose oil and silk and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The straining of the bone, when it is sensitive to touch and has no incision, is that you place a thin layer of fine-milled powdery plaster and egg white on the bone, then put light bandages over it, and insert a spear under the joint if necessary.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	then take a very wide bandage, one palm length wide, then place two layers on top of each other on the stump, and apply the plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a thin stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the top of the bandage is exposed.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and place the stick on the fracture, then turn the bandage around the collarbone, and lift the healthy armpit, and lift the painful armpit.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and reset each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the stick does not move over the broken bone, reward it each day, and when the bands loosen, restrict them.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient lie on his side, and place a small pillow under his armpit to raise the dislocated joint;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	if you lighten the fracture with the alignment of the shoulder, or tie the arm to the collarbone, and no further harm comes from it for twenty days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then resume the splinting if you see that it is necessary, tighten it and leave it thus until it is healed;
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is restored within 28 days, and to no one sooner.
de la brisure de l’espaule	from the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It follows that when the shoulder is broken or severely dislocated, it does not move normally, and its position can only be adjusted by touch.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if the apparatus is adjusted according to the shape of the fracture and restored to its natural form in every way possible.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then place a soft, fine-milled powder on the joint, along with light bandages and a double cloth covering.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then place a wide and thin steel (blade) slightly larger than the shoulder, and dislocate the blade in no specific place of the shoulder, using that sharp edge of linen cloth, so that the blade cuts evenly.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then tighten it with a great firm band so that the blade does not move from its place, and examine it every day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and whenever it loosens (the band), loosen the strap and place the blade evenly if it is out of its place, and lay the patient on his side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is reduced after 10 to 25 days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when these numbers are reached, if it is dislocated, be careful, for it is not bone that will set itself easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone sticks out and is not removed from the inside, it causes inflammation and pain in the abscess, so do as we have said to calm the heat of the abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	from the break of the worst abscess
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The skin is never broken in the middle, but it can be slightly damaged.
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks when subjected to heat.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken at the end, it retracts inside and causes the patient great pain, and there is no strength left, and sometimes it bleeds, and opens up the wound in the broken bone, and feels better.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his side, and puts a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and aligns the ribs with your hands, subtly making it even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be.
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then apply plasters and bandages over the tender flesh of the broken bone, wrapping it in a cloth and securing it so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and restore the ligament to its proper position on the back, tightening it gently, and checking the freedom of movement every hour, relaxing it if it becomes tight.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	if it becomes necessary to release it due to corrosion or itching in the flesh, or pain or an abscess that develops at the site, act quickly, release the plaster, and treat the underlying condition appropriately.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then reset the splint and hold it tightly until it heals.
de la brisure des costes	from the breakage of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the breaking of ribs only occurs in the upper regions of the back and at the top, and they do not bend unless they are broken.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and feels the patient well during questioning as is right.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is such that you put it back in place as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, gripping it with a splint if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the rib fracture is inclining inward, the patient feels great pain, as well as piercing and crying out, because the bone punctures the tissue.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and furthermore with pins, and often and violently filled with blood, it is of great pain and the ancients have put much skill into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And for those who say that it is appropriate to administer foods that cause bloating in the stomach to push the fracture out.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not claim that incisions in hot wounds will not come, if they have not already come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes back, then the patient is healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they say that none of us should use cupping glasses on the skin, as it forms a vacuum, and this seems reasonable.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, there is doubt that the cupping glass does not attract impurities to the skin due to its weak condition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that none of you should cover the joint with moist wool in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to evenly distribute the heat around it, then treat the cure for pleurisy, flesh, and with medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patients feel great pain that they cannot bear through their bones where the cup is pressed, there is doubt in the patient, and it is necessary to cut into the broken rib bone, and it is necessary to put under the instrument to hold the satisfaction.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then one must cut the bone, draw gently, and stitch the two edges of the wound together, if it is large, and treat it with poultices, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if abscesses develop, place moistened oil-soaked rags on them and cover with a cloth.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat while the cloth over the abscess is fresh, keeping it in place, resting on the side where it should be, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	From the rupture of the collarbone.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	No fracture should occur to the delicate collarbone, and it rarely happens;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also to the painful spine.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will recover, pay attention if you see their hands becoming soft, swollen, and numb, and they cannot move or stretch them, and if you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Knowing that it is deadly in many ways, and if they are mute and feel well when squeezed and not at all, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and the patient will be cured, if proper treatment is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if a similar thing occurs to the painful spine, you must know if it is whole or not, if you observe if its joints are soft, and if there are any accidents in the hands, and on the back, coughing and vomiting without will.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when you remember it on your belly, such severe coughing and vomiting without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is remembered lying on its back and wants to move, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	He knows that it is deadly:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if he does not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not occur, then the matter is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that if there is a hot abscess, you apply warm rose oil or egg yolk oil to it until it is soothed.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then place a comforting and drying plaster on it, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, as long as he is whole.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	and if any bone becomes detached, it is necessary to cover it with cloth;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and remove the bone, then close the two edges of the wound with a stitch if it is large, and apply a dressing to the wound, keeping it clean, as long as it is whole.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the bone fragment is broken, which is called the "fragment of the wound," press your pouchet (possibly a type of bandage or compress) with your left hand and place it equally in your right hand over the wounded area, then apply plaster and a splint if needed.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then hold it tight, and if there is a bone out of place, put it back in order, and heal the wound as long as it is clean.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	from the fracture of the bone in the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	First, if the bone in the neck is broken, and it has, there shouldn't be much reduction at the top.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and stretching it long, and bending it in the opposite direction, brings pain to the patient at the site of the break, and swelling, and inflammation that results from the fracture.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the healing is such that you extend your hand above, as long as you are over the break.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and such is the fracture and shape of it;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the fracture is only at the head, then make all such fractures even, as long as they are in their natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, it inclines inward, then make the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of this fracture appears.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have made it even, then place a splint above it, and put a stick or rod under it, and tighten the fracture so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and hold the limb against the body, as long as the muscle is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if an abscess forms, it should not be touched until it has calmed down, and then apply what we have said above.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to restoration, holding it as necessary, if there is no adverse event.
et c’est li maniere.	and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	dislocation of the joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The helper is what lies between the shoulder and the head, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two ways:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	do not take a sharp instrument of medium thickness according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	and bind the two parts together, twist them upwards, and place the patient in a reclining position;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then pour the hot liquid over the broken arm until it is completely immersed, and place a wooden splint around it, then twist it upwards towards any heavy object or have the attendant pull it downwards.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	then align the fracture so that it is level with both hands together, until the fracture returns to its proper position.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another method is that one should place the patient on his back, and bind his hands to his neck, then command the assistants that one holds what is above the break in the hand, and the other holds below at every joint, and extends each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then tighten it slightly from around the fracture, and on the fracture, and stretch each of the assistants to their side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the fracture is near the top of the shoulder, it is necessary that you apply a medium-strength ligature under the joint, and another towards the neck, below the fracture.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and also if the fracture is towards the neck, it is necessary to apply a light ligature without effort, as long as the fracture is even on the bone, both on top and towards the neck.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	then make the fracture even, as it should be, and tighten it, if abscesses do not form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if an abscess appears, it is not pulled out for seven days, and a moist cloth is placed over it in linseed oil and rose oil until the abscess at the base is calmed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	then pull it out, and the manner of pulling is that you place the strap over the dislocation, then raise the arm towards the helper, and place your hand on the shoulder or the breast.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and take the cloth, pull on the helper and the arm, so that the arm is straight up, as long as nothing prevents it or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a splint, and place on the fracture a broader and stronger splint than others, and leave two spaces between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes beyond the fracture on both sides.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	then tighten the splints, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter about the fracture, stronger and less apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the position of the splints and their tightening, as we have said, when you return the broken member to its place, and doubt whether the abscess is hot, leave it bound for up to seven days, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then, each day for three days, observe the wound, that it does not become inflamed or swollen, and let no movement come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it is necessary, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accident occurs, then do not release it until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and place the dislocated joint in a soft pillow of equal-length wool, and observe each hour during the day or night, to ensure that the shape of the limb is not altered, and the ligaments do not relax.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if it is healed by the virtue of medicine, and given food that we have mentioned above, in such a way that the food is first subtle.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when it begins to recover, it will be significant.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	and it is customary that the aid and leg should be healed over forty days in all.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then it should be dislocated and treated with baths and medicines suitable for the joint to be healed.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the contraction is severe and swollen, it may take longer to loosen, sometimes days or even months.
de la brisure du bras	of the dislocation of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fossa," one smaller and the other succeeding to the pouch.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and it is the one that is opposite, towards the smaller bone.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	should the larger "fossa" break only, or both, then reassemble them together if possible.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the smaller bones break, their restoration and healing is easier.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the bones are broken, if healing is poor, it becomes more painful than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bones are broken, it is sufficient to extend them slightly and make them even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is a large, deep wound, then more force must be applied to tighten it.
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and extends it on the cushion, placing the palm higher than the others, and the small fingers lower, crossing the patient over itself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any pain.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then extend the healers' hands to the side of their hand, or to the joint, and other ministers to the others above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then set it even with the eyes, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture each piece is set in its place, and if there is none that holds the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then doing as we have said above, on both sides of the bone.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the wound rupture, I have spoken of it in the specific chapter;
si pren la cure.	then take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of restoration appear abscesses, I apply a bandage made of rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and I cover it gently, until the abscess is calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	Then remove the bandage, and apply the plaster of fine-milled powder with plenty of egg, then place the pins, and let the pin from the break be even stronger, a little broader than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that it must have six pins or arms in various positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	so that the break is in one of the bones, or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and it is held tighter on the fracture than elsewhere, and less as it heals, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the bandages on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and the thread, from which it is held, should be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after no days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if no ill accident befalls the limb, such as itching which may come upon it, then you should apply hot water to the limb until the itching is soothed.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the member not be squeezed tightly at rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then repeat the exercise, and if the ligaments become slack and the bones lose their alignment, or any similar thing, address it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the tightness prevents any movement in the limb, because it is too tight, then you should loosen it a little and leave it for some days until the stiffness improves, and then tighten it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then he should be released in twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	if troubled, then tie his hands to his chest, and make sure his collarbones are even, and guard against movement and gesture, and sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 45 days, and by chance in 10 days, according to the combinations and complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the dislocation of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that on the back of the hand and at the joints there are often small breaks, and it brings only pain many times over.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the hand bone is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient cuts across it and holds it straight before him equally.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then he places his hand on the extended board, extending the broken bones of the minister and aligning them equally until they are properly joined.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and applies a poultice and hot compresses, if abscesses do not form, then he places a piece of salt according to the size of the wound.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and is wrapped in a cloth drape.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is near the stomach of the plant, make a ball of cloth and instruct the patient to press it against the broken place.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then stretch a long drape, and make the heart-shaped cloth as tight as the palm of the hand, and tighten it, as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the edge, then you must place a stick across it and another underneath in the sole, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the bones.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	If any of us experience a break, and it is the joints, place it evenly, as appropriate;
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and tighten with the palm, and if you see that a small, straight cloth raises the break without moving;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the break is in other joints, like in the example or any other, place it evenly and bind it with the healthy finger after;
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	you hold them all in place with a tight grip, as much as possible, or you put a splint on it, just like you would;
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and placement of hot abscesses, and protect those who come near it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	from the broken hipbone
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	the bones of the foot are often broken, and it is clearly visible when they heal in front and behind;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is when they are bound together above the break and another is placed below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on his face, then extends each limb evenly to both sides.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the fracture is through the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the hipbone, one should bind it towards the wrist, and the others below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is near the knee, then the ligaments around the knee should be relaxed and the extension should be downward.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then aligns the bone with both hands, evenly according to its natural shape, and then applies the splint, binding it firmly in place without causing new damage.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it soothe down, then return to your work and treatment.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The bandage is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	You should wrap around the fracture a bandage hard and tightly doubled in two or three layers, then remove any excess, and turn the leg until the heel reaches the root of the toe, and insert a long thread between the calf and the leg, below the knee joint, and bring the end up over the top.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	then turn to the leg and shin the bandage, then place the splint across it, and put a stick over the bone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	then use the eighth part of a cloth, soft between the leg and shin, to apply an even strain, then begin to tie three turns or four over the splint.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and as you go higher over the splint, strain it less.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then take the two threads that you have woven between the leg and shin, and tie three stitches on top, then return to the other side, under the knee with the thread, until you reach the foot.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and hold it steady, if it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, and it will not become abscessed or swollen or any other thing.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it happens that it disconnects, and the swelling comes back as it has many times before, as we have said numerous times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are fragments of bone that grip, it is prudent to extract them if possible;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if one cannot extract them, then it is necessary to break the joint and pull forcefully;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and the treatment is as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And never should the foot be broken in this way with stars, as is done in the aid or arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	However, this restoration done in this way does not please the sick.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the foot is restored in 7 to 10 days, or perhaps a little less or a little more, depending on the variety of complexes.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the alley of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	You know that in the alley of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, even if it is only a crack or a hole, it affects every wound, and without a wound, and everyone feels well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is when everything is put back in place as it should be, as long as it can be moved together.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then apply the plaster, and put a round stick, if you need it, and hold it as appropriate, then correct all the positions that we have mentioned in other fractures, such as a hot abscess or any similar thing.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	if each case requires it, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	from the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Knowing that the leg has two bones, of which one is called the "right" and the other is called the "shank";
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and it has a similar fracture as the arm, and its restoration is the same as that of the arm, equally difficult; and if both bones are broken together, the leg can turn in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, they return to their original position.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain, and one can see it well.
et torne desoz.	and turn it inside out.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then apply extension, and set it even, and tie the stars equally.
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	But nevertheless, it is necessary that the broken bone be ugly, and there are multiple pieces, so the extension should be less severe and lighter.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and make it straight according to its strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your task, take two strips of cloth as thick as the leg, extending from one side to the other, and make them quite long from the thigh down to the ankle.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap it in two bands of cloth, both above and below, and tie it tightly in the middle, and with this binding, the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and no one should administer any binding around the length of the leg, and if it is of cloth, they place the leg to prevent movement, and properly make this at the fracture where there is an injury.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move each part of the leg to see if there is a hot abscess or any other accident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if you treat it while it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot can be fractured and the two small bones, and there is no treatment that applies in all cases.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if a bone is broken deeply, and you see the bones pressing against each other, causing the patient to lie with great pain on the ground, as if they wanted to move, then place your foot on their leg, holding the bones in their original position, and press until they return to their proper place.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	then apply a splint and bandages, place a small, flat board under the belly of the leg with two holes, fasten it to the leg, wrap it tightly with cloth and other materials as needed.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three or four days have passed, if you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones even, either broken or discolored.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if any of the two bones are broken, restore them as we have said about the bones of the hand.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	then take the broken bone and make it into a splint according to the length of the bone, and make it slightly wider, then place the foot under the board that I have mentioned, and tie it securely.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three, or more broken bones, take a splint for each bone according to its length, wrapped in a cloth, and tie the board under the foot.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and so it is placed on the upper part of the table, with the belly facing down, if it is done well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, when we have spoken.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and attend to each of these accidents as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Regarding the fracture of the bone in the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bones of a woman's natural structure are broken and the swelling increases, then incline her to one side, leaning on her back, and hold her from behind.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the wound with a cloth saturated with honey and also add as much as I can.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then turn the woman around, gently pressing her back, and then pull out the cloth, until it reaches the wound's entrance, and return the bone with the honey.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she wants to urinate, remove the cloth, and once she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven days or so.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	if the fracture is healed, and you notice, take a bladder of barley, tie it to the opening with a cane, and pour all the contents into the wound.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow into the flame until the bladder is filled inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	nature will heal the broken ones.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then fill it with cotton and leave it thus for no days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bones of a man or woman are broken, restore them thus as we have said regarding the hip bone.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these fractures are not hidden from him who devotes his study and skill to them, and listen to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For fracture indicates various dispositions towards the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	understand then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the staff, when it is broken, take a goose throat and blow the staff;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap rags around it, leave for three days or until healing is complete.
de brisure avec plaie	from fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is important for someone with a fracture and a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone in the shin or shoulder or similar, to be treated immediately, so that the healing process, as we have described, can begin.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, but there is still hardness from the bruise, if you have no other remedy, then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or on the same day that the abscess appears.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscess opens on its own, let it heal undisturbed for a new day or two, until the abscess is calm, and do not touch it even on the third or fourth day, or you would bring about a bad outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible beneath the skin, you must gently place your hands on it, with small extensions.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension does not appear even in your hands, then reset this instrument which is of iron, having seven or eight inches in length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this reason, it is necessary to use a mirror so that he moistens three or four times, according to what he needs in each break treatment.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and it should be round and somewhat thick, so that it does not bend to the pressure on the limb at your discretion, and it is sharp in front and thick in the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called a "palainche", so it is necessary that the curved bone be placed on the visible head of the bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and the bottle should be held once, as it returns, and so that one is even with the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, you must hold the head of the bone until the instrument has a firm grip.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, take a suitable instrument, such as a scalpel or forceps, in your power.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then take that which is delayed in the bone, of hardness and small cuts.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterward, knowing that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If you make it stay in its place, then moisten the cloth with black vinegar, and apply it properly.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not place any wax or other substance on the wound that would prevent air from reaching it, as it will cause putrefaction and decay.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer steriles when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound exposed, and clean the surrounding area, according to the size of the wound, and be careful not to constrict the wound with any fragments.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times they have done this foolishly, and brought upon the patient death or great corruption several times.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and so the bindings should be softer and more gentle than others.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is severe or large, and you doubt that a complication will arise, as we have said, and it brings pain instead of healing, if it is not suitable to place anything on it.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap it around, instead of bandages, with hard cloth, and bind it.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is bowing or sinking, then remove what you have applied to it, and apply a healing dressing for wounds, such as a four-part ointment or similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it remains swollen and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be separated in such a way that the bow of the joint gently moves downwards.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if this persists for a long time, it cannot heal but repeatedly returns to the bowed state, knowing that there are small fragments of bone, so it is necessary that you clean the wound thoroughly and remove all these misplaced fragments causing the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula forms in its place or any other type of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it according to what is said in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when a bone is broken and opens up on the limb, such as the bone of the shin or the shoulder, or other similar bones of the large limbs, do not pull it, for in many cases it leads to gangrene, but let it be until it rots.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	if, after twenty or thirty days, the wound has healed, then treat it if possible.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if it cannot be treated, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	burns that come from the solder
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often encounter after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near a joint, and the sight of the misaligned limb is a sad thing.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and by chance cannot perform the natural movements of its limbs.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Beware therefore, if this happens to us:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if he administers astringent medicines such as aloe, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, akebia, and similar ones, without pressing any of these things or all together, and conserves them with astringent wine or with abundant egg white or with ash.
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and places them on the wound in compresses, tightens them well, and does not untie them for several days.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then dislocate it, and begin again with a new one, until the knots are broken.
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you stretch it on a well-made plank;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of the plank is that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the knot has become hard as stone, it must be broken, if possible, and the excess removed, exposing the surface.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	You must cut it with no rasping, as long as it is fresh, and treat it while it is clean.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the weak member after treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone is healed and the limb remains weak and delicate, it occurs for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	because one is due to it being constrained too tightly and not constrained as it should be;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because it has too many constraints and cannot attain the normal movement of the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	for from many irritations;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or due to too great movements, not staying in its proper time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because it has little blood in its body, it becomes weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment is that you make the patient eat, and make the body firm, until the blood begins to multiply within him;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer baths, and give joy and comfort;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then place lead on the affected member, so that the lead attracts great pain, and often raise it with cold water, until the pain subsides in the member.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The twisted member after health.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the member is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the member is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function.
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	do not believe the fools who say we must break the member from the very beginning, and many foolish practices have been done in our land.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and this work is blameful, and brings great harm, and sometimes death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	However, if the nodations (swelling) and torture are fresh, they should be treated with hot water or cooked herbs that have soothing properties, such as fennel, roots, melilot, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and apply the soothing plaster, well-prepared as it should be, and take the resin of fennel, and preserve it with gelin fat or sesame oil, and apply the plaster.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	You take fatty substances, crush them finely with collyria and similar medications that ease inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never should the dislocation be rubbed continuously and for a long time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And allow the limb to move every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the swelling is inflamed and hardened, like stone, then it needs to be opened with iron, if necessary covering it with cloth, with a delicate incisor lightly.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and apply compression and study the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations occur from a joint moving out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs due to no apparent cause, it is necessary to attempt to bring the limb back to its normal position immediately.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	Because if treatment is delayed, the swelling can increase, and it may be necessary to apply pressure firmly to the site.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	because it is not necessary to move it with force when it is swollen.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	often causes pain and other discomforts;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	however, when this happens, if it makes the patient healthier, then leave it until the abscess is completely healed.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then raise the affected limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as the cure comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the shoulder joint all the way to the foot.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It is first necessary that the jaws be dislocated slightly, and both dislocations are according to two manners:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	when they are slightly separated from their sockets, and softened somewhat;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are entirely dislocated, hanging down towards the chin, and draining saliva from the mouth so that it cannot be held closed, nor can he close his lips, and he drools while speaking.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is minor, it often returns to its proper position through various dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is entirely and completely dislocated, then it must be reset immediately, without delay;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a way that the physician places his thumb on the patient's head and pulls it slightly with the root of his hand into the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, thus dislocating it by half.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two hands should be prepared equally.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instructs the patient to soften his jaws and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he should equalize the pressure, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if they return to their place, especially when both jaws are involved, then apply hot water and oil, gently bringing them back together.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	I shall not try to bring it back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are brought back evenly, and the patient's mouth is closed without too much difficulty, apply moistened cloth bandages made of rose oil and wax, then gently bind them with soft cords.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and have the patient sleep on their back, with their legs between two cushions, so that they do not move to the left or right, nor strive for anything more, but gently press meat into them until the pains are gone and the jaws are still.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then massage it gently, and do not try to open the mouth for eating or drinking until the jaw is well-nurtured and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be brought back to their proper position within an hour and are not aligned properly, then fever and severe pain may occur, as well as abdominal distension, and possibly pure bile vomiting.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it is destruction;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and often leads to the death of those whom it befalls within seven days.
de la forcelle	De la forcelle" translates directly to "of the
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot stay in place from either side within the continuation of it and is dislocated neither outside nor inside, and it causes great pain.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, extending their arms.
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the joint back into your palm, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then apply the plaster and bind it tight, and hold it fast.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the joint that is near the shoulder cannot be dislocated.
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if it does not move, and if it does not dislocate even once, then put it back in place as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply the plaster and bind it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and so, itself is brought back to the shoulder joint, when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	You know that the shoulder is injured in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one is when it is injured at the part of the shoulder blade towards the back;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the part of the lesser curve;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and by chance, it is injured at the upper part, and this happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and do not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate inside for the nerves.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and often dislocate away from the axis, especially for those who have little strength, as this causes them great pain.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	for those who have enough strength, the dislocation occurs gently, and it returns gently.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And occasionally, no matter the person, they might experience a bruise or fracture, and an abscess of heat forms in the shoulder, and they think it is dislocated because of that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	It is therefore necessary that you test it, as long as you are certain.
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And dislocation is recognized when it moves towards the joint, and makes a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their manifest diversity between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find at the top of the shoulder a pit, and by pressing on the joint, the top of the shoulder feels as if it were one.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring their hand back to its normal position, nor make any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated at the top and not hidden away, for you will feel it clearly through touch;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this method of dislocation is not only to be used when it is fresh, or if the patient is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is that the healer places his hand on the patient's head, then puts his palms underneath the affected area, and pulls the joint upwards with strength towards the joint.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the healer lifts his hand, extending it upwards, then places it underneath.
si venra hastanment.	if illness comes.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if illness does not come as we have said, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and apply it gently and soothingly, such as with an infusion of fennel and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be applied.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then the patient should be placed on their back, and a soft cloth of equal thickness should be placed beneath them, neither too loose nor too tight, then place a pillow under their heel and gently lift the head from the shoulder, and pull the hand of the ill person.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and other ministers should tie the patient's head to prevent movement.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	the shoulder now returns, and if it is dislocated, reset it according to this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and make sure that the presence of someone at home is more significant than the patient's illness;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and be straight against the side, and pull the patient's shoulder blade away from the spine, and lift the blade upwards, so that the patient's arm hangs down.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and other assistants take hold of the patient's hand below the abdomen.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, and any heavy object causes no discomfort, then the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And it is also adjusted in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and place a long stick in the ground, so that the end is also bright like a pestle, and not too thick or too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then the patient is placed on their back, but with soft cloth over them, and the pain should be from a long wound;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then, stretch his hand downward from another direction, forming a new angle, and the joint will return to its place steadily.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not want to return for all the things we have said, make this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take a small piece of cloth from both arms, broad and long enough, that the end can be pushed completely through the wound, according to this shape.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then wrap over the wound with a cloth from above, so that it does not hurt the patient, and then insert it through the wound of the ill person.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	And stretch one arm over the thigh, holding the shoulder on the thigh, and raise the arm up to the top of the hand; then place the arm on the palm of a wide knife, and extend the hand downwards, leaving the body hanging from the other side.
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint moves back now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is dislocated, in any way, it is necessary that you place under the limb a spear of equal wool, then apply the plaster made from powdered chalk, with incense and eagle's egg, over the entire shoulder area, then stretch the limb away from the body, and secure the bandage on the plaster, and press the hand to the collarbone, so that the hands remain in this position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he move slightly, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it will heal more quickly.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then move more after two or seven days, and move it again.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is frozen and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is stuck due to moisture or any other cause, it is necessary that you apply heat at three points, as described in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and after seven days the dislocation persists, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm above his head, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is either compressed, stretched, or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is toward the worst, and the joints, either front or back, are caused by a sudden movement, extending the hands, and similar actions, and require another treatment.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal as long as he is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after healing comes cracking in the limb, and delayed movement; if the patient uses it often enough, as long as that cracking is relieved, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation cost
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Knowing that the joint's pain is caused by dislocation, and it repeatedly dislocates;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not fully corrected, for one can both see and feel it clearly;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and dislocated according to each misalignment.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick part with the healthy, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is dislocated, and the arm cannot bend, nor can it touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And you must reset it so that the dislocation is corrected before it returns, because if the dislocation comes back again, it will be difficult to correct.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and it may not be brought back completely, especially when it is at the back.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	it is worse than other dislocations, causing greater pain, and in some cases it can lead to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And for the restoration, when it is such that it can be brought back, you should extend your hand with both of yours.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And let his arms be spread out, and the hands with wide open fingers according to the contour of the bone around, apart and together, and straighten the joint at his palm's base, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his palm, and turns the root of the palm side that is misaligned.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong extension.
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and it is that the two ministers extend the arm, and the tie of the two ministers, so that it does not move with the extension.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the mirror shows the joint of the joint in the hand, if it is not oiled to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly, until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, apply dry plaster with heat and stretch the joint, pressing the arm against the collarbone of the afflicted person, and leave it for no days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, release the ligature, and leave it.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint is not well aligned, recommence the binding and the bandage, and leave it thus for no more than a few days, until it is firmly set.
puis le deslie.	then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	and if it feels sore after resetting the joint, and it becomes stiff, then bathe and gently rub it, pressing until it is relieved.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	or place on the joint a greasy sheep fat, leave it there for a day and a night, then remove it, and make the patient take a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when it swells, rub the affected joint tempermentally, then place a cold compress on top, and then immerse it in water.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this twice or three times, as long as it remains healthy;
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see that it is covered with moist, hot pus and swollen, apply a fine cloth dipped in butter and press it on;
si revenra a sa disposition.	it will return to its original position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand dislocates easily, and its return is light, more so than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	However, it is necessary to reset it gently in the same moment it dislocates, so that the joint does not swell or an abscess forms hot.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the resetting is done by placing the patient's hand on a table, extending the affected limb, and visually ensuring it aligns evenly; then pressing down on the palm until the joint returns to its place.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	However, you should check if it is well-positioned.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then, place the patient's hand on a table with the fingers extended and then bent.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, let the patient lay his sick hand on a table, and look carefully at the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it does not return, strain soothing plasters over the abscesses, and leave them thus without beginning again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after any number of days, then the twisted joint persists.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and do not harm the patient until their hands are relaxed, and they cannot squeeze anything at all.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	so know that the nerves or arteries are cut,
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other engine but to extract with delicate cautery, and by chance it is worth nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, if you put on the plaster as we have said, then pull it and leave it for a day, then loosen it and leave it so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no fracture, then apply warm water and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	on the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	never should the two sides of the hand, or the back of the palm or the stomach, be dislocated.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then they should hold, and reduce the dislocation in their hands until it returns, then support the head with both hands, and align it towards the part where it is separated.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave it for two days, then set it equal again on the third day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and do not tie it, as we have said, but loosen it on the third day and make it move, then relive it with the nut.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, as long as it is tight, and do the same if it becomes distorted in the palm of the hand, and proceed as you have done before, until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same when it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	dislocation of the shoulder blade
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade or collarbone is dislocated and there is no cure, the patient faces a greater risk of death due to haste.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs of this are that the patient's movements are sudden and involuntary, they cannot hold it, and often the limb becomes limp, whether it is one knee or both, or both arms.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the elderly become mute, at least partially.
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	the one who becomes mute at the back is called "gibbosity
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The cure is that you warm the joint if the stiffness comes from childhood.
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	If there is no cure or remedy for it at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things, they speak of ancient ways of cure with great words, but these have little to no benefit at all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have abreviate it according to my understanding, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gigot (fatty tissue) that comes to the foot first, no one has ever felt well.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also those that come straight to the second side, and one cannot cure anything outside of that which comes properly to the back, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient should be extended on their back equally in the first position, and have strain from below, so that they do not bend.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then insert a thorn into the ground at the head, and another under, and tie a string from below around the patient's limbs, and another at the hips, and at the thighs, and at the ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two attendants know the ligaments, one at the head and the other at the foot, among the two splints.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they should be well secured; the splint as we have said, and the surgeon places his palms on the protruding bone, until it heals.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not heal with this treatment, take a table three feet long, cut a slot in the wall, and place the patient on their side, then turn the head of the table away from the wall, and put the middle part of the table over the bone.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and place the mirror on the other side of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you look, do it with the turning wheel that turns in your hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And take two sharp splints from a large limb of a patient and place them at the head of the dislocated arm, then put your other hands on top, with one palm-length space between each splint.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and make each splint have a hole, or let the turning wheel run through them, and ensure the splints are firmly in place so they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each of the two pieces there should be one piece that turns, so that the joint is restored, and it has two small pieces turning in one hand, to return to its original position.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the ligament that is among the attached to the joint towards the top, and the other ligament towards the foot to the other joint, and each of the assistants turns their joint with the entire ligament, and the master sets the splint evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, apply a drying plaster with plenty of heat, then the pads, and then the plank of three fingers in length, which secures the joint from the stiffness and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a ligament as we have said, and use gentle treatment for the patient until it is healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if any thing comes to the end of health, it is necessary to administer soft and soothing medicines, with the care that we have said above;
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and never administer a plug, and never does the appearance come in the last spine of the back, and it is believed that this is a dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone that opens, so one must not have presumption;
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	in case death were to come.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of dislocations of the spine
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	You know that the joints of the spine and the joints of the shoulder only cause dislocations, not like the other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the spinal joint is misaligned according to three parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	inside, outside, front, and back;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more inside, then slightly misaligned in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of his dislocation is such that when you join the diseased leg with the healthy one, it extends further, and opens up the diseased knees more widely than the healthy ones, and the patient cannot bend their knee fully.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the swelling that is affected by hot abscess, because the joint of the thigh comes over here.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who experiences this at death is that this event is contrary to what has been said before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of one who experiences it in front, are that their leg is straight according to its natural position;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	but do not bend the knee without pain, and if you want to make it move, it cannot go forward, and it retains urine, and swells up the ankle, and when it moves, it goes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who experiences this afterward, are that he cannot spread or bend his knee, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the angre is softened, and the limb of the thigh is raised on the side of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	They must reset this appearance of dislocation if it is old and persists according to its nature, as there is no cure for it.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and there should be no presumption that it will not recur.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And for the one whose dislocation is recent, there are three types of dislocation: if you hurry to return the joint, it will be inside and outside, or moved to the right or left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	for fear it may return, and there needs be no other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong compress and extend the leg firmly at two hands, or fasten it to the knee joint.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and other ministers extend their hand over it in such a way that they press their hands down on the sore spots, then pull firmly with a slow motion on the leg just above the ankle.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another holds the head with a firm grip.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch up and down several times, until the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains still.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to all three cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this is not done, then care must be taken of its appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When dislocation occurs in the joints, it is necessary that you bring the patient to rest on their healthy side, then wrap a bandage around the root of the thigh, and the joint that is away from the pain, then stretch the bandage upwards towards the pain and downwards towards the stronger part.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then apply pressure with your hands on the patient's arms, embrace the large joint of the affected thigh, and stretch it to a wide angle.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in that way as we have said, then you should tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong, soft ligature on the two heels and on the two knees, and let the injured leg be extended two more degrees than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then it should be hung on a pole with the head down, and two long arms above the ground.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then instruct the assistant to embrace the hip joint, and have other assistants with the patient who are embracing the hip, for the joints will now heal slowly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is external, if the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of stiffness, and carefully extracts the ligament from the affected leg, also from the opposite side;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then place two splints, one at the hip and another below, then insert a splint between the hips of the patient in the shape of a bow.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and place moist rags around it, so the patient does not suffer pain, then extend each limb towards him and equally apply the medication to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it does not return, place it on a table and press it as we have said in the previous section, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is present, it is necessary to extend the affected leg forcibly, as I have said before.
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and apply the compress to his pain of being on the affected limb, then press with the other hand and stretch it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is on the outside, it is not necessary to stretch the affected limb downwards or lift it up, but rather, it should be held in the same position as when the hip was dislocated, as we have gently described above.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and place it on his face, with the limb extended as we have said before, and all must press down on the joint on the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be clear when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then tighten the thighs, and apply the plaster, and wrap it with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and rest for three or four days, then untie it, and apply the plaster again.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, hold them as before, and leave it for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then dislocate it again, and make it go smoothly, as long as the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From the dislocation of the knee.
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The dislocation is treated according to three methods:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	that is to say, internally and externally, and behind.
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not treat it in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not return to its place at the knee, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg if they can, and place them face down on your lap, and rest their foot on top of yours.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take their kneecap in your palms, pull it between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee cap;
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and other helpers extend their help until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it has recovered well its leg slightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and apply a poultice, and make the leg recover to its place, and hold it together tightly for three or four days, then release it.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and the patients should not move about until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not in place, apply firm extension as we have said in the treatment of the shoulder, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are neither completely dislocated nor fully aligned, and they are distorted both inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the sign of this is that the ankle is swollen, and it turns red at the site where it was dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	We reset it if it is slight, and one must gently extend their hands when they are slightly dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is slightly dislocated, one should make the patient lie straight and hold them by the leg above the ankle with a helper.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then take the foot in your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards, and gently pull the foot upwards.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice as we have said, by extending and pulling the foot.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it returns, that's good.
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	If it does not return, the work must be restarted, for it returns.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return in that way, lay the patient on their back on the ground, and insert a stick firmly into the earth between their legs, and wrap cloth around them to prevent the patient from hurting themselves.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then strike the patient's thigh, and another assistant extends the leg or holds it at the knee;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then extend each limb equally, and the bands should be placed again between the legs of the patient to hold the patient still when pulled.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then place the mirrors equally on the dislocation of his hands, and another minister ties the healthy leg at the ankle, and the dislocation will return steadily.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it has healed somewhat, apply the plaster and fill it up, and stretch it tightly, and fasten the foot to the leg, and hold the reins that are on the ankle behind, so that the bandages are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	then leave it for two or three days, and gently move it if it is strained.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	then dislocate it on the third or fourth day, and make sure the patient walks for three days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if it does not heal by this time, it is not fortunate that it will still be dislocated.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses form, it is necessary to soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, while they are clean.
des dois	Of the two (parts/sides)
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both (sides) are dislocated, if they need to be realigned without effort, it is a light task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any other part of the foot or leg, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back or on a table with his body straight, and place your foot on what opens up from these joints, then press gently with your foot until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when they are even and open nothing, place the sole of the foot on a table with two joints, then stretch it firm and leave it for three days, then loosen it.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and make it rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	From wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with a dislocation and one wants to restore it, often the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in treatment, since you are ignorant of the art and have not practiced it for long, and if you lack compassion and mercy and are slow to act, do not be bold.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and at the beginning of things, apply hot poultices to the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you have no hope for healing.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and if you see hope, then now reset the member to its place, so that the abscesses heat goes away;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the member is in place, apply hot poultices to the abscesses, and treat the wound as appropriate, with dried herbs.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are broken, then as we have said in simple illnesses:
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and keep from entering a path of fear, according to what I have said, for it is your movement according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your arms and body.
