O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, my very dear children, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine, its full understanding, and I have concluded it through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I completed this with a treatise, which is the part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And since the work of hands is highly specialized in our region and foreign to all, the knowledge is lost and cut off, and there is no longer any memory of its strength except for small descriptions in ancient books about what the hands have done.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes error and vanity, and intentions are closed, and knowledge is estranged.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will revive this treatise by ordering its content according to the method of exposition and explanation, and the brevity; I will bring together the forms of cautery tools and other instruments used in the work, with adjustments to their declaration and preparation as needed.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has declined.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who wants to excel in the art of anatomy, as Galenus says, must know the judgment of the members, their forms and conjunctions and separations, have knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, and the number of them, and understand the action and rest of veins and arteries, and from where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And Hippocrates says that the name without action is meaningless, and the action without knowledge is poor; especially in the art of healing.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the beginning of this book that he who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, risks error and mistaking people; as I have often seen many of those who engage in this science without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a most wondrous sight, which infected the abscess of scrofula in the neck of a woman, and affected the arteries of her neck; so much blood flowed out that the woman died in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another wonder: a stone was removed from an elderly man's bladder, and the stone was large; it took away with it a piece of his bladder, and he bled internally for three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; if it were not removed, he would surely die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another marvel that took in hand the care of a duke from our land who had broken his leg, and with the break, there was an open wound; and all the ignorant healers bound the break over the wound as if by strong magic, leaving no trace of healing to the wound, and left it thus until the leg was entirely gangrened and the pain became unbearable, and it led to his perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	They called me to come to him, and I hurried to free the leg; and when I freed it, he was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way of corruption was already confirmed in the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another wonder: the abscess became worse, and then it was inflamed because of the evilness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For the ulcer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, one should not use iron if it is not in a part that can be entirely removed what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear child, it is necessary that you know that the art of medicine is divided into two parts: namely, the work of the hands, which involves great danger in many positions; and I will show each part in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Therefore, hold fast to this, so that the foolish gaze cannot speak ill of you. If you take up your weapons in courage and undertake your patients gently yet firmly, and use the best means, through the grace of God, you will attain salvation and be happy; and banish the diseases of sorrow from your mind, and lay down your weapons, those which make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the other with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in none of his warnings: "Do not take too much care of a bad disease, lest you be called a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatment according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter deals with fire cautery and the cautery of medicine (ague), and it is ordered from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the tools for cautery, and everything that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and of ventouses (suction cups) and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is ordered and includes the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar conditions; and it ordains the use of the main instruments from the head to the feet, and the forms of the tools.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Furthermore, remembering the work, it is necessary that I describe the qualities of aid and the harm of each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and their harms are the most extensive knowledge and subtle science, and these secrets are revealed; and many sages have spoken about them and agreed on this; and I will be content with little of their words, as I fear the lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally for all complexes where it has matter, whether hot or dry complexes: that is to say, a hot complex with matter, and a dry complex without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In both hot and dry complexes, matter is present, some say that cautery is great help, while others say the opposite: that cautery is useless for ailments arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For nature of fire is hot, and should not be treated with heat for hot ailments, neither by heat nor dryness; and he who says the contrary states that cautery provides great help to hot and dry ailments that come upon the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of a man and its moisture with the hot complexion of fire, you perceive the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any case, no one should attempt this except he who has tried it himself, and knows through long experience the chapter of cautery, the diversity of human complexes, the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the remedies according to time; for the rest of complexes, we have only fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all agreed and consented to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cautery brings together fire in a way that is the essence of healing, and indeed far greater kindness than the burning cautery of medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and brings no force but to the member that is hot, and does not harm any other member.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The burning medicines travel from one member to another by going away, and they bring to the member diseases of sorrow that have no cure; and sometimes the fire causes the patient pain because of its warmth and the goodness of its substance, if there is too much of it.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And if you have found me through experience and the length of service and study that I have put into this art, and it is about the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse the length of my words, because I do not like to take away from you the secret that lies within fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives diseases from the body, as the philosopher demonstrates; then consider it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on the times when cauterizations should be done and carefully chose the instruments.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate in all times, because the pain-relieving effect of cauterization removes the damaging influence; and especially when cauterization is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait until a greater ill comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear child, as they do who are ignorant; for to the illness that is healed by cautery there is no relapse; and it should be so; but it is not like what they care for, because cautery is only a medicine that alters the complexion, dries up the humors that cause pain, and moves more quickly than other medicines because of the virtue of its work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And another thing that is possible: the illness comes according to the complexion and the nature of the malady and its virtue; and excesses accumulate in it with the acquisition of foods and similar things, except when cautery is administered to reduce excesses and moisture, as in the cauterization for pain and similar conditions, where this pain does not return; but it happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand at all why cautery is called the last resort of medicine; it is true; but they do not believe that cautery has any value after medicine, because when we administer methods of cure for any illness and they are ineffective, then we use cautery, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it becomes clear that cautery is indeed the last resort of medicine, not at all according to the opinion of learned people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that gold cautery instruments are better than iron ones, and they only spoke of fire for its quality of gold and the high value of its substance; they said that the heat of cautery does not cause putrefaction, but it is not true, as I have experienced it, and I have found that it has no effect on any man; gold cautery is more effective than iron.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you are not certain if it is heated through by the color of the gold, and as soon as it cools; and if it is overheated, it will burn; thus there is ample obstruction.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use fire cautery because we have made it suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or, I have ordered this chapter in a logical sequence, so that the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Cyst cautery is applied to moisture and cold on the brain, and it is effective for various conditions caused by illness, known as "soda," and by numerous humors that descend from the head to the ears, and due to excessive dreaming, toothache, throat pain, and especially for diseases arising from cold such as paralysis, soddenness, apoplexy, and similar ailments.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged with a solvent medicine, purifying the third or fourth (part of the brain), according to the virtue and age and habituation of the patient; and then the head should be allowed to dry out again.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit with his back between your hands, and place his hands on some weight; afterwards, put the root of your palm on the root of his neck between his two fingers; and there where your two middle fingers meet, if he bleeds, immediately heat up the cautery called 'olive', which has this shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Mark the location with an ink sign, and repeatedly descend and stretch your hand while twisting; then gently release your hand, and assess the bone; if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you. Afterwards, take a small amount of string, place soft, melted cotton inside, and apply it to the location; leave it for three days. Then put clean, moistened cotton on top, and continue until the burning is gone; finally, treat the wound with 'tetrafarmacon' ointment while ensuring it remains clean.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients say that the longer an injury remains open, the more it purifies itself; for this reason, it is helped to heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one should not leave the cautery for so long that part of the bone is burned, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it will be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another says that one should leave the cautery for so long, and pull so hard that part of the bone is removed as wide as a woman opens her womb to let humor flow out; and the wound should remain open for a long time; after that, it should be cleaned and dressed.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me in all cases, except for those who have no hope; and I think I should leave them; for the joint is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and also when the patient's joint is weak by nature, and the initial appearance of cauterization seems safer and more mobile to me, and from this I act together for the good.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain in the head comes and lasts for a long time, patients should use herbs and pills called "cough drops," and purgatives for the head and eyes, and bandages; and if one performs the cauterization that we have mentioned above, it is of no avail.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient's condition is of a strong nature and not too severe; then cauterize deeply, as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterizing each horn of the skull just below the bone, as we have previously said, and cauterize the one called "vasselz" (vessel), which is where suction cups are placed; hold your hand slightly away so that you do not see the bone. The patient experiences much greater pain from this cautery than from others, which I will discuss later. It is necessary for the cautery of the horns to be more precise than that of the middle part of the skull, and this is its shape.
dou cautere dou chief	For fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When there is a sudden intense pain in a part of the head, and the disease extends as far as the oil (or possibly referring to inflammation/fever), and the symptoms are purged with medicated remedies, and all other treatments mentioned in the division of illnesses have not helped, then perform cauterization according to two methods, that is, using heat or fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with heat (or fire) involves pricking a sweet-smelling herb and applying it to the skin where the pain is located, in such a way that you can push the sweet-smelling herb beneath the skin; then tightly wrap and leave it for 12 hours. After this, unwrap it and treat the area fiercely with honey, leaving the wound like this for 2 or 3 days, then apply cotton soaked in butter until the pus is gone.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with medication as long as it is healed; and if you see that something similar to any of the burning medicines I have written about or the dosage for treating them has been done.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery instrument with this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a cap with a small opening, and in the middle there is a little appearance; then place it on the painful part, hold your hand, and turn it slightly so that half of the thickness of the heart is burned; remove your hand when the artery stops burning, which is when it ceases to pulse, and abundant blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton in awe of the wound, and covering it with cloth for three days; then he immerses the cotton in butter, and then dresses the wound with medicine until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called 'cultellare', be sure not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not old.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have previously discussed in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cautery mentioned above does not provide enough medicine and does not help, then you must heat up the cautery called 'cultellare' until it becomes white; then sign on the affected wound with a line half as long as your finger, and move your hand once, and pull without covering the artery so that it does not reach the bone; guard against the jaw muting when chewing, and let the teeth pay attention only to mute and prevent spasms from coming to the patient; guard against the blood clotting of the artery once it is cut, or there will be great fear and even more for one who does not know, and who is not studious and experienced; leave the work in the middle. But I will tell you how to retain blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it becomes attached.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice against the disease, and the patient suffers, cauterize the vein as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healthy; and if you notice, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter about the extraction of the artery, along with a cautery having two blades; and this cautery is better and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	about the pain of the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear due to coldness, and various restorative medicines and other treatments as we mentioned in the section have been tried without relief, then use this cautery called "the point," which has the following form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncturing the entire affected ear, or both ears if they hurt in both, and moving them slightly away from the root of the ear, once you have marked the joint's position, place 10 points around each ear; then treat the joint until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	regarding the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture that requires cautery is limited to those that involve fluid movement, as we have explained in the sections on diseases; and do not perform cautery on areas that are merely dry, sore, or numb.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this kind of pain that mutates from fluid of water and purging of the head and gargarism, and this does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little below the temple, and the third in the joint of the two lips; and place the cautery on the part that opens up healthily, burning half the heart. This is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the appearance of the knife that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle, and it is necessary that the blade be a bit thicker; after that, treat it as I have said above, as long as it remains healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When the apoplexy is old and you cure it thus as we have said, and it does not benefit the patient, and they do not have fever, then make four cauterizations: two on the temples of the head, and one on the top of the head, and one on the limb called 'vassel' as we have previously mentioned, and no cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and treat them as we have said before.
de litargie	The word "de litargie" seems to be related
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large years (possibly referring to a type of herb or medicinal substance) and pills to purify the mind; afterwards, apply hot compresses on the entire head of the patient, and place on the occiput (back of the head) the plaster of mustard, as written in the treatment of plasters; and this is the manner of cauterization: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy thus, good; and if it is not, make three cauterizations on each side of the hip joint, extending just below the collarbone, with a space between each cauterization as thick as two fingers; treat it like the others, and if you notice any protrusion, and the patient suffers, make one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, another two on top of the two horns, and treat until it is healthy; this cauterization is called 'olive' as I have mentioned above.
de la froidor dou chief	From the cold from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be washed with earth and water as we have said before; then clean the patient's head, make a cauterization between the chief and each horn, and three on the spine of the collarbone; if you need more, and the flesh is moist and the patient suffers and the disease is severe, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; leave it until the most tender heart is burned, then ease your hand. After that, treat it until it is healthy, and let the cauterization called 'olive' be as we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery unless they are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to purify the brain with years and other remedies that we have discussed in the section regarding great suffering from disease.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an evil spirit that cannot endure suffering, give them gargles and chewing, purifying the brain often with good meats; then place the head in a warm middle, and perform cautery as we have said before, and cauterize on the veins and each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffers greatly, perform cautery as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the limbs, on the spine at the back and neck, and cauterize with olive oil in the manner that I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is ill, make them undergo cautery delicately according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When, due to melancholy, there are excesses or corrupt moisture and a thick flux, then apply cautery with gentle cauterization as we have said for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if, due to melancholy, the excesses are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist with illness, then give them something to drink by which the brain may be purified, as it is stated in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After preparing the patient's head, make an incision well-made, circular as well, placing it in the middle of the head; and the patient lies crossed, held tightly from all sides; then apply the ointment, mixing it with butter from an old lamb; heat it at a suitable temperature over fire so that it can be endured; afterward empty the circle inside the head, and leave it to cool; and repeat this for the patient each week once, with another good treatment.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you need to cauterize it, make several points at the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery moistens the flesh increasingly; then apply cotton soaked in butter and goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes come first as indicated by the signs I mentioned in the previous section, then begin and administer to the patient a purifying drink, guarding against all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After instructing him to look up at his head, he makes a fire in the middle of the head and applies cautery to both temples if the eyes are misaligned together, or separately if one is lower; and take care to cauterize all veins and arteries beneath the heart, making the cautery long according to the width of the temple; and beware of excessive bloodletting, and if you see too much blood emerging, stop immediately.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you, in the extraction of arteries and in the caution of incision, how to suppress it; and never cauterize or burn through the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	two parts of the eye
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes have been old and habitual, and are in the veins, removing the arteries that appear on the surface of the eye, and one sees that they are cold, watery superfluities, then apply the cautery as I said at the beginning of this treatment, descending on the eyes: cauterize in the middle of the eye, and cauterize on both temples, and cauterize below the two bones; and if more is needed, cauterize carefully over the eyebrows with all small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	let the eyes weep through the eyelids
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the previous section, and it does not help, then give the patient three cups of warm olive oil cautery; after that, apply a hot iron cautery in the middle of the cautery; and make two cauterizations with the cautery called 'clavilis' on both sides of the hairline; and be careful not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery that is called 'clavilis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil (skin) is softened by illness and moisture, then use this cautery which is called "olive" (possibly referring to a type of herbal poultice or olive-based balm).
de coi ci est li forme:	Due to which the shape is:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you perform the cautery on both sides of the affected area as long as the tendons are, do not let go of the instrument until the third part of the skin is burned, according to the method I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hairs which do not allow the skin to heal.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time does it happen that the hairs of the skin are turned to scabs, and they prick the skin, and one performs cauterization according to two manners: that is to say, with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a clean bed; next, sign on the skin with a figure that is as vast as a full moon, and it should be at the beginning of the hair growth; then apply moist cotton wool soaked in egg glue and musk from the persil to the skin, and heat up the cauterizing iron so that its shape...
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the affected area little by little several times, burn the nearby nerves gently; and the signs of the healing of the wound are that you see the skin retracting and the hairs standing on end at the point of the oil; then lift your hand and leave it thus for three days, then apply moistened cotton in butter until the burning sensation is gone; afterward, treat the wound with care until it heals.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs grow, and the skin becomes soft, then restart the cauterization on the same area as before; and if the hairs have fallen out, cauterize it again while the skin is lifted to its natural state, and even, and let the hairs not prick the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medical cautery with burning drugs, you must instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a shape out of parchment in the form of a myrtle leaf; take French soap and hot chalk, each one part, and grind together well; apply it gently so as not to chill, then place the shape over the affected area on the paper; if the illness persists only in one place, you must operate there, and also in both places; place cotton oil moistened with egg white under the affected area; let the patient's part be in your healthy hand, and put your showing finger over the medicine, press a little and move it every time the patient feels medication biting, because it also bites like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	As you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine from your body.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the infection has passed, raise the limb gently, and observe if you see the skin raised as it was before by constraint of fire or incision; and if so, it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply more medicine to the limb or the medicine has not taken effect, as long as your work is even and your joints are in place; then put a moistened cotton ball in butter until the pain is gone, after treating the limb with the dressing called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is your duty to take good care of your work with great attention, so that it does not seek the medicine on its own.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hairs prick in the oil, repeat the treatment on that place which has been softened by the paper, just as you did before; then cure it until it is healed; and this is the form of the poultice with gentle care.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the needs of men vary in size and complexity, according to your constraints; and do not deviate from the right way for those who have studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of fistulas by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have discussed in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head on a healthy surface, and hold the affected limb between your hands in such a way that it does not move or shift its position. Afterwards, apply moist cotton or persil juice over the wound. Then, heat the cauterizing iron until it is hot. Position the iron over the injury, shaping it like a quill, or like a tent. However, whatever shape you find most suitable for your work, that is how it should be.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, open it, and drain the pus and dry it; if it is closed, repeat the operation, and use hot cautery; hold your hand over the cautery at the affected area above the oil, so that your hand does not cause harm; place the cautery on the fat of the oil, and corrupt (it).
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you start the cautery near the bone, that would be better.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If no, repeat the cautery again, and if necessary, do it a third time, leaving it for three days; then apply moistened butter cotton to cure the drying dressing as long as it is healthy; and if forty days pass and it is not healed, apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the remedy should be according to what comes in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cautery for a fistula, which no one from the past mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand the fistula, and fix its position; then place a fine, sharp instrument into the gap, which thus forms the shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it in the quantity of a drop of rain; and hold your hand firmly, so that the patient does not move at all, until the liquid flows out on its own; and one should put clean cotton over the wound, either with a poultice or in any other way: the liquid will gently leave the fistula and heal it miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the ulcer is healed by the cauterization we have described, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If that does not happen, it is necessary to administer warmth or cold, and bring the ulcer back to the body according to what is appropriate for its own place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks appear in the lips that are called "pox," especially on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	As you treat these wounds of which we spoke in detail, and the treatment is not effective, then heat a small surgical blade according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	and insert it into the wounds until it reaches the bottom; after that, treat the area with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms in the throat's root or in the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it causes putrefaction and swelling and becomes a fistula; then you treat it as we described in detail, but it is not effective. In this case, you should perform cauterization according to the size of the fistula; after that, remove or close the fistula opening, and keep your hand on it until the heat from the cautery reaches the bottom, and do this once or twice, following the treatment we described for wounds, until it is healed; if treated in this way, it will heal well. If not, you must expose the area and remove the rotten bone, as you will find described in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	no movement of the joints
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and treatment with medicine is ineffective, then place the patient's aching tooth in a healthy place; afterward, apply the hot cautery to the area where the shape will come as if you were placing a candle on the tooth; and insert the hot cautery firmly, holding your hand until the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; then release your hand and repeat the cauterization according to your desire; afterward, have the patient fill his mouth with salty water and leave it for an hour and a half burning.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the tooth that was moving becomes firmly set, and the soft gums are restrained, and the moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	about the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold, either from being cold or swollen, and medical remedies are ineffective, then it is necessary to use cauterization according to two methods: butter cauterization and fire cauterization.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cauterization is done by pressing warm butter onto the affected tooth, using the tip of a metal spoon or arrow, and wrapping cotton around it. Moisten it with melted butter, place it on the aching tooth, and hold until it cools; repeat this several times until its effectiveness reaches the root of the tooth. If you don't have moistened wool and cotton in butter, apply the warm butter directly to the aching tooth and hold a hot iron to it until the heat reaches the gum around the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	He uses fire cautery if it is such that you can insert a piece of iron or steel, and it is thick enough that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cautery, from which the shape will come, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be lessened that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the haste of that cautery, and then quickly remove it; and this is the shape of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make cautery on the upper lip where you wish, and according to what you are able to do; and this is the shape of the instrument.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is of cold moisture, and is not obedient to digestion with medicines, then heat the cautery knife with this after which comes the shape, and it has openings for the fumes to escape from the cautery in another part; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, as it is necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply cautery according to its quantity, and leave it thus for three days; and then cover it with moist cotton and butter until the burning is removed; after that treat the wound and bandage it until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the bone:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture defeats the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be drained first by solvent medicines; afterwards, apply cautery to the root of the throat, and beware not to go up to the throat, and only use a little heat.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, apply another cautery to the joint of the collarbone near the top of the spine, and these cauteries that are called 'claves' which we have described above; and treat the limb as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	The term "de la toust" does not appear to
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and any illness of the humours is due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, and it is an old illness, make two cauterizations on the strong parts of their own will; and another cauterization between the two members; and this cauterization which is called 'clavile' according to the shape mentioned above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make a cauterization by pricking all the cauterization called 'poins' from which the shape is as mentioned above in the illness of the ears; and the points can be up to 30, or even more.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment, reset the limb according to what is mentioned above, and make the cauterization in three stages according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for this reason, cautery is lighter, because you do it three times in succession.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of the dislocation of the shoulder joint.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterward, remind the patient of the pain in their back and side; afterward, apply gentle pressure with your left hand to the area where the dislocation is; if the joint is out of place inside, heat the cautery tool gently until it takes the shape of:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and burn the heart as long as it feels hot, and repeat the process of cautery three times; and for this reason cautery is performed with a cauterizing iron that has three prongs, so that the shape of the cauterization has six points; and the nerve follows the subtlety of a thread, and this is the form of cautery with three prongs.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never should it be adjusted on this nerve, for then there are eight cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the cauterization, wrap with a cloth; then rest the patient, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comfortable.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated from above, this happens rarely, then apply cautery on the thick skin around the bone with a hot iron or several cauterizations by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For once the joint is closed, and the moisture is expelled, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach while it is being stretched from its natural state, catarrh multiplies within it, and usual treatment methods are ineffective, then the patient should be made to lie on his back, extending his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this and afterward, make three cauterizations removing the knife with as much force as a finger, cauterizing all over; and two cauterizations crossing the two sides so that the shape of the cautery is at three angles, and there is enough space between them that they are not joined together while they rot; and the cautery should be so thorough that it sears both parts of the heart, and the shape of the cautery is in this form without adjustment.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you are cauterized with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and whoever is afraid of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and signing on the stomach at one point according to the amount that you see fit; then cauterize all over the cautery called "point.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment we have previously described, as long as he is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver feels pain from cold and moisture and excessive flatulence, as long as it is deviated from its natural state by superfluities; the patient should be treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not help, so it is necessary that the patient rest on his back; and there are three cauterizations according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, to remove the humors, either below or above the ribcage of man; and there should be a considerable distance between each cauterization, as thick as a finger; and the cauterization should be long in the body, and do not press too hard with your hand over the entire cauterization; and burn only the middle part of the kidney, and let the patient keep his feet straight; and if he cannot, let him lie down, extend his legs, and ease his breath; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish to cauterize these wounds with a knife, since you are skilled and sharp in the art, be careful not to burn all the heart, for you would harm the entire body; and let it not come to boiling, for the veins are very delicate there, and only the wise will see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you need to know if it is within the liver flesh or in the membrane: if it is within the flesh, the patient feels moderate pain; but if it is in the membrane, he feels excruciating pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure requires the patient to look at their head, they should be alert; then apply a sign on the spot where the abscess is, and heat the cautery instrument that resembles a rod, thus forming...
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize until the colors are burned, and a scar remains, as soon as the inflammation is completely gone; then apply treatment according to the treatment of wounds, as long as he is healed; and it should not be done by anyone who has not studied medicine for a long time, and by whose hands these illnesses have never been corrected.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can boldly operate, but nevertheless, I still think it is better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	the cautery of tears
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	They say that one should perform cautery on the pleura with roots of aristologue in this way: take a root of aristologue long, the largest you can find, dry it, and make it as thick and as long as your forearm; moisten it in oil, heat it over fire, and cauterize the cautery between the ribs and the collarbone, and smaller cauteries downward in the area beneath the beard; cauterize between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly declining behind; and cauterize across the middle (of the body), and another on the stomach, and between the shoulder blades, and along both sides of the lower ribcage, removing the cautery between the shoulder blades. Do not press your hand, but hold it open as if smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they say that no ancient person should use fire cautery resembling a razor, and heat it and place it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and suddenly there is great pain, as we have said of the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is great fear among the patients, and many die now, or a fistula occurs that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said about the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit, then they (doctors) apply three ways of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Dislocate the joint in such a way that you make three cauterizations, or four, according to the length of the bone, according to the shape of the cautery of the fire that we have mentioned above; and do not rush your hand over all the cauterization, and let the patient be wary on his back; and another way of cauterizing is to heat the cautery that has two prongs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and ease the pressure where the bone is located, or where the patient's pain comes from the left side, and elevate it according to the direction of the pain, according to the length of the body, and the cauterization should be according to the breadth of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After you have drawn the two inflamed prongs until the bone is pierced on the other side, then quickly remove the cautery, and thus you will have four (cauterizations). And if you see that the cautery has been applied to all the cauterization with three prongs.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has been putrefied for a long time, then it is more movable than the other remedies mentioned before.
de ydropisie	Dyshydration" is the English translation for
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not indicated for the dehydrated, except in the manner known as "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	If your cure, according to the methods described in divisions, is not benefiting, then you should perform four cauterizations around the waist, one on the stomach, one on the liver, and one on the kidneys, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the anus; and the cauterization should be close to the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery open for a long time to let pus drain, and not allowing any treatment for the patient after the cautery; then healing would be hastened, and the two intentions [i.e., parts] would be brought together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the stomach should be like the claw that we have shown before; and for the back, it should be oval, as is explained above.
de l’enfleure des piez	from the swelling of stones
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the stones are swollen in a person who is gout-prone and filled with bright yellow pus, you should cauterize just above the affected stone between the little finger and the ring finger; and hold your hand lightly with the cautery without twisting it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And don't enter too deeply, so as to prevent the citrine awl from being effective, and perform the cautery according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make two cauteries on each leg, at the tip of a cutlass; and perform the cautery longwise, one on the inside of the knee joint and the other outside, along the leg; and leave the cauteries for a long time without dressing, so that they stick; then treat the other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	of the joint
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When abdominal pain arises from cold and moisture, the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by normal means; you see the patient suffering greatly with strong vital force, so perform a great cautery on the stomach as he has spoken of before, to the circulatory cautery; and three cauterizations around the anus using subtle cautery claws, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each part, and two small cauterizations on the stomach to alleviate the great pain, for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	On the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are of long standing and consist of corrupt, cold, moist humors, they are treated as we have said in the previous sections, but they do not benefit from cauterization.  Make three incisions along the spine of the back, starting from below and moving up in a triangular pattern; make one incision above the anus (two incisions deep); if you think the stomach is chilled, the meat does not cook, and bloating is observed on the face, then apply a strong cauterization on the stomach as mentioned before, and another on the liver, and yet another on the heart (the whole body with cautery). Leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, reset the joint as long as it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	from the fleshiness called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you deal with the fleshiness (thelul), if the cautery appears too sharp, then cover it entirely with hot embers over the entire flesh; and leave it until the cautery reaches the vein, thereby sealing it; do this once or twice, and if there is much flesh, cauterize each part as we have said; afterwards, treat the wounds profitably as long as they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on raw (fleshy) skin, it will be of greater help.
de plaie mal curee	From the poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we shall relate, a certain illness comes about that can only be healed by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a vein forms a fistula, and becomes inflamed with putrefaction and corrupt moisture, you must try all subtle remedies, and be sure to know at every step how effective they are.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery instrument to a sharp degree, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the attempt has entered, and repeat the cautery once, or twice, or three times, depending on the quantity required; be careful not to burn the sensitive nerves and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	He will puncture the bladder and intestines if you are not careful with these joints, and do not make too deep a cut in fleshy parts, and think that it is not dangerous; then treat the joint until it is healthy, and if the joints are intact and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the joint is completely healthy; but if the matter remains, know that the joint is weak and the bone is corrupt at its base, just as we will say of these joints.
de la maladie des reins	regarding the illness of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When kidney pain and severe constipation comes, and it prevents a woman from doing her duty, then you must perform cautery on the kidneys from both sides using the cautery clamp that we have mentioned before; and if we apply the cautery in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a row, and it will bring greater relief.
de la vessie	from the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from pressure and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then it should be cauterized in the upper part of the bladder where the hairs begin to grow, both on the right and left sides, and each cautery should be as long as a finger; and also cauterize behind the back if necessary; and make the cauteries in the shape as mentioned above.
de la marris	of the marriage
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the wound is cold and moist, and does not allow anything to heal, and the flowers (scars) are corrupted and their healing is delayed; and when they begin to form, great pain is felt; then it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the edge, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back; and the cauterization should be done with a clavicle, as we have said.
de la hainche	de la hainche" translates directly from Old French to English
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends into the chest of the hinch (a term for a lung or breathing difficulty), and because of this it remains in its place, and the symptoms are that one leg is longer than the other when measured together; and there is found a weak pulse in the affected area, it is necessary to cauterize the patient above the chest of the hinch with a circular cautery, marking in front of the joint around the chest so that it stays within the circle, and if necessary, the cautery should be done as one does for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present for you, perform three cauterizations from the large olive, and let these cauterizations be just as effective as all the others; and treat until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	for the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain arises in the back, caused by cold and moisture, and the patient's condition does not improve with the treatments we mentioned in the previous section, then it is necessary to cleanse the patient of the bad humors using foul-smelling pills or other similar good pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After making the incision, there are two ways to cauterize: with burning medications and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery has many methods, of which I will describe two: first, cauterizing the breast in a triangular shape, making sure it is deeply and widely done, with each cauterization spaced apart by about the thickness of a finger, and they are olive-shaped. Never should cauterization be performed in the middle of the chest, as this creates three (or) four shapes according to this method.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	If you see that the cautery is in a circular shape as we have previously described in the dislocation of the chest, make it in such a way that the circle encloses the entire chest, and all the spaces around the heart are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the method used for sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach down to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the pain reaches down to the thigh and leg, perform a cautery on that part where the patient feels the pain, starting from just above the ankle, on the left side a little; it can be a cut cautery or a burning of the thick tissue; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up towards the knee or near it, cauterize there where he feels the pain, three times or four times with a cautery known as 'point'.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is so intense in the knee towards the thigh, make a cut with a sharp or circular instrument, and be very careful in all your cauterizations that you do not leave them for too long, lest you burn the nerves and large arteries, and cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have made cauterizations on the ankle of the foot, and left them until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it became pierced and corrupted throughout the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal solution, he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, apply cautery to one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise ones say about the cautery of the spine, which is how it should be done: take a piece of iron, as thick as a new date palm or slightly thinner, and make it twisted and interwoven from one side to the other, at a distance equal to that of a thumb's nail; twist it over both sides, making it straight like a bow, and have a skilled blacksmith forge it. This is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it is entirely red and exudes bubbles, then place it on the affected spine of the patient, and turn to the healthy side; apply cautery once more and leave it for three days. Then, cover it with butter ointment and keep the wound open for a long time; after treatment, as long as it heals.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use this cautery little because of the danger of its regard, and we should see few who use it; nevertheless, these are good cauteries, which one can endure, and where it is firm.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The burning cautery of medicine is made by creating a tool with a thin, descending edge, either of iron or steel, attached to a long handle. It should have a groove in the middle, with each side being as thick as a finger, and it should be open at both ends and joined together in this shape.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the board of the couch over the patient lying on their side, and quickly covering your hand with the board, pour between the two circles of hot ash, which is heated over the fire, and leave it for an hour while the patient endures the heat and burn from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it causes a severe burning just like fire; and when the burns have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the affected area gently, leaving it for three days, and apply butter until the blackness from the burn is gone; and leave it for another three days as pus drains out; and this would be the final aid after treating the wounds until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, use the instrument to draw the awl according to what you did with the hip, increasing the pressure; and this is the method of hot awl, which I have written about in the treatment of rectifications of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, both in equal amounts, grind them together, and place them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	If there is a small opening, make it larger with a point of a needle so that the alkali and lime can enter; then place this pot into another well-sealed pot, and add more alkali and lime on top, stirring gently until there are two layers of powder at the surface as you hold it in your hand. Leave it thus until the liquid inside becomes clear and evaporated. Then take all that remaining liquid, pour it over the lime and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And therefore it will be very useful and beneficial in many medical operations and other cautery treatments, for it acts like fire, and it is used in other medicines such as fomentation and myrrh and anacardium and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a case where a nobleman was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatica, and he says that no other treatment was done, and he was completely healed once this cure was performed, and he bathed as he is instructed below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And prepare it in such a way that you press the litargire (alum) with fresh and dry herbs, grind them finely with a bit of fat, apply it to the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is, and wrap it; leave it for three hours or according to the amount, until the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then make them take a bath or a warm drink until their body is slightly warmed, and have them lie down in bed, and the pain will disappear entirely and they will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such cautery with these medicines unless it is after evacuating the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dyscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's hair fire, it provides great aid; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and grease it with old oil, and apply it to the fossa between the big toe and the one called the hallux.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that, take dry goat hair, ignite it until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the wool, leaving it until it is stained; and repeat this process again and again, without stopping, until you believe that it has reached the hinch (a possible reference to a specific body part, perhaps the hip or lower back) and the pain has ceased; and this method of cauterization is called "goat hair cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	From the great pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from strain or impact, or due to excessive blood evacuation, or from what appears to be a cold, expanded substance, none of these signs should be treated with cautery, except for that which arises from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary that after the patient has been voided of foul pills or other similar substances, one should apply to their back, where the pain resides, three lines marked with a sign of a cross, and on each line perform five cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cauterization should be done using a instrument called 'a point'; and if you see fit, make three or four cauterizations at the medium cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness often comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight and painful throat when they swallow, and fear; and you feel a sharp pain in the lower back and an appearance on the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you observe its cure, cauterize it with the cautery iron according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	The cautery should mark each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see that the cautery around the spine is made with a sharp iron, drawing two or three lines, and the points are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treatment, keep the limb healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply heat to any blisters that are nerve-related.
de la dolor des jointes	joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is caused by moisture that has spread to each limb deeply, and when the pain comes on suddenly, they call it "gout" properly speaking, and when it is due to a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then cautery is the remedy in this manner: make several cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterization be olive-colored according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary to pierce the face with a pin, make the cautery completely around with a claim of "no point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, this often happens, make cautery on each knee with three or four cauterizations from every part, completely olive-colored; and if you need more, do so, but don't hold your hand too tightly until the heat of the heart is gone.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make points inside the bones with two lines; and if there is no pain in the middle finger, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the fingers or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and apply medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give good care to him and purge the flu, he will be healed by God's grace.
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the thigh bone
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a rupture occurs in the bowels, and the intestines descend into the coils, it is important that, when you see the cure take place, they do not move at all during the day; and he should use things that leave the belly empty, so that the intestines return to their proper place. After this, have him lie on his back between your hands, and command him to keep his breath until the bowels are healed, and arrange them in your hands, and mark the rupture on the bone of the wrist, and at every sign, it should look like half a circle above the body; then take the fire cautery whose shape is described here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and exudes scent.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their proper places; and have the minister place his hand so that they do not return backwards; and carefully open the legs of the patient, and place a cushion and a support under the legs, and another on the anus which holds his hands; then apply the cautery to the sign over your entire hand, holding it straight and firmly until you reach the bone, and if you do not touch it the first time, repeat it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the bone does not jump when applying the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that the patient does not die or suffer any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cauterizer of children should be subtle according to their size, and of tall people as great according to their measure; after three days, treat the wound with butter until the burn is healed; after that, treat other injuries until they are healed, and have the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well sealed; and it is necessary that his movements be limited for a long time, so that the boils do not appear when he goes to bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to stand up, apply a well-made compress and leave it for another forty days; and have good rest, that he works little and guards himself from too much drinking and eating, and from loud laughter; and when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will now describe the treatment for cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other parts of the abdomen and are recognized, and you see that they do not grow larger, it is treated with cautery according to its quantity, and sometimes it is burned with hot iron; after this treatment, follow the method as we have said; and no one among the ancients has said that it should be cauterized at three angles in this way.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place with a sign of lightning and make a line across the width above the rupture; then another one from the opposite side, and hold your hand steady over the entire cautery area.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterization is lighter and easier.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain arises in any member, whether from strain or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the cure of medicine is ineffective, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "point," and the cauterization should be according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness, and its virtue and location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first cauterization is successful, that's good; if not, recommence with another cautery on the same member, for it is customary for it to move towards the nearest member, so you should perform cauterizations until the patient is free of pain.
de meselerie	From illness
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The medicines are aided by cautery no less than by great help, especially the illness that arises from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	You must learn to cauterize, take care if the illness is in its beginning, and cure it according to what we have said in the previous division, so that it does not linger or remain, and doubt lest the corruption spread throughout the patient. Then perform cautery on the head: first, make a new wound on the crown of the head, and another towards the front at the end of the hair; then on both temples, and behind on the nape; and leave your hand so that the cauterization goes down to the bone, and the skin parts outward so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape. Cauterize the mouse according to what is indicated above.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the disease is widespread throughout; and it appears manifestly, then you must cauterize with these cauteries that we have mentioned in the beginning, cauterizing in some places, and cauterizing on the spine of the neck, and cauterizing on the spine of the back, and greatly on the crupie and another delicate place, and two on each shoulder; and two on the elbows, and two on the tender parts of the pis, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the fossae of the hands; and beware of the nails that are on the last toe, that you do not burn them; and never make a cautery on the bone of the wrist, or on the bone of the stomach, or on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you perform cautery, the greater the aid and benefit it brings, and move it for the better; and know that the patient feels no pain from cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be great and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the manner of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, cover the wound with flour of times (a type of plant) mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling appears in any member and is cured by medicines, oils, and bandages, but it remains unhealthy, then make cautery on the member according to its size and shape; and let the cautery be slightly inside the hope of the heart; then cure with poultices until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never should cautery be performed on the hand, foot, or back, at the point of the nerve that causes the limb to move, and thus if swelling is removed; nevertheless, no one should intervene unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the passages of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	of albara (or perhaps "from blisters")
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is afflicted, and the medical art has no effect, then cauterize with a hot iron slightly, according to the depth of the wound, until the white is removed, and the color changes; then apply a cure of meal, lentils, rose oil, plantain leaves, collicon (a herbal remedy) and alder bark, each in a portion; mix all together, wrap it in a cloth, and keep it at the fire until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of ulcers with cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a wound appears at the beginning, and you wish to stop it, cauterize it with the cautery that seems like a circle around the entire wound.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	However, wise people say that cautery should also be done in the middle of the wound; yet, I don't find this good, as I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it work effectively before. A more proper thing is to cauterize around it, with a cautery called a "circle," as we have said in many cautery practices.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	from the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	If anyone has a disease called "adubelati," and it is slow to die, either because of the excess it produces or because of the old age of the patient when he is debilitated (that is, too much) and has little blood, or because of the time; then you see that it hastens to die: at this point, cauterize it with many small cauterizations by poking; then leave it alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	Because it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce through all the cauterization, make the cautery so hot that...
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this illness called 'adubelati' until the cauterization has reached the heart, and it is done like the cauterization that the patient feels relieved in this way that the course of decay is stopped.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	Heal the fire with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of illness is called 'corrodens', which is nothing other than a wasting away of the members, as it attacks the limbs just as fire does the dry branches.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a limb that can endure fire cautery, then heat the cautery instruments slightly and thoroughly, according to what is suitable for the limb or the disease; afterward, cauterize all parts until you have eradicated all the corruption, leaving nothing from it, so that everything that is corrupted be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and apply oil to the cauterized limb, grinding it, until all the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds that generate heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days a healthy character does not appear, it is good; and if not, the cautery should be repeated on that which remains delayed from the corrupted joint.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this mixture is sometimes cured with a hot medicinal drink instead of fire cautery; but nevertheless, the fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already mentioned the cure with a cold medicinal drink in the previous section: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	from the vessels that come as pieces
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that a pain arises from a defect which we call "close" according to our intention, and it is a great wrong that hurts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this illness is according to two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is when you heat the cautery tool to a fine point with a forge, making sure it has sharp edges; then apply it to the nail, turning your hand around the nail until it reaches the bottom; leave it like that for three days so that it starts to rot; then make an ointment from crushed wild mallows, and apply it over the cautery mark, leaving it on all night. The nail will fall off and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the shoulder with a healing ointment, making it as clean as possible.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are affected by fire and the skin is burned, often both hands or feet, it is necessary to apply hot water cautery; and it is done thus: take a rod of iron or steel, or a needle from a bowstring, and attach the nail and the glue, that is, the putty, to the burn; then place the rod on it so that it covers everything around it, and pour some hot water over it, and hold your hand firmly, and twist it so that the edge of the rod reaches the root of the nail, and find the hot water deeply into the root; allow the patient to bear the sting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it as it is, and it will come out at the roots entirely.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	First, do one after another, until you have loosened all those that are in the body, then treat the ulcers that cause pain.
li cure dou trembler	It cures the trembling.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone trembles from cold or quartan fever or any other, it is necessary to make four cauterizations or five on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization on the fish, and one on the stomach with an olive cauterization; if this stops the trembling and hastens the healing from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	from pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never is it apparent through external defects or pus-filled blisters that come from highly corrupt matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	it is necessary to act at first when they appear, performing cauterization on each head of the pustule: a delicate cautery with a stick of myrtle, from which the point is taken to the fire, or with a long root of aristologist, or with a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never should cauterization be performed at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, nor can it grow worse in progress, but it breaks off the superfluities from which it comes, and becomes healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many serious consequences often arise from the blood of an artery that is cut during a wound, or in the case of a vein opening, or incision of an abscess, or cautery on a limb, and similar situations; and it is a very sad thing to experience.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet, if this happens to anyone, hurry and place your index finger on the wound of the vein, pulling it firmly until the pain subsides from your finger, and no more blood flows; then take several small and larger olive oil cauteries, as hot as they can be, and apply them, depending on the size of the wound and where the artery is located, placing the cautery on the vein where you hold your finger, and holding it there until the pain subsides.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if a sudden jump occurs when you remove your hand from the vein, and the cauterization is complete, then quickly take another cautery tool from those that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to perform this one after the other until the wound is completely healed; be careful not to damage the nerve that lies nearby, and ensure no further harm comes to the patient; and know that when the flow from the artery cuts off, it cannot be properly healed, especially if the artery is large, except through one of the four methods we have mentioned: either by cauterization, or extraction when it has not been treated, or tightly tying it with strong thread, or applying medicines that have the power to stop the flow of blood; and it should be bound and tightly wrapped.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers relief from pain by binding tightly with cloth or placing hot things, or other similar things, will not succeed unless it is done properly.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and they have no good medicine at hand, then they should put their two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press hard until all pain from the wound and the vein has subsided; and they must not move it, but apply moist cold often, as much as is very cold, until the limb is frozen and engorged and free of pain. And prepare in advance everything that is needed for cautery and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	We begin the second book of surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about every illness where it is necessary to cauterize with fire or burning medicines, and about the herbs, causes, instruments, and forms of cautery; I have placed that chapter primarily before this one, so that whoever wishes to find these things more easily can follow this same path.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, before we begin, it is important for you to know that this chapter involves more danger and fear than the first one on cautery; therefore, greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	Because many ways of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from such who have become so affected by their illness that they die quickly because of the severity of their condition and the magnitude of their suffering; of these one must be afraid.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who, in their weakness, say: "Wait, I am bleeding," and the illness is malicious.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not consent to those who come to you with such methods, but place more emphasis on your honor than on their greed, and act prudently, not foolishly, regarding what you are certain of, and what you can safely acquire; and use prognosis and treatment in the care of your patients, so that health may be restored; and this will help you gain good repute, glory, and lasting fame.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Most precious child, Our Lords grant you good understanding and integrity, and if you desire the holy inspiration from His hand, so be it.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordered this chapter for you, devising it according to chapters about cautery, as it is before or the chapter on dislocations, which I have devised from the head down to the foot, so that you may find it easier to understand what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	chief filled with water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	You know that this illness often comes to children at birth, when the child's head is too tightly bound, and it never happens for a reason that one cannot fathom.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and to all those that I have seen, death comes quickly; and for this reason, it seems to me that it is better to leave the work in part for some cures.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose joints were filled with water, and the head swelled each day so that it could not be supported; and due to the moisture, it became infected, and this moisture gathered beneath the bone next to the lymphatic vessel, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such that the moisture is located between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, so you must make a wide cut across the head where the moisture is present, as deep as possible, until the moisture flows out; and see the shape of the spatula.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the openings of the commissures of each side wide open, and there is a sharp, strong discharge when you press with your hand from within, and it does not return to normal, then you must make three cuts in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After loosening the cracks of the bandages and powders, he applies wine and oil and leaves it for up to five days; then he unwinds it, treating the wound with bandages and poultices, and stretches the head equally, and gives the patient dry meat from a pouch of moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you observe or measure the size of the abscess and the arrangement of the fluid; for it never appears in front, nor behind, nor on the right, nor on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Measure then the abscess and the quantity of fluid, and make the cut according to your ability; be careful not to block the artery; then comes a flow of blood, so that the patient dies due to the slow progression of blood and moisture evacuation.
de reume	Of the root
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a disease called "cataract" either in one eye or both, and the disease is old, and medical treatments are not helping, then the final remedy is cauterization by sealing the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see the patient turn their head, rub the affected area with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then gently pull the skin away from the eye using all the cloth; observe where the vein is located, and its branches behind the ears, which should be visible; mark these spots with a sign, then cauterize both with a sharp spatula, going deep into the tissue up to the bone, making sure it's wide across the forehead.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, turn the spatula away from the artery and cut the coagulum on top, also cutting as it should go through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, it bleeds continuously from above unless stopped.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open when pressed, it is necessary to measure the quantity of space in three parts, then tie it with string and make it extend to the bone; and this should be done with blood, about six parts, or perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the state of the artery; then examine the wound: if there is no discharge from the sinus that forms at the point where it was cut, and if the coagulum does not prevent healing, then press and bind the wound, and apply treatment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes with a severe catarrh due to moisture in the eyes and sockets and other similar symptoms, and all medical treatments fail to help, then we drain the arteries of the eyes and apply heat, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method for extracting them is that the patient pulls out the hairs from his temples and listens to the artery opening in the temple, as it opens clearly due to its beating, and it is tightly closed, except in no one who is too frail; and if it is closed, he tightens a piece of cloth around it from some thin fabric, then rubs the area with hot water until the artery appears manifestly open. Then take the instrument (spatumile) shaped as follows:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then scrape the skin lightly as you approach the artery, then grasp it with pincers and free it from the webs that bind each part; and if the artery is delicate, twist it to the tip of the hook, then cut off that part according to the number of joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it will not heal without great pain throughout.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And incise the blood with a sharp tool from the sixth to the third; and if the artery is large, tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that putrefaction does not come before the wound heals and complications arise; then cut off the excess between the two threads at that very moment, and, if you see fit, cauterize the patient with a cutting instrument until the joints are cut through; and this is the moving part, if the patient does not have fever and has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauterization is a help to end moisture: therefore it is of greater aid against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or for the extraction of arteries, it is necessary that one fills the wound with fine cotton and covers it with well-made bandages; and when they are loosened, take care to apply dried medicines that produce heat, and new bandages, as long as the wound is healed; and if you see any sign of an artery, be quick to cover it with cauterization, or use vitriol and press with your hand so that the wound becomes clean; and if you do not have this at hand, put snow on the wound until it freezes, and keep applying cold water until the bleeding stops, and pull gently as necessary. The warmer and lighter the artery is when extracting, the better it is to cauterize the vein with this cautery, cutting from both sides, but the cuts should be well-spaced to maintain heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they hold the heat less.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two blades a good space, and then when you have marked with a sign the two joints, and put the hot iron until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two joints; and they should be separated between the two parts because this cautery is not fully sealed everywhere; and this is the form of the cautery.
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes descend into the veins that are under the skin of the head, and no medicine can help, you see the face of the patient contort, and feel their forehead twitching as if with tremors; and the eye is inflamed and moist, so much so that the eyelashes fall out, and the eyelids are scorched by the heat of the tears, then this cure is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it the "old cure" (li cure contuse); so for the patient with this condition, you should shave the hairs on their forehead, then make three cuts (fendures) on the forehead evenly according to its length; one of these cuts should go all the way across the front from ear to ear, and the others should be two on each side of the bones above the eyes, avoiding the incision of the arteries that are next to the bones; also, keep your hand away from the joint of the lower jaw. Each wound should be about three fingers wide. Have a piece of sponge and clean cloth to wipe the blood, then mold the spatula with one part as follows:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is made on the temple down to the second incision; scrape all the flesh that is between the two cuts to the full satisfaction that is on the bone, then make another from the middle incision down to the other second, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you insert the instrument called 'cultellaire' into the first cut, it should be very sharp on one side and slightly soft on the other; this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the sharp side towards the far edge of the cut, and the soft side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the joints as long as the incision is continuous until it opens the heart, and then make another cut in the middle until the other side is open; and then extract the blood equally, and press out the blood with a cloth, and put in each wound a piece of old cotton, and place on top moistened cloths in wine and oil and ash, and be careful that no abscesses form; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and administer a strong infusion of water, then apply basilicon treatment with rose oil, and other treatments to cure wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	the joints
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When any catarrh comes that is usually accompanied by thick and small veins, weakening sight, burning papers, hair falling out, and intense pain in the head, the patient sneezes; then know through these symptoms that this matter and catarrh do not come from a single cause but are rather the result of many veins, and the movement cure that is necessary.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And instruct the patient to bend their forehead backwards, then make a deep cut across the forehead, and another one wide enough.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And starting from the cut in the left temple to the right temple, make the incision down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the muscles of the temples that move when you blink. When the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood away with a sponge, then separate the two edges of the cut and insert old cotton, and cover it with linen. Then place moistened cloth soaked in wine and oil on top and protect it from infection; once the bone heals, rub the bone gently until new skin begins to form, then apply a drying agent that promotes healing.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of rye flower and three parts of chalk, mix them to make a paste, and apply it to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	from ear infections
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Anything that causes pain in the ears is one of four things: grains or seeds, animals or creatures, hard rocks or similar objects, or fluids such as water or mucus; like seeds, beans, peas; or flowing things like water and mucous-like substances and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When a piece in the ear or any other object that does not adjust itself to the ear, does not enter the ear, then place the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a foreign object, and some violet oil or oil of sisament drips from it, then proceed with extraction; and as the condition permits, make the patient sneeze, and when sneezing occurs, stop their nostrils, and place pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear; and pull the ear gently upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often, this treatment works; and if it does not work, then extraction with fine tweezers should be performed, in the following manner:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If she jumps out of the pincers, that's good; if not, apply a subtle, thin extraction at the base; and if she doesn't jump out, make a hook of iron and twist the head of the hook or the perforation of the ear tightly, and stop what is around the hook with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the hook; then treat it firmly, as it often comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, take a lot of care to catch it, and use a sharp instrument suitable for this purpose, and put some cotton around; then press the pressure on the stone or something, and extract.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not jump out of all the things we have said, hurry to split the ear so that the abscess hardens and relaxes; and the way to split it is that you first make the patient from the cephalics, and extract blood according to its strength, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the base of the ear where the fat or tissue depends; and let the cut be as thin as a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it vigorously with your mouth; and cure it as long as it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is embedded and swollen, then perform extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, then apply a thin, delicate spatula according to this form.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and perform an incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not attempt this if you think the grain is moist from earwax, until you have made many attempts; then extract it with fine tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case where something has entered the ear, it is advisable for the patient to use a light sneeze and cover the ear with thick cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them lie on that same ear where the pain is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps out of fear, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If she does not jump, take many small, thin stones according to the length of your thumb and index finger, warm them slightly in the fire, and insert one into her ear, then from another side, insert a larger stone over the stone in her ear; continue this process with stones, one after another, until all the water has run out, and thus she will jump out entirely. And if you see that she is trapped, take a thin bone, and push one of the joints into her ear, while pulling the other end with fire until the thinner joint is burned; then make other joints in the same way until all the water is gone, as we have said before.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	During the removal of an animal, if it is a small core, like a pest or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the previous section; but if it is a large core that one can feel, then use pincers for its extraction; and it is the lighter thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms from the ears, if you treat it as we have said in the previous section and you treat the distillations, but the cure is not effective, then you should examine the ear in sunlight. If there are no visible worms, use fine pincers to remove them, and if they are still not visible, take care to extract the worm from where it has taken shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be tight from below and wide from above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And then insert the most subtle tube into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then suck until all the water is drawn out; do this often until all the truth is revealed.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, then stop up the canal with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not protrude as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have tried in the extraction of worms, and you will find them or treat them through distillations; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear using all these instruments, forming them as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And take a thin piece of silver or gold and insert it into the small opening to distill; and over it place an instrument made of good iron to press down on the distillation; then take a razor and wrap it tightly around the tip with soft cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you wish from your medicine in the kettle, and let the kettle be in the ear; then put the razor entirely into the cotton and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or barely enters the ear; and let the patient feel it within, and the distillation should be warm as if it were distilled in the ear; but beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From ear inflammation
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with any perforation in the ears; and the same thing occurs in adults due to a wound or a foreign object inside the ear, and this blockage never completely closes in the ear unless one can see it; and sometimes the perforation becomes permanently closed, and no one can see it.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	When the blockage completely closes, if one cannot see it, it is due to poor healing in various dispositions, and in this case, you must place the patient's ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the wax visible, check if it has taken on this shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And make cuts and incisions all around and behind, so that the ear is not wounded; if the pain arises from the cartilage or the flesh of the ear, hold it with delicate pincers and gently cut, until that part is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the incision is completely in the ear, take a thin, sharp razor and heat it slightly over fire, then apply it to the cartilage of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the incision causing the patient great pain in the ear, make a slight perforation, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then insert into the ear a plug according to the size of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Keep the bandage on for as long as the wound is fresh, or take a cloth and soak it in rose water, and sprinkle vitriol powder on it; and if you see the ear swelling, it is necessary to remove the bandage and apply another moistened cloth made of rosin oil and wax until the swelling subsides; then treat it while it is still clean.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other remedies to stop the flow of blood, which include treatments using distillation.
de la char des papieres	from the matter of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Gather all the papers that come from the eyes when they are moist and dry; it is necessary to stretch them with pliers and pincers, and cut off the top of a spatula at its roots; then place it on the vitriol paste.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if, after removing the skin, the lenticular cautery is performed with a delicate cautery, and the cauterizer moves after incision; often they heal, but nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the frost (or ice)
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come before us strange things that appear grainy in their form and hardness, and for this reason this illness is called "frost," and it's a gathering of great moisture on the paper from above and below; the work is as follows: be vigilant if the frost becomes silent on one side or the other, and this is a slight thing to know; then make them wide, scrape gently from each part, and pin them up and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper slightly, it causes no harm to the patient; and if the gathering is great, with a stitch, treat it as long as it remains healthy; and if it's small, do not use much force, because the stitches will soon reopen and cause pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the pain is descending within the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper inside out, and the pain will tighten in pinches, pressing from one side and the other; and if the paper is removed by incision, it causes no harm; and when the pain is cut away, pour clean salt water and heal the place where it was causing trouble until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	The condition is a fat that forms in thin layers on the eyes, and it occurs more often in children than in adults, causing great discomfort to their eyes. It leads to frequent watering of the eyes, preventing them from bearing the light of the sun. Due to this, they rest their faces, sleep with their eyes closed, and their paper-thin eyelids become moist, showing signs of inflammation that have opened up in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel the pain between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the procedure is that the patient places his head in a healthy position; then he takes a linen cloth and prepares a tent-like structure according to the amount of blood from each part, placing it on top; and he presses with his fingers on both sides so that the blood collects within the circle; then, using a sharp spatula, he makes a groove not wider than the wound made in the vein, and completes the incision until he reaches the blood; and he continues to cut the skin in a perfect manner until he comes to the blood; and depending on the various arrangements, blood will come out from the groove in the form of a white fat piece.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take then a whole piece of cloth soaked in fire between your fingers and move your hand to the right and left as long as it is glowing; and be careful not to insert anything into the wound, do not go all the way to the oil, do not touch it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the wound does not open at the beginning of the cut, gently widen the wound slightly until it opens; then take it out as we have said, and moisten the cloth with water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and hold it tight.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And for such men who grind and apply it to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat him as long as he is sane.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the hot abscess, treat it with cauterization as long as he is sane.
des poilz des papieres	hairs of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow in papers (or abnormally), they become entangled, causing harm similar to the problems caused by ragged papers and albugine, as long as it is due to the destruction of the hair follicles; and the cure is according to four methods: either with cauterization using fire, or with medicine according to what is mentioned in the preceding chapter on cautery, or through incision and stitching, or with binding, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the patient's head in a healthy position, then turn the paper from the oil in your left hand; if it rotates, that is good; if not, insert an needle along all the thread above; and this should be done either along the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow along those hairs, and pull the thread above all the paper, turning it against the razor; then cut into the skin below the hairs, close to the root, from the large scar to the small one; then extract the thread, and place below the paper a small piece of cotton and cloth, and sign on the paper with an image of a cross, as if it were a fir tree, but the image should be according to the amount you raise the paper, which is marked at all points.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if you take a tool with which to cut great quantities of paper according as the paper is softened; then make incisions throughout all two lines that you have marked, and begin from a large tear as far as it extends; and let one of these cuts be near the natural hairs, in thickness equal to a root, then turn the oncin (scissor) into one of the two angles at heart, and scrape off everything; then bring together the two lips with a single stitch of fine thread, and wipe away the blood, and dry off any superfluity of thread on both edges with something non-adhesive if you can do so; and if not, leave the stitch and thread for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitching it up, using drying and constricting things, for the paper revives at the healing of the wound and its joining together, but the stitch moves (as they say in old times), and this is a work full of danger; and if another way: mark on the paper a figure like a fir tree, as we have told it, at three oncin distances according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut off what overcomes the small forces equally according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the pincers equally, and the matter is not equal, take a needle where there is thread, and tie it around the shape; then take another thread beneath the large lip, and the second thread beneath the small one, and tie them together equally between your fingers; then gently let go of your hand equally, and remove all the skin you have marked, as we have said, then sew together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed; and if an abscess forms at your incision, soothe it with wax and similar remedies that relieve; and sometimes the paper-like tissue becomes converted. It is necessary to use what we have said about the incision; but sewing in one direction or another is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure for the broken arm is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and make it inside according to what I have said, then make two bands by art, also very thin long like the paper and the width with the spatumile; and fasten as much of each part where you hold the bones; then assemble them both delicately on top of the paper from the oil, and stretch the two bands from the formed parts; and leave it thus for several days, and the flesh that is squeezed will die and wither and rot until it comes out by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays and the patient has strength, then cure it as long as it is healthy; and when the wound is dried, and if lifting the paper does not hurt anymore, and the hair does not grow back; this is the shape of the two bands that you will make according to this figure and this quantity of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work involves piercing the skin with a fine needle and threading it with soft, delicate silk thread; then joining the parts together very gently, making the length of the threads one palm's length. Next, arrange another thin thread of silk quickly and tie the ends delicately; place the patient's head on your healthy side, and let the sun dry the wound so that the work is revealed, as it is a delicate and small task. Then push the needle through all the skin at the root of the hair neatly, and make the paper pierce it gently until you remove it from above the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the thread in the paper, and put back into the thread any hair that remains such as one, two, three, or more. Finally, withdraw your hand once all the hairs are pulled through the thread in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair does not come out with the pulling, pull the hair root out completely along the entire thread that you have ordered; until the hair comes out from the opening and you see it through the eye of the needle; then you will pull the hair and the thread, and close the wound and leave it for two or three days, until the new hair grows in its place; and if the hairs are small, accompany them with a long natural horsehair, and raise it along with that, as long as it is elongated and then release it.
de la porriture de l’oil	regarding the impurity of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this illness called "aleacrati" or putrefaction comes in the body, it has two manners: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it occurs suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of working on it is that you open that wound, separate the lips of it, and put inside several pieces of linen, and bind them until they are healthy; and it does not suit that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but it uses softening agents, such as fenugreek; and rosewater of water or oil and flaxseed are cooked, and the diaquilon (a type of ointment) is melted in one of the eyes, and it envelops a cloth, and treats it accordingly.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the true power of your cure lies in ensuring it does not follow the same form as before; and these works that we have spoken are only correct measures for this illness so that it does not return in the same way again.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the grease that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness which is dislocation, truly called "axacti," is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidental dislocation arises from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar actions; the manner of its occurrence in this chapter is such that if you pierce a needle with a thread, it should go through both sides of the flesh, starting from the left eye socket towards the right, so that the thread comes out at two places on the shoulder; then the muscle is above the entire needle, and the scar tissue is wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the shape of the muscle returns to its proper position, it is good; if not, take a razor and insert it into the gap, turn the muscle, and make two cuts on either side inside the muscle; let the angles of these cuts match the angles of the incision you made, creating an angle so that when they are brought together, the shape resembles a letter with a curve (not 'griesche'); then remove the excess muscle, according to how much is above and below the skin, from where you turned the muscle; then adjust the two mismatched parts, stitching them with a thread of wool; finally, apply the curative treatments we mentioned for mollifying medicines and bandages until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from cutting or stitching or cauterizing, it is necessary to make a clean cut under the skin between the hairs, and according to what has been said before; then separate the two books of a joint, as I have mentioned; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and skilled doctors use various devices from all possible means to restore the natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what they need for treatment and instruments in different arrangements.
dou soudement de la papiere	The phrase "dou soudement de la papiere" does not have a clear or consistent
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture is in the hands of a skilled person in this manner that the paper on top is smooth with oil white, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary that you pierce the point of a razor under the paper and lift it slightly; and hold it as tweezers, until you remove what is sharp at the delicate spatula, which should not be too harsh nor too shallow, so that the patient does not suffer from the harsh spatula or the oil bleeds; and make your incision gently, so that the paper returns to its natural form, and all the assembly is healed, and never leaves salt in the oil, nor makes it bitter with water, and then place between the paper and the oil a linen tent, and over the oil, wet wool in abundance; and after the third day, use collar and things that soften until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	from the nail of the finger
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You know that the nail has two types of appearances: it is either nervous and resembles a hard, smooth stone, or it is not nervous but appears as white, moist, frozen snow. When you touch it with iron and tend to pinch it, no one can do so without great difficulty. Both resemble the beginning of the great tear, growing thicker and thicker until it covers the entire vision and all the light and movement of the finger.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The method of incision is as follows: the patient places his head in a healthy position, then opens the fingers. Take a piece of paper and hold it in your hand, then pinch the nail with small pliers, extending it upwards. Take a needle, thread it with horsehair, goosehair, or oxhair, and a strong thread; double the tip of the needle slightly and insert it through the nail, perforating the entire length of the needle, and tie the nail with the thread, extending it upwards. Peel away all the hair around the nail on both sides of the cut, using the side of the nail that is closest to the root of the tear, until you reach the end of the thread. Leave the natural shape of the nail or tear intact so that no additional tears come from the incision, and never stretch the nail except with pliers or a thread, as we have said. Then, the nail should look like this:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be sure that the scalpel does not touch and tear the soft flesh, and that the prunelle (eyelid) is not pierced; after the cut, drop a little of the crushed silk into the oil and make a collar from it, made of lithargy (sulfide of lead), and leave it until the next day; then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerved and you cannot push the needle, and the hooks cannot enter, often this appearance of a nail requires treatment with medicine; as I have said in the previous section, if you see it covered, open the oil for the patient and take the scalpel lightly according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently remove the fingernail, and if you see that it shrinks a little and the pain decreases, then distil from your mouth an oil made with lithargyrum and a red collar, and apply the oil until the next day; then repeat the other work according to this same method, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing contradicts you about the oil, such as a hot abscess, then apply it, and treat the hot abscess first until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is completely healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh in the eye causes harm in the oil due to great damage, hold it at the oncine, and cut off a part but not all, so that no tears come; then distil into the eye a red collyrium made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	on the flesh that is born on the iris
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some people are born without any red flesh on the iris, which covers and restricts the eye, making it look like a rose petal; and the difficulty is that the patient must place his head in a healthy position, then open the eyes, and pull out all the flesh as smoothly as possible, supporting it with force. Then, cut off the first piece of flesh, shaving it all down to the end, taking care not to damage the eye during the process; and use oil from a sealed container or distil a red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and apply cotton dipped in hot oil on top of the eye, ensuring the abscess is hot. If nothing remains, and the pain subsides, and you suspect a hot abscess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with cooling remedies; then return to your task as long as it remains healthy, and thus make all other cuts adjusted in the eye by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless, you must attend to each individual weak part of the body naturally; and in the case of an accident, through force; and do not push your hand into any of these works until you see that this member suffers from the work.
des voines des eulz	veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These are red veins that are covered over the eye, and they steal from the sight their work and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Skill is therefore in the first place that you look to see what state it is in; if it is swollen, hard, and there is no other disease but the swelling, then take these steps: command the patient to place his head in your healthy hands, then suspend these veins at every turn according to your wisdom, and make the incisions delicate twice as much according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And there should be two incisions made by degrees in the body according to this form.
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then, gently stir those veins and wipe off the blood hour after hour until you remove the veins from the oil; be careful not to damage the oil with the tips of your spatulas, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, working diligently so that you do not stop until the veins are all removed; and when you have done this, distil green and red collyria into the oil to corrupt what remains from the sebum.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all of this in that hour, make a poultice over the oil with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for no more than a day until the pain is relieved and the hot abscess is assured, then begin again according to this manner as long as it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	from the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	He calls these fistulas "arissati": when you treat them with cautery and strong medicine as I have said above, and they remain unhealthy, there is a growth within that you must cut into the abscess, where it is destined to die, and remove all the moisture within, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, take all the instruments mentioned here and shape them; it is called the "sharp point", and it should be made sharp from a fire-hardened metal, just as it is in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the corrupt bone back in its socket, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand slightly until you know that corrosion is gone; do this several times, then return the joint to dry medicinal herbs.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the joints are fused, and it grows, and the bowel's core is fused, and remains like this for 40 days, and it does not heal or become abscessed, and no other bad accidents come, then you know it is healthy; if not, there is another tool to bring the fistula back to the opening of the new flesh according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with acuous medicines, and when it is uncovered like this, take care that the iron has three angles, and the awl should be thinned up to the tip as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place it on the delicate bone of the arm, and move your hand away from the wound, then turn the entire limb until it pierces the bone and the patient feels pain as if blood comes to that spot if he keeps his hand on his shoulder; and afterwards, return to the dry medicinal treatment, as I have taught you, and when the flesh heals and hardens on the bone, see how much lighter the condition is for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the wound
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the limbs are completely open and there is no disturbance to the shoulder, and it is necessary to keep the patient still, then apply poultices or compresses without harming them in order to draw out the disease; then cleanse the wound, and apply a poultice made of aloe, myrrh, and frankincense, and then strain the poultice, and paste it on with bandages and cloth; and the manner of the cloth should be that you press enough soft cloth together in layers of three, and place one upon the other according to the need of the limb; then strain it from above with a firm, tight bandage, and repeat the application of poultices for sucking without harm; then remove the poultices and leave the strained poultice day and night, and if it becomes looser, that is good; if not, renew the poultices, cloth, bandages, and compresses until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	dislocation of the skin veil
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the disruption occurs in the skin veil, it opens and lets out small particles similar to resin grains, which is a sight to behold; then, if you see this, take a needle and insert it into the root of the affected area down to where it connects to the upper part, and insert another needle where the thread forms a double loop near the tear; pierce through and leave the first needle in place; then cut the double-threaded part of the veil and tie a section around it tightly; remove the needle and apply fresh, moist lint to the wound; leave it until the thread absorbs with the veil, and treat the wound with comforting remedies until the injury heals; the wound should be restrained by the veil in every direction until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the joint shows great appearance, pierce it with a fine instrument that comes from oil, remove the white moisture and draw out the joint, and enter again soon after; then extract it as soon as it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the vein (or artery)
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This illness, called "alcunnati," is not merely a vein (or artery) that is compressed, resembling an acute descending pain, but it is not acute; and the manner of its appearance in the work is such that you must place the patient on a seat equipped and straight, then take the upper part between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the vein come up to your fingers; then insert it firmly, and do not let the light escape, and have the patient look at the things as he usually does; and if it does not descend, know that it is acute, and its movement from the vein must be equipped as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you let the patient rest in your hands, then take the delicate instrument and make incisions on the corneal membrane along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal and coronal tissues until the bowel is released; and when it is discharged, it distills into clear hot oil mixed with honey, or boiling fennel seed and honey, then apply another remedy as long as it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	the waters of oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the appearance of waters in the division, and what should be done to pierce; if it is done according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the patient lie between your crossed hands, away from the light for the sun, and bind him tightly with pure oil; then place the paper of oil in your left hand if his toes are on the left, or in your right hand if his toes are on the right; then take in your right hand, if his toes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda," or in your left hand, if his toes are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument into the crown through the thickness of a single strand at the bleached part of the oil to the smaller end of the tear, and turn the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and twist your hand until it pierces the bleached part of the oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the almagda be exactly the same as the measure of the space from the plum to the end of the darkness; and this is the crown of the oil; you will see the bone on the paper due to the clarity of the horny cloth, and then place the instrument up to where the water is, and express it through one path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he lets it descend now, then he must see the patient before him and hold the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After a brief rest, he should then attempt to raise it again along the second path, applying force with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not rise, gently extract it by turning your hand back and forth; then reset it again using a string of the finest silk, and remove the instrument from inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply heat to the affected area using a hot poultice or any other moistened oil mixed with plenty of egg yolk, and bandage it with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, put a fine grind with much heat onto it.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are many people with very hard eyes, it is necessary that you press the instrument called "alberit", which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce only the conjunctiva gently, and do not cut too deeply, but make it subtle, then press the almond-shaped object as we have said; and after completing the work, prepare the patient for sleep with a warm place, on his back in a dark room; and be careful of all movements, and feed him light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his condition for three days. Then release him in the same dark room, test his vision, and make him see no objects, and then put the bandage on again for seven days; and it is not appropriate that you do this during the treatment or after the incision now, but you should gently ease him, because sharp pain rises suddenly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If an abscess appears, you should loosen the oil on the seventh day and apply the remedies for a soothed abscess; once it is soothed, loosen the bandage and place an edge on your face to cover it for some time, and thereafter remain in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then he should leave the house little by little and recover from his condition; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And then one came to us from Iran who told us that in their peaceful land they use a device to suck out water, but I have never seen one in our land, nor do I read about it in the books of the ancients; perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of magics, for he who does not know them will see them as if they were made of gold.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the tip of this same tool be very sharp, and the rear in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	on the wound near the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No wound ever appears with diverse adjustments, from which there is none that seems like a scorpion full of pain; and if there are such where the wound is enriched with bright color, or the flesh is soft and of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In this case where the wound is sore and not yet healed, you should place the patient between your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils, and pour ointment onto those parts, and treat them fiercely; cut what you can hold with the delicate blade on one side, as long as you know that part of the wound is completely healed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If there remains anything that cannot be covered, cut it with all the delicate and light instruments until nothing is left; and without delay, perform the incision as needed; and if it is a malignant abscess, hurry and cauterize it until the blood is completely drained and all parts are healed, then apply heat or cold and wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If he opens his mouth and moisture comes out until the wound is healed; knowing that it is healthy, and if the moisture does not come out as it should, knowing that there is a chip in the upper bone, preventing the instruments from cutting: then you must insert a thread of linen somewhat thick, using your hands, and allow each thread to have some space or little; and place the patient's toe in the thread at his power, pulling it by smelling until it comes out through the wound inside the mouth; and often children do this at school, and it is a light task for those who want to do it. Then hold the head coming through the wound with one hand, and the other head coming through the mouth with the other hand, knowing each after the other as we who are in thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do as you know, purify the infected wound, treat the child, dry up the blood, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment, then put it back to its place; do this for three days or more, until the ointments have corroded everything that remains of the infection. Then place a bandage around the neck for no more than a day while ensuring it is clean; if medicine is needed, use it; and this is the form of the instrument used to purge the head, with which one distills oils and medicines into the wound.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or gold, resembling an open lamp, like a candle, and lead it thus; and if you see fit, make a closed candle, and let the instruments be full to purge the head; and have many around the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Of the pain near the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often, near the nose, a pain appears called "telul," which grows and becomes very large, so much so that it is a thing to behold; and for this reason, you must catch it at the beginning, and clean it thoroughly, then apply cautery or the burning medicine; and if you delay covering it until it becomes large, be wary if it turns hard, of poor color, and losing sensation: do not touch it with iron, because it is a deep abscess, and when you cover it for the first time, great harm comes to the patient. If the abscess is sensitive to gentle touch, there is no turning back, and the patient must be cured by completely emptying it without pain, using dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and seared
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Knowing that when a continuation of one of these important cartilage structures is broken, it benefits no one.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore important for no one to delay, if the wound is fresh and filled with blood; then close the two lips with a single stitch, and treat it until it heals; and if the lips are already separated on both sides, it is necessary to scrape all parts of their heart while they heal, then bring the two lips together with a stitch and tighten them, and apply dragon's blood powder and incense ground; and place a piece of plaster from strong or other adhesive plaster over it, leaving it until it falls off by itself, then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of stitching is such that you bring the wound together: either with needles, as we have spoken of in abdominal stitching; or with thread, as I have informed you.
des apostemes des levres	abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home, the abscesses on the lips appear hard, resembling small grains, both smaller and larger; then you must turn the lips, cut each one open, and take out the pus with tweezers, applying it to each part; then use vitriole (a caustic substance) after making an incision, until the wound is clean; then apply oil from a light plant, and cure the lip by keeping it moist until it heals.
de la char des gencives	Of the work of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often, a growth appears on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; it is necessary that you hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root, allowing the blood to flow or the pus to drain; then place upon it vitriol powder, or other restrictive and desiccant powders; and if the growth returns after the incision, this happens often, especially if the piece is cut a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after cauterization; these are the shapes of the tools for cutting.
des sordens	from disorders
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	No teeth are ever aligned at the head of the jaw, within the gums, which are ugly and rough; and no tooth is black and yellow and rotten until the corruption reaches the gums, and the tooth becomes bad-smelling. It is necessary that you hold the patient's jaws in your hands, and his teeth in your sanctum, and pull out the visible teeth until nothing remains; and so do for the blackness and green, jaundice, and other types, as long as they are clean; and if what is at the root of the problem is removed first, it is good; if not, repeat again on the second and third day, until you have everything pulled. And know that teeth require various tools to pull, according to what the work demonstrates, because the instruments used to pull out teeth from between others have different shapes than those used to pull single teeth. Keep these shapes and others with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	You should cure the tooth of its pain as soon as possible, for you must not delay in treating it at all, because it is a very delicate matter so there is no excuse for postponing it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	If the patient is in great pain, then it is important that you are certain about which tooth is causing it.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain continues, and the patient thinks it is a healthy tooth, so you extract the good tooth; however, the pain does not leave until the bad tooth is removed, as we have already seen with these patients; and once you are certain about which tooth is causing pain, it is important that you scrape around the tooth with a strong spatula to protect the gums from all sides; then move the pliers gently back and forth at the first touch, as long as they are well-aligned, and tighten the pliers; keep the patient's jaw in your hand between your knees, and hold it firmly so it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take none of these tools and push it gently from every side, moving it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	If the tooth is broken and missing, it is necessary to fill the gap with cloth or thread, either through the opening or the perforation; and if it is tightly stuck with pliers, be careful not to break it while pulling; and it is very important to work gently around the gum line to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Be very careful not to break it, and if a part breaks off, return it to the patient; due to the evil of its root, it will cause greater pain than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be careful not to act like the ignorant healers who, by their haste and courage, break the bones at every turn, and do not heed what has been said; but they bring on great illness through their speech, or because of the bones they break, as we often see; and when the swelling is drained, wash the wound with wine or honey and lint; and the pus that comes from it occurs often, so use vitriol powder; and if this does not help, then cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, with which to mute the bones first, should be long and sharp with thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull out the tooth; and these are their shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let there be strong members such that they do not bend when pulled, and made of iron well-forged, and toothed for firm hold.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root holds fast when pulled, it is necessary to place over it moist cotton or butter overnight or for two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the eyes are relaxed, then apply pliers called 'algefri', which makes the joints look well-cared for; and they are made inside like a file and this is their form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out of these claws, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and put the instrument called 'alethal' (i.e., a plier), which has this shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is hard and dense so that it does not break, and the root jumps out through this, that is good. If not, use all the instruments, and the shapes will come as follows:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument with two prongs, the shape is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are used in the reasoning of teeth, and this tool that resembles large pliers, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	This tool should be strong so it does not break, and you should know that many tools for teeth exist; there are also other tools, which are not mentioned. The most skilled surgeons create their own tools, according to the specific needs shown by their work and the disease, because there are many different conditions, and if a part breaks or becomes unstable, and he seeks the appropriate tools I have told you about, using gestures to indicate what is needed, then its form is as follows:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and well-fastened to hold the bone, so that it does not escape but can be held and removed; and then return the limb to suitable medicine, and if there is decay in the bone, even if it is small, use all these instruments.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural shape of the body, and its form is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth is grown after the others and not in its proper place, and one cannot saw or file it; then extract it. And if it is mobile with the tooth, take this instrument whose form resembles a small beak, and let it be of sharp steel.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And take a small knife in your hands each day for the pain in your teeth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, file it from one side as this form shows:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	It is also like filing the metal used to make needles; file the tooth gently with your fingers every day until it stops moving, then in the end, it should be completely smooth without any roughness, and if the dens (teeth) is too sharp, it can hurt the tongue, so you must file the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not hurt or impair speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth aches
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth aches greatly, either by impact or pulling, and the patient cannot bear pressure on it, he suffers immense pain, and medicines to restrain it are useless. They should be restrained with a golden thread; for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes. The thread must be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth. If you need to adjust the teeth, take the thread and wrap it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the aching tooth(es) between the other teeth, as many as there are, until you reach the healthy tooth on the opposite side; then continue the wrapping and gently but firmly pull until it no longer moves. Your finger should be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the bones with file clippers and assemble them, and insert them between the healthy teeth, and arrange them so that the tongue does not move; and leave it as tight as possible while it can stay, and if it loosens, the thread will pull again; if it remains tight and serves thus for all its time, this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the arrangement of the two healthy teeth and the two muscles, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is dislodged, it must be replaced in its place, fresh by fresh, as we have said; and let no one intervene unless they are skilled and patient, and never form a tooth from the bone of a sheep, but place it in the empty socket and tighten it as we have said, and keep it tight for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	cut the bandage of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Never cut the ties that originate beneath the tongue, whether from natural causes or an accident during a deep wound; and the work involves opening the mouth of the patient with care, placing his head in yours, and lifting the tongue. Then cut the nervous ligament widely, as much as possible, until the tongue is freed from its attachment, and if there is any hardness or newness (from the injury), immediately insert a hook and cut widely that ligamen; be sure not to sever the artery below. After finishing, raise the limb with rosewater or oil, then apply a thin layer of linen beneath the tongue; and do this for each patient every night so that the ties cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the bleeding comes from an abscess that has been broken open, and if it does not stop, cauterize it with a slow-acting cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see it is red or black or hard, so the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it turns pale, and there is moisture, soak it with vinegar, and cut out the lump with a delicate spatula from both sides; and if it does not stop at your work, place vitriole on it until it is stained, then return to your work until all is healed. Then lift the limb gently and steadily, and treat it with other remedies until it is well.
des apostemes de la gorge	from the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there appear in the throat small cavities called "godath", which are properly known as the two amandres (amandrs), and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they are not cleaned properly, be careful: these abscesses are hard to the touch, of small size and faint color, so do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is thick, do not touch them with iron, also for the discharge of pus; but leave them until they are dry, and then you will remove them, or they might break on their own. And if they are of white color, and the root is thin, have a tool prepared to cover them, but first ensure that the abscesses are calm and at ease.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient stand before the sun, and his feet in a healthy position, open the mouth and grasp the tongue with the fingers between his hands, pressing it down onto the entire instrument, from which comes the shape; and let it be of silver or fine gold as if a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You cannot press the tongue down onto all of this instrument and see the abscess, so take the chisel and the file and insert them into it, pulling upwards as much as possible; do not touch any part of the threads with them, then cut with the instrument, from which comes the shape that resembles a hook; nevertheless, the head is curved, one side to the other, and they are very sharp, made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, if it is like pliers, then take it to shape thus:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And it should be cut on one side and not the other; and when you have extracted one of the mandibles, extract the other in the same manner, and after the incision, rinse the patient's wound with hot and fresh water, or with broth of pomegranates cooked, or bags of myrtle, or similar things, until the blood is stopped; then treat it while it is still clean; and no other abscesses will form in the throat besides the two mandibles if they are extracted in this way.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was located inside her throat, namely a small abscess; and the entire throat was tightly closed, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passageway, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if left thus for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so swollen that it had pushed aside two ribs through the two openings where it entered.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then quickly inserted a blade into one of the openings where the abscess entered, and pulled it through, extracting a large amount of pus; then I did the same in the other opening, opening the mouth and pressing the tongue; after inserting the blade into the abscesses and scooping out some of the pus, only a little blood came out, and thus the passageway from the throat was opened for the woman. She began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to drain the abscess for a long time; but the abscess reappeared, filling the space I had cleared, growing very large. Then I bandaged it and cauterized it inside the throat: in this way it healed without further growth. And from these actions, God be praised, I was able to save her.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the eye descends and is swollen and distant, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is removed, thick and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the previous section, but the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscess is calm, and it is small, then it is necessary to drain it; and the round one that is not far away, and it is bloody or of a dark color, then it is advisable to avoid incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	So it is necessary, when you see this, according to the manner I have said, that you lay the patient before the sun and press his tongue with the instrument of which we spoke earlier; then insert the point into the eye and pull it out, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned in incising the two joints.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut off more than the excess beyond the natural limit; for if you cut too much, it hurts the voice and speech. After the incision, use what we said about incising the two joints, and treat it as long as it is clean.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you use instruments for the cauterization of the sensitive parts.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of cauterization is very sharp and hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should place his head on a healthy surface, and then press his tongue against the instrument described in the chapter on cauterization (or mentioned previously), using a sharp, hot tool. The application should not be too thick or too thin; and this is the shape of said instrument:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the patient hold a hair, as if it were the handle of a spoon, and place the tool with all the medicine on the eye; have the patient lie on their side, so that saliva and mucus from their mouth can absorb the medicine without going down to the throat or causing discomfort. Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour until you see it stop bubbling and the stinging of the medicine is soothed; and if you notice, take cotton and wrap it around some tool, dampen the cotton in the medicine, and keep pressing the cotton into the socket until it sticks to the eye; do this often until the cauterization is complete, then leave it to dry, and after three or four days, or five, if you need to repeat the cauterization of the medicine, repeat it, and after the cauterization, clean around the eye with cotton soaked in buttered water, and purify everything that surrounds the medicine; rise with cold water, and perform gargling until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than cautery or incision; if it is carried out by fumigation in this manner, take plenty of calament, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile and avernus (or similar herbs), and mix them all together in a pot, then place the pot on the fire and bring to a boil; ensure the pot is well sealed with a tight lid, as described below:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	It should be either of silver or gold, and one of the joints should be compressed in the mouth of the patient until the vapour rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye becomes numb; afterwards, it often recurs as the eye dries out, and take care not to perform this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, as many complications may arise; do not attempt this except during the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and insert within the mouth a thin piece of wool, so that it does not burn too hot; for the woolen thread does not allow the steam to heat up the mouth, and it is a good remedy for healing together and salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a burning sensation occurs in the throat from bone or fish spines, or some other thing. Therefore, it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument so that you can observe the thing; and if it does not open and is stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the food cooks in the stomach. Perhaps this will dislodge the thing through vomiting. Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a dry crust of bread, and then ties a thread to it and pulls it out; and when it reaches its place, it will open up and then you can pull it out forcefully. And if it does not come out as we have said, take an instrument made of salt according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved towards the throat so it can enter more easily, and hold the head elevated; beware not to touch the epiglottis, so that everything does not get stuck, and do not push the bone inside; and move the patient to insert the instrument, because it needs to be moved where the thing is reversed; if it goes down, pull it out slowly throughout the entire instrument until it comes out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is the throat treated with medicine, as I have said in the previous section, except through medicinal treatment; and if that does not help, then examine the throat of the patient in sunlight, and press the tongue with the instrument I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the vein, draw it back to every tiny needle or use subtle pliers that are suited for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if the above does not work, take a horsehair rope and tie it around the throat of the patient, then tighten or loosen the rope until the vein heats up and does its job. Do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has a fever with water every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	then take full glasses of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in slowly, allowing him to swallow it, and do this often; and as soon as the vein feels the water, it will close.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not break as we have said, and fills the patient with bad odor from the instrument used in the fumigation of the eye, do this many times, for it will eventually break without warning.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	The method of fumigation is as follows: you fill a pot with hot coals and place a perforated cover over it, through which the instrument for fumigation is inserted. The patient then puts the tip of the cane in their mouth, seals their mouth, and inhales the smoke until they feel the sensation, without allowing any smoke to escape; if the sensation does not occur, repeat the fumigation several times. The patient should endure thirst, eat salty and spicy foods, and avoid drinking water; then it will be necessary for them to expel the foreign body using this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound, if it is possible to see, resembles a curved pair of pliers for entering the throat; and it looks like a hawk's beak, and has the hardness of lime, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go; and here you can see its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many appearances of abscesses are, according to what the memory brings to mind in this book, and they differ in terms of perforation and size; and there are two manners, one being in its own likeness, and those that hold moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for the joints where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess of the head is different from that of the base, and the abscess of the muscular limb is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if, for an abscess, one must not pierce while the bowel is still alive according to its completion; and if for such cases it is necessary to pierce when they are fully grown, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are in the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	Because when an abscess comes from the destruction of the joints, and it is left until it becomes putrid around, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If the abscess is in the main member, and you delay piercing it until it becomes gangrenous, it will harm the principal member; or if it is from the foundation, pierce it likewise while it is still alive, otherwise it will putrefy completely, become swollen inside, and develop a fistula, and cannot heal fully.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time of perforation of the abscess which is killed according to completion, and this is when the pain is soothed, and the fever departs, and the pain and redness decrease, and the swelling of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you should make the perforation depend on the level of the abscess, and where it opens; and it should be a long perforation in the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in the joints and muscles and arteries, and everywhere equally, where there is no swelling.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fatty part of the body, it is better to leave the incision until it has healed completely, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before the abscess has formed, the body's defense mechanism will release much blood, and it will fill with pus; and by chance, the lips may harden and get infected from the wound.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if an abscess is pierced according to its size from the flesh and the part of the body that needs it.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must treat them with small incisions, small openings; and in large incisions, large openings, and many fissures according to the size of the abscess; and if it is necessary to insert a heart, or cover it; when it has healed as much as cloth, and becomes numb, one must do the same as for buboes: and if they are cut in three angles, and such that one covers them like the fur of a myrtle, like the abscesses of enemies; and if there is such where a large incision is made, and other sizes and similar cuts.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	For those who have no head, like a superficial sore abscess, you must pierce it thoroughly; and if the abscess is large and has a great bowel, and you pierce it, do not drain all the bowels at once, but a part of them; then stop the abscess for another day, and then drain nothing from there; repeat this many times little by little until all the bowels are drained; especially if the patient is of weak strength, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old, decrepit men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For sometimes the patient jumps due to the release of gas from the bowels, which might cause the illness to worsen and you should not be alarmed.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Beware therefore of this chapter with great caution, and when you have felt your abscess, if the wound is clean, and if it is a small one, apply a bandage of lint or cotton; but if it is a large abscess with many openings, you should insert a tent into each opening so that they touch each other. If you find a hard part in the abscess and have sewn it up, fill it with dry cotton or linen raspings without moisture and bind it for three days; then remove it and treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your work, apply ice and cold water, and moisten the cloth, and place it on the bleeding wound repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bleeding persists, apply pressure and treatment, and use the powders mentioned in this book, and if it's a deep wound or an abscess, cover it with moistened cloth with wine and hot oil; and if it's fresh and the abscess is fleshy, place moistened cloth with cold water and vinegar or hot oil, for up to three days, as we have said; then remove the abscess and clean and treat it, as appropriate, until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: for I have already told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and now see this chapter.
des soros	from sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or there are small abscesses that come from the head, which are similar to threads, as in the eye of a needle, and there are many like them.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are large and fleshy, with moisture like pulsations; and if there are such that are hard and difficult to cut, then the arteries do not contradict.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the shoulder is such that you should test every instrument called "entromissory," from which the form comes as follows, containing something.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they make a hole from above down through it.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is emptied, if it does not tear the skin that contains the moisture, it returns immediately once you leave nothing there; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, use water and string, and apply to the wound, leaving it until the next day; this will heal those who are delayed by night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then resume the bandaging, as before, on the second and third day, as long as you know it does not stay in place at night; then treat the wound with suitable medicine until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess persists firmly, as this form indicates, cut it long; and drain its pus, and scrape from all sides, and apply all your care to draw out the poison from where it lies; and if the artery is against you, do as I have told you.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do the same for an abscess that is hard, and cut and cure it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut the abscess and its moisture gently, for it contains little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if none of these abscesses or pimples have any moisture, and these are the type of abscesses I found on an old woman's head—they felt like hard, sharp, white stones that could not be crushed—and if anyone were to try to break them, it would cause just as much harm as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses that appear on the head or neck—especially those affecting children and the roots of the ears—it is important to keep the opening as clean and open as possible to allow the pus to drain; and treat them accordingly.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess appears in the neck, and discharge pus, and cause pain, and never comes anywhere else on the body, and it is sore, and intertwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each goiter is properly inside its rib cage, as we have said of the neck abscess; and there are many types of goiters.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	Some of them contain moisture, and some are evil and do not obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In the one that you see has a good appearance when touched, and is similar to the color of the body, and is quiet from every side and is not closed in the neck or the artery or the duct, and is not too deep; then it is necessary that you cut it from above, and peel it from every part, and the two lips of the heart be open as we have said in the abscesses of the neck; and take care little by little, and be sure not to cut the nerve or the vein, and do not allow the fingers to slip, and do not look too far ahead so that you do not cut anything you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you open the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work, apply vitriole (poison) ground into a powder that stops blood flow, and constrict the wound; leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound softened, and begin to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is stained with blood, return to your task until you complete it; then be careful with your work if there remain any small scars, scrape and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the scar, it is not enough that you remove just the scar at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and leave it to fall without harm; then apply old Egyptian poultice to the wound for healing.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove the entire swelling, it is necessary that you close both lips of the wound and sew them now, since there is no delay due to excess because of the size of the swelling.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you understand how to close the root of it, and pull firmly, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those swellings that have excess fluid, cut them where they open up to die; and the cutting should be as previously mentioned, depending on it, then apply these treatments with dressing and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what is delayed from corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, continue treatment with ointment until it is healed.
de squinance	from squintiness
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	They spoke and wrote about the incision of the throat, but I have never seen it done in our land, and these are the writings of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those with squintiness, it is necessary to avoid the incision in the throat known as "epiglote"; no aid should be provided for this, because all the veins and the source of the patient's pain are located in those who have an abscess near the mouth, or in the throat or in the stomach.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the throat from a cold, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss caused by strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we should make it three or four small cuts across, between the two circles, or according to the depth of the cut, not penetrating into the cartilage; and these cuts are most suitable for cutting through the epiglottis so that there is no charring, and the edges remain long and clean.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the surgeon is cautious, he should extend the skin of the throat to the entire circle, then cut through the heart as it reaches the channel, and avoid blood vessels, if you see any, and then remove the tissue, as we have said; and by examining the section of the stream of the channel that has burst out from the broken place, and by the loss of voice, it is demonstrated that the wound should remain open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed and there is doubt about the strangulation, bring together the two edges of the wound close to the heart, and cut through them entirely down to the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote healing, as long as it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis states that this should not be done until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be near death, for it lacks breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then, they should cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he will breathe through the wound, thus preventing death; and for this reason, the ancients ordered that the wound be kept open until the evil of the disease has passed, which can take three or four days. And then they commanded that the wound be sewed up and dressed, as long as it was healing; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a damsel took a knife, and stabbed it into her throat, cutting part of the tongue from the gum; and I was called to cure her, but found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had come from it; I realized that there was no strength or passage for it to go anywhere but the throat, and the veins burst out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I acted swiftly, sewed up the wound, and cured it until it was healthy; and after she had been weak from voice, she recovered to her former state; that is why I say that in the construction of the epiglottis, one should not be afraid.
de la grosse gorge	from the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Cystic abscesses are called "neck hernias," and they are large abscesses in the color of a jaundice, and they occur mostly in women; and they are according to two manners: natural and accidental; or naturally without any cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental is according to two manners: one seems like fat, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and it does not suit to make sharp cuts except in the small ones, and test and seek all the entry points: if you find them just like the fat ones, and cannot be moved in any way, then cut them as one would cut the nose, and remove them entirely if possible, and bandage well, and treat as appropriate until they are perfectly healed.
des nous	From us.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways concerning us, of which I will speak of all their similarities; and now it is necessary that I explain the entire difference between our origins and end.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the end is characterized by heat and fever, as long as the boiling has not occurred and the putrefaction is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the new birth, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it possesses satisfaction, which is its own sack and according to the state of the body, and begins like a seed, and becomes large; and they are according to two similarities, either fat or moist, and have much color as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	You should, when you approach the treatment of a new illness, that you try and inquire first about all the instruments called "instrumental" according to their form, as is explained in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	The method of investigating abscesses is to press more or less gently the place you find the abscess, and turn your fingers in and out repeatedly, until you know that the instrument has reached the center, then, according to the size of the abscess, extract the instrument, and be careful not to damage it.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture runs through the cut, what color it has, do as I said for other abscesses; and if the instrument does not come out moist after that, know that it is stuck, so make a cross with your fingers, take hold of it with pincers, and carefully peel it from each side, taking care to extract all the pus, or cut it away if you cannot remove it whole.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it does not stay, it returns to the mind repeatedly; and if it lingers a little, without greatly troubling you, it employs the wound with some corrosive powder or hot water, constricts the wound, and applies soothing things on top, and treats other treatments until it is healed; and if it becomes great, it costs both lips of the wound, and treats those who cause harm.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the veins break against you or anything else prompts haste, use the vitriol powder and leave it for two or three days until the wound pus forms and the blood flow stops; then return to covering what has receded again.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Look here at the shapes of the instruments that enter the body, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three quadrants called 'albaret', and one called 'breb', and they are also like needles used to cut through sores, and they are made of gold, bronze, or iron, and the yellow ones are more effective in encircling fistular abscesses; and these are also of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the wound.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the hooks are very similar, as you can see: large, medium, and small; and there are also hooks with two curves in three ways; and some have three curves, also in three ways; and others have two curves, or even just one curve, and these too are necessary for their respective uses.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of these instruments is sharp, and some do not cut well from one side, causing the skin to be scraped, so that neither vein nor nerve are severed; and these inserments are screws returned in several pieces, so that the patient does not lose blood when opening abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they should only be used on fleshy parts, such as legs, arms, breasts, wounds, and similar places; and never make another small instrument resembling the edges of pincers, according to this form, to stop blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it should never be placed in a place that heals quickly after cutting veins, arteries, and never according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never inflame the breasts of any man when they begin to be corrupted, as long as they seem like women's breasts; they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them must do so according to this form from this line b until g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then peel off the fat and apply medicinal herbs with charred ash, then close the two lips of the wound with stitches and treat it until it is healthy; if the breast sinks downwards and becomes soft due to its size, as it does in women, making them appear in two ribs, through two similar openings; so that one rib holds the other at the end of each, making the larger line contain the smaller according to this form from this line b to line g. Then peel off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have mentioned regarding stitches and powders, as well as anything necessary for treatment, until it is healed; if it is not healed, or the incision has not been properly made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, it is necessary to fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive dressing; leave it until it absorbs the fat and moisture, then treat it until it is completely healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	from abscesses under the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that come from under the armpits and are hard scrofulas or have lumps, and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B to line G:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, apply clean cotton to the wound and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton and continue treatment with appropriate care until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, then make an incision as we have said about the scrofula, and if the wound opens, apply cautery as we have previously mentioned.
de la routure de l’artere	from the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When an artery bursts and the skin above it is sealed, it often leads to abscesses, and also occurs in the veins, causing them to become swollen and abscessed; and if one recognizes this as being due to an artery, then the abscess should be left to heal on its own; and when you feel it at your extremities, it feels strange; and in the case of veins, they appear red and inflamed; and it is foolish to drain such an abscess, especially when it is deep within joints and surrounded by bones and other parts, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary to watch over the iron cure, and he who is in charge must also be vigilant, and on him who has an arterial wound made above the skin, then carefully open the artery from the threads, as much as it is exposed; then insert a needle from below into the other side of the wound, and pierce it through to the other cost, and tightly hold the artery with a double thread in two parts, according to what I have taught you about extracting the two arteries located in the temples; then mark the space between the two threads with an instrument until there is nothing left that can be cut out, and carefully remove the abscess; then administer the cure as soon as the wound begins to heal; then treat any subsequent treatments appropriate for that wound, as long as it is healthy; and if the abscess is located along a vein, it is necessary for you to keep your hand over the abscess from its beginning to the entire skin, then insert the needle below the space you are holding in your hand, and pierce it through, and hold it with a double thread, so that you can pull it from the other side; then secure the abscess as I have told you, or tie one end of the thread to each part; and if you doubt that the threads have disappeared, insert another needle into all the parts below the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in three parts; then remove the excess from the abscess until everything superfluous is cut off, then cut away the excess skin and leave what is tied; then cover it with a moist cloth dipped in wine and oil, and administer treatments with bandages and ointments as long as it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	from the abscess of nails
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly to abscesses in arteries and veins, nails can also develop abscesses when they are injured or subjected to excessive work, among other things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this occurs more frequently in joints and fingers, causing abscesses that appear as if from the flesh of the body, and are in various shapes with great pain, not completely in line with the rest of the body, but deviating towards the heart; and they move little or not at all forward or backward, or upwards or downwards, and the joint affected should not be bound with iron, for it may cause contraction; and those located on the head or forehead cause the skin to pucker.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, and it can be gripped with tweezers, dig it out at its base; and if it's large, suspend it on a hook, and scrape off the skin, then cut out the flesh and sew up the wound, and treat it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	Des grosses boces pendans" translates from Old French to "hanging jaws
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	It occurs in the belly alone, and nowhere else, and is a disease known as "fungus" due to its appearance, it has subtle roots, and causes large and small stools; I have seen men with two or more fungus-like growths in their bellies, there was no distinction between them, they were white, had thin roots, and continued to exude moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I gathered them and found in one eighteen ounces weighing, and in the other six ounces, and the work of the incision is such that you consider if the patient is moist, and the color of the artel is white and moist and of a subtle root; if it adheres to the spatula, perform fire cautery in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For cutting often brings too much blood loss, and if it goes without control, then be quick to cauterize; and if you see the patient afraid and anxious about the incision, take a well-made thread and tie the artel as we have said, and leave it for two days; then restrain it and do not cease to pull the thread until it extracts the artel without effort; and if the roots are large, be afraid most especially when cutting near the belly, but you can still cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not recur; then dress the wound, and be careful not to cut the thin part which is of a bad color and poor texture and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess enhanced, and I will come to the treatment of the cancer hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the wound is closed due to crusting.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the crust is due to cauterization of the wound or fissure of the flesh, and it is on the belly and not in any of the bowels, as happens with other openings, or from bloodletting or cutting of veins or arteries as is usually done, or from flatulence; and if it is through an opening in the flesh and through the emission of the bowels, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a slight thing without pain, and has various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to an intestinal issue, then it is more complex; when pressed with the hand at its points, it repairs itself and returns, and sometimes becomes sealed off, widening greatly at the bath entrance or through hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor issue and opens well when pressed with the hand, without constraint; and if it is due to blood, it appears through these signs: large and hard abscesses, and is fixed in quantity; and if it is due to wind, it feels soft to the touch, and the severity is such that you must observe its appearance, whether it is the blood of an artery, a vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary, you must leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter about abscesses, both for the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if it appears to be an intestinal or bowel problem, you must instruct the patient to keep their leg still and extend it straight, then mark around the bowel; next, command them to move it gently between your hands, then wrap the marked area with a strong thread or a firm silk string, making sure the bowels are completely immobile; then open the other half of the abscess that is above all the pain, and insert your finger, exploring the intestines. If you find them stuck in the string, release them and bring the intestines out through the opening in the abdomen. And if it’s a bowel issue, take hold at the anvil, cutting off the excess; then gently go back to your work and take two needles, piercing them through what you have done in the shape of a cross that you made; then pull the abscess three times with the needles, making sure to remove them afterwards and leave the wound to heal on its own. You should collect any blood or moisture you find, treat the wound as necessary, and complete the abscess as we have said; then, when it becomes soft and curable, proceed with the cure, and finish the abscess as we have described; finally, treat the area with the appropriate remedies and close the wound securely.
dou chancre	A cancer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the previous section about the appearance of cancer, and how it should be treated with medicine, and how to avoid iron therapy; we say that cancer is insidious and requires great caution in its cure, and they advise the ancients that when a cancer is located where it can be cut out, as is the case with cancers of the flesh, or in the foot, or similar places, then it must all be removed when it is in the beginning; however, for large and old cancers, you should not approach them, because I have never been able to heal any, nor has anyone ever healed one before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for the work when a cancer is located where it can be removed, as we have said, do not at any time purge the patient of black blood; then make them healthier if there is evident bloating, and cut out the cancer from a good place to perform the operation; then pour on your poultices or cancers, and remove all parts, leaving nothing behind; let the blood flow completely, and check the place with your hand or anything else, and if the occurrence of blood makes you hesitate regarding the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize it until the wound is healed; then apply another cure until it is healed.
de ydropisie	Of hydropisia
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already discussed the signs of hydrops and in what way the collection of water occurs, and the symptoms of each condition, and the treatment using medicines, and that which is treated with iron; in these two cases only; for touching iron on these two conditions is dangerous, namely tympanitis and yposcare, as it is a deadly matter. Therefore, when treating this hydrops-like condition, called "eclites" by medicine, and the cure does not help, consider if the patient is weak or has another illness besides hydrops, such as intestinal troubles or similar conditions; in these cases, do not use iron, for there is doubt; and if you see a patient with strong vitality, and they only have hydrops without any other illness, and are neither too young nor too old, then proceed thus: lay the patient gently on your hands, and the assistant presses the abdomen towards the lower part, draining the water to its lowest point, then take the sharp spatula according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And make incisions from the second part.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Stab it with a point, but do not push it in so deep that it reaches the intestines when inserted, and do not let it pierce; then observe if there is any droplet formation towards the intestines. It is necessary to make an incision from three fingers' width directly beneath the armpit; and if the hydrops is due to a disease of the liver, make your incision on the left side of the armpit; and if it is due to mucus, it should be on the right, and do not let the patient lie on the incision site so that the excess fluid does not flow towards the weak joint. Then cut through all the skin with a tool, and sever, and gently pull your hand across all the tissue between the skin and the sinew as if scraping with a fingernail or slightly further; then cut the sinew until the tissue comes to rest in its natural position, and this is the shape of the instrument:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a small silver chain, delicate and made of fine gold or silver, with one opening at the base and three on one side, and two on the other, and one on the opposite; and the part is cut as if with a quill, which is the form of the incision that scribes make when they cut quills.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top of it is the opening, so that when the instrument comes into contact with water, it sinks directly onto the instrument; then empty half or a third of it, for if you remove more than is necessary at that moment, perhaps the patient dies due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls unconscious, or approaches death; but empty according to its quantity and according to what the nature of the virtue in the patient indicates, and his pulsations. Then take the instrument and hold back the water, which is now retained by the plug that stops the opening I mentioned above, which you pierce in this way; then repeat the process on the other side the next day, if you see the patient suffering, and remove a small amount of water; do this for several days, and be careful not to let it dry up completely.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much water, either by burial or hot sand, or through sweating or a bath, or in the sun, and he turns color; then cure him with drying medicines as soon as he is healed, and cauterize his stomach and liver and spleen after draining the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	from the obstruction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without an opening in the penis, or if the opening is small, or it is not in its correct position.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary for him to pierce all the very subtle spatules according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then open the very subtle cleft of the bladder, and hold it closed for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the closure, let him urinate, and then replace it; however, sometimes it is not necessary, because the hot urine that comes out will not allow it to be closed again.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the opening is small, it requires a gentle closure of the bladder as we have said, so it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have a gap in their joint are blighted, for no one is born with a gap at the top of the bone, so they cannot urinate until they raise their bone up; and they cannot engage in sexual activity because the matter cannot reach the marrow, and this is a terrible disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on their back, then the gap in the bone and its head, as well as the top part, are opened up to the size of a feather, so that the gap is wide enough; and be careful not to let blood flow, which often happens, and if it does, stop it with what stops blood, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	from the pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often, this inflammation appears on the penis, and it can be either benign or malignant; it is necessary to prick them gently with a needle, scrape and clean them thoroughly, then apply a moist cotton ball in an Egyptian ointment; then continue treatment with the ointment of diaphoretic until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the inflammation is malignant, with putrid color and discharge, it is necessary to treat it with cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have achieved it, and if the splint is comfortable, let it rest on the body with a portion inside the wound and another outside; then it is necessary to remove the splint inside first, and when it is removed, treat the wound.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, unless you are certain that the splint is not damaged, blackness and decay will appear in the splint and the wound; then it is necessary to remove all of what is black and corrupt, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from the bark of red apples and leaves, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a blood clot occurs, then administer the lunar cauterization according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauterization is carried out as follows: that is to say, in case of blood clot or corruption; and if the part of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary to insert a plug made of soft cloth into the urethra and let the patient urinate; and when the hair on the head of the penis is dry, which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, or there is a wound or abscess, then you should scrape it with a sharp instrument until the ties are loosened and the part of the penis is freed from all sides; and if this is a difficult matter to decide, it is necessary to scrape it gently with a spatula at the base of the penis and the stone, then separate them slightly and put a fine linen cloth moistened with cold water over it so that it does not dry out.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a dislocation like other wounds; however, when we perform this operation of our own will, especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best and most gentle incision for healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they did not practice it in their laws, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen most of the masters and elders who practiced circumcision around that time, and they did it with strength and skill; if it had been according to custom, since there were two layers, someone might cut through this one and delay that one.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or she returns to the wound, and the pain doubles, and with the cleaning that is done from time to time, the tip of the member is not assured; and in the cleaning of the nail, by chance, the iron escapes and corrupts the work, and often they heal in such a way that they do not need cleaning, and I wish it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleaning that is done with force on every link of thread, I have found the goodness of experiment, for the forces cut precisely as well from above as from below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, if you cut evenly in all directions, then the thread should be well twisted around the skin; and make sure the manner of the first operation so that the child, if it listens, understands that you are not making him suffer more than necessary by twisting the thread around the stick, and then make him feel at ease in every way possible. Then twist it between your fingers straight, and press the forces between your fingers or under your feet so that the infant does not see or notice any of the tools; then bring your hand back to the stick and blow on it, drawing it up as high as the end of the stick is; then clean it well of all the dirt gathered on it, then tie it with a double thread, and connect it to another thread; and hold it by the second link at the index finger and the little finger, and cut between the two threads, then gently remove the heart from above violently and pull the chief of the stick; then let the blood flow slowly, for that is how it heals; and apply powder on top and cover it with a cloth dipped in a mixture of rosewater, finely chopped fresh herbs, and good oil, and leave it until the next day, and treat it with care every day until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of purification is this: both shoulders should be held tightly and cut, and the shoulder blades should also be large and equally measured.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in purification is when the veins are not cut properly; then you must stretch your finger so that the shoulder joint becomes abscessed; and do the same for the other, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, use pliers, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it persists for three days, and the area under the arrow is swollen, leave it until the abscess is calmed, gently scraping off the crust; cut it as much as you can, and be careful to avoid the arrow's shaft, which will not harm it in any way.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat therefore the injured part suddenly affected by powder (that we have spoken of in treating powders), and if it is cut too deeply, and it goes above, then it will cause no harm; treat it, therefore, as we have said, while it is whole.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is caused by the obstruction of a stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or a baby, or similar conditions, as we have described in the previous division; and if the urine cannot be released, and you observe that the retention is due to a stone in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees; pressure should be applied to his back, and he should extend his belly upwards from the lower part of his back, and restrain him as much as possible. Then the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone above, allowing the urine to flow; if it does not pass, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must provide an extraction for all instruments called "syringes", which have this shape: they should be made of fine, lightweight silver, like a bird's feather, with a length of about 1.5 palms, and be thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the method of urination is as follows: Take a double thread and tie one end with wool or cotton at the top of the syringe; draw out the thread inside the syringe, cut off the excess wool, and insert it up to the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and position the patient on a seat. Let them urinate while the syringe is gently inserted into the penis until it reaches the root, then double over the penis towards the tip. Then, insert the syringe before the bladder, and have the patient feel the urge to urinate until the bladder is empty, but not too much that it becomes painful because of its twisted position; tie off the thread tightly, following the wool as it goes, and extract the urine, then drain the bladder, and repeat with the syringe until the bladder is completely empty and the patient relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	From the illnesses of the bladder.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When ulcerations or abscesses come to the bladder, and putrefaction is gathered there, you should draw out water and medicines with a device called a 'clepsydra', and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and the furrows by which the medicine flows are made so that they stop the flow well without addition, if one can draw out the moisture and push when necessary. And when you pour your medicines into the bladder, place the head of the container in the moisture and draw out the liquid slowly. Then, push firmly on the container; it will draw out the moisture from within and enter the bladder immediately, so that the patient feels it. This is the shape of a delicate enema bag used to enema the bladder: thus is it.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or gold, and the matter is more valuable; then remove it from the breast where it is lodged; take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you wish to use for cleansing, then tie it between the two breasts with a strong double thread, and warm the moisture over the fire. Then insert the end of the cleanse into the urethra, and press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle of it, and pierce it around the circumference; then thread a strong thread through these holes, assemble the circle as one would an earl, and put inside what you wish to use: oil, moisture, and water. Tie it with the instrument, and do as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already spoken of the methods for treating stones and their extraction, along with various medicines; and I have explained the difference between stones that cause rain and all the signs, and what kind of stone requires surgical intervention; and in the bladder, and in the penis; I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone that is lodged in the bladder occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign of acute urine retention, resembling water in its subtlety; it opens up the urinary tract, greatly disturbing the patient, often recurring, and then becoming chronic; and most of these blockages originate from the kidneys. The cure for children up to the age of four is relatively light, but it is much more difficult for older individuals, especially those between youth and old age; the treatment is lighter for those with large stones, than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with a cleanse, to draw out all impurities from the bowels.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often gets stuck when trying to pass stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and upright them, moving them away from each other so that the stone descends completely into the bladder, never sticking up high; then place him between your hands with his hands resting on his thighs, causing the bladder to tilt downward; then tie him down and feel inside. If you feel the stone in the space, now hurry to cut through the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come away with the touch, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, and if the patient is an adult, press gently on both sides; hold it in place at its base, and when you feel it give way, press firmly on your right side, and the stone will come out from the opening where you cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to extend their right hand upward and stretch it, while removing the skin from their left hand beneath the stones in the area where the cut is made; then they should apply the scoop-shaped tool, which forms the shape as follows:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And they make an incision between what is between the cheeks and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left navel; and it should be straight on the stone, and your fingers should always be near the fundament, and the cut should be wide on one side and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; so that the pressure from the finger at the fundament causes it to come out easily without effort; and know that there is part with angles and margins where it comes out; if it is stuck, it is gripped as if it were a spearhead, round, and smooth, whose exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	If there are angles and margins where it comes out, make the cut larger; and if it does not come out, you need to use pliers that are also like a file at the tip to pull the stone so that it does not escape; or you can insert a small, curved instrument at the top; and if you cannot do this, you should enlarge the opening slightly and then extract the stone with vitriole; and if there is more than one stone, first pull out the largest one from the neck of the bladder, then cut around it, and finally pull it out, and then the smaller ones after that if there are any others.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, they want to cut it out, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things can happen to the patient: he dies, or his urine flows again through a wound that the limbs cannot heal; but nevertheless, strive hard to extract it with pincers, as you dislocate it piece by piece; and when you have completed your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, and bind it, and place on top a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then dress the patient's neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, if a lot of good oil and water arises from it, then apply the curative ointment and basilic ointment, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses and corrosions occur in the wound and congestions of blood in the bladder, and urine retention, known in this manner as difficult with urination: then press your finger into the wound and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and rot; then cleanse the wound with water and oil and heat, and aid it in every way that you know, until it is healed; and it is necessary that at all times that you treat it, you bind both thighs together and apply medicine to the joint.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is caught in the urethra, and stuck inside, and urine cannot pass; then this cure that I say, to cut it many times, is excusable due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tested this thusly.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take the iron at the forefront according to this form, and insert it into three pieces of wood.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the urethra beyond the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then gently push the iron into the urethra until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron in your hand slowly into the stone, as much as you can pierce the stone from the other side; soon urine will come out, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the urethra.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken and jumps with urine, and it pains the patient; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then insert a thread into the stone from below and another from above, then pull the thread, loosen the knot, and clean the frozen blood in the wound; and treat it until it heals.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It is rare for stones to affect women, and when they do, the treatment is difficult, hindered by three things: one is that the woman may be a virgin; the second is that it is hard to find a woman skilled in this matter, especially one who is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that, by chance, one may not find a woman well-versed in this art of midwifery; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman's womb is more acute than that of a man, for which reason it must be cut deeper, and great fear exists. And if need arises, it is right that you should engage a midwife well-versed in it, and if she cannot be found, then look for one who is somewhat skilled; and present her with a prudent counsel regarding the life of women, or a woman who knows part of this art, and command her to do what you command regarding the inquiry about the stone; and take great care that this woman is chaste. Then she must push down her finger into the base and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she should constrain it from below her finger, and recommend that she pushes her left hand on the distended bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, she must move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder down to the root of the thigh; until it reaches the middle of the thigh where it is mobile, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move the stone above or below the thigh, or make a small cut first. Then press the stone out from the wound as much as possible, and know that there are many types of stones: small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with edges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know these similarities to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the wound does not heal, put crushed vitriol on it and keep it there for an hour until the pain is gone; then return to your work, as long as the stone remains firm, and have the tools I told you for extracting stones from men to assist you in your task; and if the wound does not heal, and it's an artery that's cut, put powder on the spot and press with tenes and bends, and do not repeat this, leave the stone and do not pull it, unless by chance the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat from the blood is calmed and the veins are opened, return to your work as long as the stone remains firm.
de hernie carnouse	Of herniated flesh
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Moisture is nothing other than a gathering of water or white wax, which is removed from the heart of things, that which contains the life; and it is called 'syphac', and never properly part of the life's web, if one thinks it another thing; and this is the skin of the coion between the white syphac we have spoken of; and this does not happen by chance.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this syphac is due to weakness that comes to the joints, and this material expands.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And it never comes from striking against the joints, and this moisture has many colors: it may be yellowish, without red, black, or white liquid, and so on; and these are signs to know this gathering, for if it is the white syphac we spoke of, then the abscess is bright red, long, shaped like a vein, and does not open the joints, as it is surrounded by moisture.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the wound bed, if it is accompanied by redness in a part of the flesh, then one thinks it is another wound; and if the moisture is between the skin of the tissue and the white part, then feel it well; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all the intrusions carefully, from which the form is determined.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, after examining the intrusions, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When treating it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to their strength and the replenishment of their body; then place them on their back, on something slightly elevated, and cover them with many sheets; then have them sit on their left side, and command the attendant to sit on their right, and extend the probe to one of the two ribs near the heart of the tissue; then take the scalpel, and cut the skin of the tissue from above down to the elbow, and make the incision entirely straight by examining the skin of the tissue until it reaches the white part beneath, and carefully remove the flesh without damaging the heart of the rib; then make a large opening in the flesh with water at a suitable distance, and extract all the blood, and then apply your ligatures, and draw the flesh upwards; and do not touch the heart of the rib, but only the flesh; cut it as finely as possible, for if you do not cut it carefully, the blood will return; and if the operation is successful, put it back in its place when you have finished the work on the flesh; then sew together the two parts of the ribs near the heart with a stitch, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the heart corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you hold the vessels that are suspended, in doubt about the flow of blood; then cut off the vein from everything that is suspended, and extract the heart, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the vein is assembled in two parts, knowing that these are two branches; cut off the other part as you did the first, then dry the blood and apply it to the wound with clean moistened wool; and place another layer of moistened wool in wine and oil, and lay the two veins on top of each other, and cover them with doubled cloth, and tie it securely according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two strips of cloth, and use coarse woolen material according to this form, and sew them together at the throat of the pants, one strip covering the hip joint up to the back, and the other on the palm side; also wrap the second piece tightly around the two angles, and assemble all the constraints in the loop of the pants. Never apply this cauterization with a hot iron, but use a delicate surgical knife, cut through the skin of the coions, and heat it as we have said, until the white substance that holds water is exposed; take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that substance at various places, and scrape off with this delicate hot cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the surgeon in all ways that you can, as long as you drain everything; and be sure that fire does not touch the wound; and know that this work is safer; and move cautiously to avoid infection, and treat the wounds of cutting carefully; and if anything contradicts you, whether it's an abscess or a complication from blood or any other thing, cure what contradicts you, as has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this operation because of its horror, then perform a perforation as I have told you, and make sure that when you are certain through the signs that we have mentioned that the pus is present, place the patient in a sitting position; then incise the abscess from below towards the entire spatule (area) widely, and insert the perforation through the flesh lengthwise; make the opening wide enough for all the pus to flow out; then place cotton on it and bind it, allowing the remaining pus to drain, then dress the wound until the wound is healed. If the clean bandage does not allow the pus to come out into the wound's mouth, then it is necessary that you insert a needle or an instrument used to drain water from dropsy, as mentioned before; widen the wound and know that the pus will flow out and collect after six months or so, and when it has collected as before, the patient's condition will improve.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the abscess of the hairs
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	You know that in this chapter there are many different arrangements that cause great pain, which is why I think it is better to leave it alone; and I will tell you about the work and the similar conditions of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I therefore say that many abscesses come with hair, and most often in the hairs; and this is in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is due to the excessive acid and ague that spread through the hairs, or from percussion; and the color of the abscess matches the color of the skin; and it does not cause pain, and it is a severe abscess; and sometimes there are many grayish, piercing, and dark-colored abscesses, and sometimes they come from a new artery or the swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is through lack of an artery, if it is constricted by the hot disposition of an abscess when you press it with your hands; and it is not appropriate that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made from vein inflation is constricted by the disposition of being touched by the fingers, and he can be cut to fit this appearance, and other parts; and it is to open the heart of the matter, then heat will go up, and the pain becomes mild, white, soothing, and releases all parts of the heat.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the heat is already sore with these cuts, it is then appropriate that you release the heat and open it; and if it is in the veins or inside the vessels, it is then necessary to free all of this tension, and open it properly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the base of the hair is behind, it is necessary that you pull it out entirely, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, immediately apply the wound with moist wool in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the bowels
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess surrounded by a similar wrapping like a borion, with the swelling of the bowels, and it makes the patient suffer greatly when it appears; and the cure for this disease is just as important, if not more so, than the one mentioned before, and nevertheless, we will tell you about its work according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You should make the sick person sit on a comfortable bed, then hang the suspenders of the testicles below your hands, to all the vessels near the penis, and stretch them gently; next, use a sharp spatula to cut through the vessels, as long as they are exposed, and scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries in temples. Then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first joint where the vein appeared, and tie it again to the other end; then cut them evenly according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt moisture; then treat the wound as you would any other, so that no vessel seeps and nourishes one of the testicles. For by this there is no harm, and all vessels will be healed, it is necessary to pull the testicles through all vessels, so that the ovary does not lose its nourishment due to incision of the vessels, and dries up and cannot help itself.
de la routure dou syfac	From the rupture of the sinew.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The symptoms of this condition occur either through the rupture itself or from its extension in the abdominal area, causing the intestines to descend from that rupture into one of the hernias; and this rupture is either due to the sinew or to its extension, and these two conditions can arise from various causes: a blow, a jump, straining, or lifting a heavy weight, and similar things; and the signs when it is due to the sinew's extension include gradual occurrence over a long period and not appearing suddenly; and the hernia remains even until the entire area is affected, as the herniated material pushes against the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the incision that a sudden pain arises, and there appear various abscesses under the skin near, and this is due to the discharge of the intestine and flesh from the syphilitic fire.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never drain the abscess with the intestine, as it becomes stuck and causes great pain to the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these poor treatments of iron, for which one must be wary.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of the operation is that you command the patient to move his intestines back into the wound in his hand, if he can; then gently place your fingers on his collarbone between your hands, and press on his buttocks; then stretch the heart above, and cut all the skin from the cojons along. Then insert the blades of a scalpel inside the abdomen as needed to open the wound, so that they can pass through; then be sure that the sharp edge of the blade is exposed; then bring your index finger over the cojon, between the white flesh that lies under the skin of the testicle and the second piece of flesh, and between the second flesh; remove what is behind the testicle, and between the second flesh. And then move to the right hand inside the heart of the cojons, and place the white flesh on top with your left hand, and press on the testicle towards the tailbone. Command the surgeon to stretch the testicle upwards, and loosen what is attached behind the ligament; and be careful if there is no intestine or hard white flesh wrapped around it, and if you find anything, then put it inside the abdomen under the skin. Then take a needle with a thick thread made of 10 threads, and insert it into the back part of the flesh after the skin of the cojons; then cut off what appears of the threads, as long as there are 4 threads remaining; then arrange them one on top of the other in the form of a cross, and bind the flesh, which we have said lies under the skin of the cojons, with a strong ligature from both sides. Then wrap the threads around the testicles, and tie them in two parts so that no vasel can enter inside, and no fistula occurs; then place the first ligature 2 lengths long on each side of this one, and after these two ligatures leave some flesh under the heart of the cojons as wide as a finger; and afterwards do the same with all the rest according to the shape that the testicle takes. Then cut off the skin under the cojons as far as it is loose, and press on it, as we have said before; then apply moist wool to the wound, and put on the ligature we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never should the white part of the wound be cauterized as we have said, after incising, out of fear of bloodletting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, leaving the wound open until it heals itself; and if it takes time to heal, one should apply hot water and do as we have said, until it is completely healed; then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly cured.
de hernie carnouse	herniated cartilage
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this condition, one has never seen anyone who dares to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is made like a root that holds together a joint, in such a way as you bind vessels after cutting them lightly on the inside; then cut through it and treat the abscess of him who opens, until the vessels stop bleeding; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No rupture should occur unexpectedly, as we have said, and open the vessels; and let no intestines drop out; if they do, it is bad, and repair them every hour; nevertheless, if it persists too long at this point, one believes it to be a wound or an abscess, until the intestines drop out; and this happens due to the extension of the abscess at the angles, as we have said, for it becomes stretched, then softens and swells the vessels, and opens them; and its cure is by cautery, as we have previously stated; and never should it be cured in this way with iron. And it is that the patient lies often on his back between your hands, then cut the vessel of the rupture deeply according to the quantity of three fingers; and then extract the abscess that is beneath the skin from the usual habit; then take the knife and place it over the visible part of the abscess; and press it completely into the belly, then cut both the visible parts of the abscess on top of the handle, and pull them; then remove the handle, and do not cover or extend the abscess or anything else, as I have told you in the cure for the vessel of intestines; and then cure it with wound dressing.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you treat the wounds, if they are dirty and you clean the wound, as long as it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The treatment is difficult, and it has no appearance in the fracture, but the cauterization is moved on this side, and it is closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the thick skin of the wounds
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the wounds becomes softened in no one's case, because the humors that are inside are mollified, and it is easy to see; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, to lay the patient on his back and cut the skin that is mollified on the natural skin; then bring together the two edges with a single stitch, or at most three stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches and cure it like other wounds, as long as it is healed, and pull out the thread.
dou chastrement	Medical treatment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You know that castration is banned in our law, and for that reason I would not like to speak of it in this book; nevertheless, it is necessary to discuss it in two ways: first, by explaining its response when someone asks about it and how to perform it; second, because we often need to castrate some animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, cats, and other creatures.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I therefore say that castration is performed in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method where we perform castration by attraction, we should keep the animal in hot water until the testicles become soft and relaxed; then you grasp them with your hand until they are returned to their normal state and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	From castration of the horse: You must tie up the animal and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tighten the suspensory, and cut each one, as you have properly scorched them; and leave no trace of any pain or subtle pain that is on the vessels; and this method of castration is more effective than the one done by attraction, because at attraction, by chance, something from the testicles may remain, causing the horse to desire lust; then treat the wound until it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	A hermaphrodite is according to two manners in men: one is when between the two testicles, the shape of a woman's nature is open, with hair and never shortens the urethra.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another way is in women, and it occurs on the wrist as well as a stick and two joints.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for hunger and thirst is to remove all the blocked passages, and treat it like other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine leaks through the skin of the penis, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the goiter
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Goiter is a blocked passage on the natural part, as it is too ugly to see; no woman can move it as much as a hand, and this is its cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you hold the excess of the tendon in your hand or with pincers, and cut it lightly; do not sever too deeply, so as to avoid complications from blood loss, then apply other remedies until it is healed; and for another matter that appears at the mouth of the wound, and spreads, and perhaps jumps, and resembles a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you cut it, as we said about the tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is the nature of a woman if she is not properly perceived, or the wound is small; it is either by birth or accident due to illness that comes upon her; or it is due to an ill-fitting garment, or a subtle or serious disease, and it occurs in the marriage bed, or on the side, or beneath, or wherever; and it affects conception, childbirth, and perhaps even the flowers (of youth). Knowledge of this comes from observing the signs.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the signs of inflammation are close at hand, either due to your own actions or through natural rights.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle disease and the signs are close to the liver, act quickly: place your two index fingers together, have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread apart; then form the two fingers into a shape as the subtle symptoms subside and the inflammation disappears. Then take wool and moisten it in oil and place it on the affected area, having the woman lie on her side each day so she cannot move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if it feels hard and sensitive, you must then grip it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is from a burn, suspend it at the joint and apply a compress; have remedies to stop blood flow, such as mint, dragon's blood, incense, together with plenty of egg whites; then apply a wide plaster so that the wound cannot close; and thus continue, applying a dry linen poultice; and perform other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a blister appears from a burn, it must be covered according to this manner; if it is an abscess, it should be drained.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that has enlarged in the wound, one must not attempt to treat it with fire.
des emorroides	from hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that, without proper treatment, can become severe. In the previous section, we discussed the signs and symptoms, and here I will outline the treatments for these conditions.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and their complications, when they are fully developed in the rectum and do not cause pain, can only be cured with heat.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	He who is at the mouth of the wound, one can feel, is he whom one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore advisable that you place the woman in a cold house, then apply pliers to grasp her teeth and cut them at the roots; next, sprinkle medicinal powders that stop blood flow, such as licorice and dragon's blood, and similar substances; then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, and immerse her in cold water. As the blood flows, prepare a mixture of sumac, scorch from pomegranates, gall, and similar substances, and then take oats flour, mix it with honey and ash, and make an ointment to apply on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it becomes wet, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If that does not help, apply cups on the back and around the breasts without causing harm; then take lint and soak it in plantain juice or mulberry juice mixed with old wine, and place them over the dislocation.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has subsided, apply the treatment to the wound as long as it remains clean; and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles a rough head, so it should be covered as I have said in the previous text; then treat the wound until it heals.
des apostemes de la marris	from the abscess of the mare
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses occur in the mare, such as chancres, old abscesses, herpes, boils, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, among others, as mentioned in the previous division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I discuss in this treatment the hot abscess that occurs in the mare, which is not truly an abscess but a swelling; and if you wish to know the effect of fire, consider whether the abscesses are aglow at the beginning of their appearance, full of heat and fever, and turn red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hasten to pierce, but let the patient suffer until the pain is eased; then place the ill person in a sitting position and give them two small pillows on which to rest, bending their legs away from the body, and supporting themselves on their back, bringing their feet together as much as possible. Then spread their thighs apart, placing their arms beneath their knees, binding them tightly with a good bandage; then open the patient's mouth towards the right side, and insert the instrument used to open the womb, from which this form arises; and it is important that when you insert this instrument, you first push the tip inside to determine the depth of the womb, so that whatever enters through the instrument does not go further than necessary, causing harm to the patient. If the instrument is too large, cover the depth of the womb with cloth, so that the instrument does not cause discomfort; and it should be placed on top, and the instrument itself tied off.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens and it is made with a gentle hand, if necessary, cover the base of the wound with a spatumile; and when the bowel is empty, put moist tents in rose oil or dry green oil into the wound to the full extent of the ulcer, and place a tent outside the wound over the ulcer and on the surrounding tissue, wet with clean water or cooked mullein and long aristology; then treat it after two days of treatment coming to this, as long as it is healed; and never raise the ulcer and the wound by a cleansing of water and honey, and then of water or cooked lily roots and aristology; then return to treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is healed in the ulcer, it is necessary to be careful not to use fire, but treat it as we have said in the previous section.
de l’enfantement	from birth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Skill is primary in the dance that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see a woman in labor and she desires to smell the air: then hasten for the child to be born; then know that these children are according to the natural figure, and are issued from their heads, and follow them; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly so that the child is born immediately; for when he descends onto her head, she follows him with him, and the mother gives birth to her superfluities through good purification; and this one who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes upon its feet, but strikes the body or the joint, and the hands, or comes up to the stomach, or suddenly turns about on its neck, and assumes other evil shapes; so it is necessary for the doctor to be wise and clever in these matters, and to guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes how aid should be given.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the fever comes upon his head by natural cause, and a woman is giving birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then she should sit on a saddle, or women should hold her; and prepare from oil or fennel seeds cooked, and then bring the bath between her two hands, the small spatula whose shape is as follows:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and split the second bone, and cut into its nail until the moisture that is inside comes out; and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with fennel seed musk with sesame oil; then make her sneeze and blow her nose for a condition, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child comes.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	If both hands are too weak, it is necessary to reset them gently, little by little; and if they still cannot enter, place the woman on a chair and raise her feet up high; then remove the chair from the ground and have the woman lie down, so she does not try to stand up; and if her hands cannot enter, and the child dies within, cut into the womb with a knife that has been previously placed there, and extract the child, and reset them both equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child is born on its feet, it needs to be pushed up; then it is turned little by little until it is even; then press on the feet and extend them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it can jump up to the knees, with the command to press, and make it sneeze from the condition; if it jumps high, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not happen as we have said, turn it little by little according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it becomes slightly easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not work as we have said, take some musk, and oil of roses, and liquid gum, and grind them all in a mortar; then apply this remedy to the woman both inside and outside, leaving it on in warm water down to the ribs; when it has softened, put a collar of myrrh around it and leave it for an hour; then place her on a seat, make her sneeze, press her mouth and nose tightly, and gently press her stomach, as the baby is now ready to be born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the emergence of the child on its knees.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child presents in this manner, he should gently move his hands little by little; then he should rest on his collarbone, and let his feet hang downwards, lying on his side; and gradually move his hands, first pressing them against his stomach, removing the cushions from below, until it is completely open; if the child does not come out, take his feet and mold them, then move his stomach upwards, and finally press your hands; and gently deliver the child little by little; and instruct the woman to strain as long as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the birth of the child who comes with a large hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I know how to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then make the woman get up and walk; if she cannot walk, lay her down on her bed with her legs bent; then apply the muscle relaxant I mentioned; and if she still does not give birth, have her sit on a chair, and study how to bring back the hand; deliver the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command her to press as hard as possible.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the birth of the child on its chest, with its hands spread and its face turned away from its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I want the patient to hold his hand, then tighten it little by little and gently; and when it is even, he should apply a light, muscly compress of herbs and oil, as we have said, then command that it moves little by little; and once you've done this, make him rest it on a hard place, and tell him to press it; and make the patient sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner, for all the rest.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to this manner for all the rest, if the seconding (presumably a type of bandage or treatment) sticks to your finger while evacuating moisture; and if it catches on his face and neck, cut it from the edge so that it is not held, and let the child breathe; then bring the baby back inside, as you have placed him properly, and command the woman to press herself at regular intervals. Then gently pull.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	You know that twins are born many times, and never three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Twins are considered strange, and do not live long, they have no name; I know that they are multiplied, and their deaths are caused by the joy of those who divide them, who are tied to the womb; and they never emerge as naturally as a single child, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born badly, if the cure is as we have said, and they are delicate and quickly and gently do what she does, and thus it is moved to safety.
de plusors enfans	from many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	They are never formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than XV, and they are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measure of his noble wisdom, and it is necessary that the skilled midwife knows all this, for by chance similar things may happen; so do as is proper.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you cure a woman who has lost her child in the womb, as I have said in the previous division, and there is no movement, and you are compelled to use manual force; it is necessary that you know if the woman's health is sound and free from any fear of death; she should be placed on her back, with her legs raised, and her intestines turned inward. The attendant should apply two parts of oil, or she should remain in bed so as not to hinder the descent of the child; then rub the mother's mouth with moist olive oil mixed with althae and fennel seeds and flaxseed, and apply this mixture and the oils to the midwife's hands. Then gently press the uterus, then tie it at a place where the contractions are comfortable for her, and pay attention if the child descends onto her head; if so, fasten or hold it in place with your fingers and place the middle finger between the two thumbs of the left hand, and gently press the whole hand to the desired part until it reaches the empty space. This is the shape of the uterine contraction:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then find another joint, where you need it most, so that the extraction is even; and then stretch it equally in both directions to pull it out, and make sure the joint is sharp for moving, just as this form shows.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains stuck, apply no oil to any of its sides and push it in that direction, then pull the other side; and if nothing comes out, place this joint higher up and do what it takes until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes forward over the other and it cannot return due to tightness, you should wrap it up in a cloth until it comes out completely; then cut at the joint of the finger or at the knuckle, and do the same for the other hand, and have two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the baby's head is large and stuck in the birth canal, and has a sharp, painful crowning, you should insert the spiny spatula between your fingers, and push the head down and extract the water; or use the instrument called 'almidach', with which the form comes out along with the instruments of this chapter, and thus do the same for a baby with a large natural head; then pull the bones out with pincers, and if the head gets stuck, break it in pieces as much as you can; and if it cannot come out, cut it off in chunks until the moisture in the worst canal is removed; and if it swells up in the abdomen or under the ribs, pierce it through until the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the infection is on the feet, it has a light attraction, and the direction towards the opening of the wound is gentle.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is in the belly or the breast, it is necessary to pull it out with the hand wrapped in a cloth; and make an incision on the belly or the breast, as much as the moisture within it allows; and if another member is dislocated and remains stuck, then turn the patient's hand towards the wound, and pull until it reaches the opening of the wound; then use a knife or something similar, and remove it forcefully; and if the opening of the wound has narrowed due to heat from an abscess, one should not work on it, but rather apply moist and greasy things; and apply poultices, using soft water that softens and moistens.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the dislocated joint is on his side, you can set it even, as we have said for a living child; and if it cannot be reset whole, then pull it piece by piece, leaving nothing of the second one.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, apply what we have said about abscesses that occur in the married state; and if bleeding occurs, it should be treated with immediate restraint, and other remedies should be applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose stomach had been cut open, and another was made on that place, and the other wound was healed.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, there comes a swelling in the cheek, it grows until it opens, and begins to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called upon for treatment, and I thought for a long time, but could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong poultice, and a bone came out, after which every few days another one appeared.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed, because this belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought this was a bone from a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound and found a bone in my hand, until the woman was in much better condition; she lay for a long time thus, and then a little bit of warmth left her. I have never heard this chapter mentioned except because, when the masters encounter something strange, they know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the woman back to her place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	After this comes the form of a press, with which books are bound; and at the turn to the other side, the two halves of the binding.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle in their tightening, and made of ebony or box; and the opening of the fust (a term for a type of horn) should be wide, with a margin of a palm length and a half; and between these two parts, there should be an appropriate adjustment of the same fust, which should fit tightly in both directions, about halfway through a palm's length or slightly more; and this adjustment is inserted into the opening of the mare (possibly referring to a female animal from which horns are taken) when the two horns are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling pliers; and it should have two adjustments at each end, as you can see, a palm's length long and two fingers wide; and when you open the mare (possibly referring to a female animal again) with all the instrument, place the woman on her back, legs spread, and open the two adjustments together into the mare, holding the base of the instrument between her thighs; then open your hand over the entire instrument, just as you did with the pliers, according to how much you need to open the mare's mouth, until it reaches its desired position.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	The surgical instruments are all well-equipped and varied in appearance; and when the mirror has made them appear even more distinct, the work is done more swiftly, and with greater skill by the craftsmen due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not disregard the instrument even if you have not yet prepared it, for the need for it is not an excuse for negligence.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine (a tool used during childbirth) is applied, it is important that you instruct the patient to retain her breath, then make her sneeze gently, and hold her hands to her mouth and nose; and if she does so, all is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If it is not possible, take I a pot and make I an opening or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calament, rue, anis, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or steeped in water on the fire; then place one end of the pot or opening over the mouth of the wound, and hold it there until the vapours enter the wound; then make the patient sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the patient experiences a second complication.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if, after this treatment, the patient still feels pain but not severe, instruct them to moisten their left hand with sesame oil or aloe and then apply it to the affected area. They should hold it there until they feel the pain subside; however, they must gently move their hand slightly to the right and left, and then remove it. This will come and go.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, we have said the cure of sneezing and fumigation with herbs; but if it does not respond to these, be careful not to extract it, but he who has a narrow opening in the wound, should tie it to the woman's thigh, then wash it with a four-ingredient ointment; it will heal and come out, but nevertheless, when it opens, a bad smell reaches the stomach and head, and the patient becomes pale.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, it is advisable to use suitable fumigations: none of the ancients have tested fumigation with parsley and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which the woman is cauterized to prevent the flow of blood and swelling, this is it:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is like a glass tube, similar to a candle, and one places the narrow end in nature, and the wide end over the fire; and there are fumes from the coals, and the smoke until it is consumed, and then another is lit.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born whose foundations have not been pierced, but they have a subtle opening: therefore it is necessary for the midwife to pierce this opening with her finger, and not with an acute instrument, and protect the wound so that she does not touch it; then she should cover it with moist cloth in wine and oil, and apply treatment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not return, either insert or remove a plug of cloth, and leave it for several days, and when the child wants to go to sleep, it will be dislocated.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And this sudden stopping of bleeding or an abscess should never be left untreated; if the bleeding stops, it is necessary to apply pressure as we have said for a plug of cloth.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula at its base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that originate from beneath the fundament are called nodations, and they are larger than those that emerge from above the fundament, or in the space between the two parts, if there is a fistula or more; and when this nodation is old, it opens up, and still emits white or subtle discharge, and these fistulas do not heal; and they are known by the presence of drainage or flatulence when the patient evacuates, and sometimes they cause pain.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if they puncture fistulas that reach the bladder, and half of the penis; and they reach the joint of the thigh, and the root of the cow.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus, you recognize the fistula present in the fundament, and it is not present: and it is that you insert your index finger or fundament, and insert a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has curvature, if you insert a thin plunger or a horsehair, as long as you feel the resistance or the hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out with perfusion or vomiting, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; be hasty in curing.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is persistent up to the bladder or up to a ureter, if it leaks urine, and cannot be healed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced up to the joint of the thigh, then the veins nearby become swollen; if there is no curvature or pain around, and it remains in that state, then nothing helps, neither medicine nor dressing; and these persistent fistulas have no cure except through hard work and the futile efforts of those who interfere with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the case where it is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope for healing by cauterization, as I have experienced, and the patient lies on their back between your hands; they extend their legs up to their thighs, and their thighs are bent towards their belly. Then apply a thin strip of iron or, if there is curvature, a round one, as long as you know where the fistula is located.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain in the foundation, it is necessary that you press your index finger onto it, and he will feel that the aching has been pierced; whether it reveals itself as satisfaction or pain between your thumb and forefinger, then know that it is persistent; if you do not work with it, it cannot be cured.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can in any case not be completely cured of these things, but it happens rarely; the aid that is provided consists of applying hot cautery according to the extent of the fistula, as mentioned above, and filling it with hot oil until it reaches the foundation; do this two or three times, until you know that these charred marks have healed, which resemble a bird's feather; then apply moist ointment, and after that, bandage and treat with healing herbs.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is in such a state, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If he cannot be healed in any other way; and if a thread enters and does not pierce all the way to the bone where it is rooted, and there is a thick covering of cloth or something similar between your finger and the thread, and you see a fistula forming after the covering is removed from the heart, then cut through the beginning of the fistula and pull out the thread before the covering, and then cauterize it as it comes to the tip of the thread; and the covering will be freed and healed. Then beware of those false threads that look like a bird's feather, and do not hesitate.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pain goes away, and the wound is closed between you and the injury, cauterize it with fire or a strong medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cautery brings together two good things: that is to say, the burning of these tissues adjusted, and the drawing out of blood and the drying of moisture; then treat the wound with moist ointments or crushed things, until the bones are bent downward, and make the burnt tissues in the bowels go away; then cure the wound with sudden hot compresses and hard bandages, and they are dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healthy and will not come back.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula appears down to the very foundation, and it is distant from the body, if you press on its root or foundation, and ask it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the pulsation, and between it is the thread or the silk or the char, or it is about to pierce through, if there is no other way of hope and rescue, through one of the three methods: cauterize it as we have said, cut it down to the bone, or if you can gently insert something and cure it as before; but be careful not to cut too deep that you don't remove the covering which holds the foundation, and pain will come from the other side unwillingly; then cure it as we have said. Perhaps it will heal, or you shall remove that covered wound and clean it after it has been cut away from the foundation, either with a needle or another instrument pointed; then sterilize the evil-doing thread in the wound as best you can; and try to restore the wound, and hold back the fistula from the part beyond the foundation. This is a lighter matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And never are fistulas made in this way: and it is when you press the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side near the foundation of the skin above, then take a tent that is pierced at the top according to this shape.
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And press the thread twisted in two, and push the tent along the entire thread into the fistula as far as the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is persistent at the edge of the foundation within, then extract the thread from that perforation, so you press your other or second foundation; and hold the top of the thread, and assemble both parts together, and tighten them onto each other, and leave it for one or two days; and do not loosen it, until the threads have healed that are between them, and stopped itching; then treat the wound until it is sealed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If you cannot pierce the fistula, no matter what method you use, it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not appropriate to attempt to treat the patient if the fistula is too deep, and then cure it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form is a sharp, spiky mass from which the fistula is formed, it is very hard and one-sided, and cuts; on the other side, it is not, so that one cannot pierce or attempt to pierce it, as you can see.
des emorroydes	Of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids exist in two ways: either they are inside the anus, resembling grains of resin, with small or large sizes, and oozing blood, or they protrude from the anus and are surrounded by a little or moderate amount of moisture, sometimes containing clear water or blood; they have the color of skin. The treatment for those situated inside the anus is to order the patient to stay in bed until the anus heals completely and the hemorrhoids disappear; if you hurry, using pliers or your fingernail, grasp them at their base, then cut them off. If they cannot be held by the moisture, use a piece of cloth, cotton, or a chamois to extract them, then cut them off and apply some hot powder from cautery; or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cautery, treating other ailments until they heal. If the anus cannot be opened, enema with bitter and sharp solutions should be given to wash out what is inside the anus, so it can be expelled easily. When the patient feels pain and when the thread (of hemorrhoid) protrudes from the anus, the cure is simple; you cut them off using your fingernail or pliers, then treat them as described earlier until they heal, avoiding incisions with a knife.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary, you must administer the stitching in this manner: take twisted thread, and wrap it around a needle, then pull the thread from above and pierce the needle from the other side, and pass both ends of the thread under the needle, and if it is too wide, tighten the forming thread, then tie the thread, and extract the needle, and do thus with all the others, leaving one for draining the excess blood; then place a moist cloth or wax on the base, and put it in place, and instruct the patient to rest; and then leave it until they heal, and when they fall, apply treatments and other remedies until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	The phrase "dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement" translates to "carefully of the parts or
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is a drying up of feces in the intestine, due to constraints of nature, and when the illness is old and no remedy avails.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary that you scrape the skin with a spatula or your fingernail, so it does not become moistened; then treat it as soon as it becomes dry, in the manner appropriate; and if it cannot dry, repeat the scraping more forcefully than before, until it becomes healthy, and is scratched; then treat it as long as it remains healthy.
dou fremit	Douloureusement" is the correct translation
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ants are a small, hairy creature that moves very quickly; and they never cause pain, and you would think them dead from their trembling, and they spread throughout the body, especially in the hands.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a feather from a goose's wing, or a strong feather from a hawk, and place that feather on the trembling until it covers the entire trembling; then turn your hand over the entire feather until you cover all around the trembling, and set it in place, and remove the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see that it is a feather of steel or iron according to this form, and be subtle from below and draw from above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	I do not feel any pain, so that I can hold still, and must press myself. And if you see, cauterize the tremor, as it is in the chapter of cautery or treatment before it.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a douche
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never should one use a enema of silver or lead, or molten iron or brass; nor should these small and large instruments be used according to those who employ them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those, therefore, who are employed in the treatment of children and those who are weak and full of pain, should be small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	He makes a small and wide incision if it is above, binding the abdomen in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and if there is an inflammation or the abdomen is bound, as you see, and the feces are trapped inside, he should have two openings on one side and one on the other. The abdomen can be filled with medicines from a bladder of animal or parchment, with small openings all around, each opening spaced by one finger's width, then thread through these openings a strong thread twisted in an 'X' or along their edges, and gather the abdomen as if it were a goat. When the medicine is inside, tie the bag tightly ahead with a strong thread, then enemaize; this is the shape of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and apply a warm cloth with oil or goose fat or similar, then bind it gently; then the attendants should massage it with both hands together until it is entirely absorbed, then remove the compress, and raise the patient's legs to the wall, and allow the medicine to take effect as best as possible; if they sleep soundly through the night, it is a greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use the clister for a belly cramp, and the medicine quickly takes effect, it returns as soon as it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoid is at the anus or abscess, it should be treated with as delicate a clamp as for a newborn; and this is the shape of the delicate clamp on which the skin is tightened.
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken of the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments of hands and medicine, according to accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the place where the wound is made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are through the use of stone, and sword or knife, or lance or spear or arrow, or similar things; or they are made according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that breaks through the neck, or head, or side, or belly, or liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is due to stone or similar things, and the skin is nevertheless torn and the wound is deep, and you doubt an abscess forming: do this quickly to make the wound healthier from the head itself, especially if there is little blood loss from the wound, and treat it conversely for the affected part; and let the patient avoid wine and rich meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to heal, let his flesh be reduced, and let him not drink wine, nor eat cheese; and apply a poultice of rose oil only, or aromatic wine; and if there is a hot abscess, apply it to the wound while it is still fresh with all its blood, and do not let the air, powder - which I will speak of later - touch it, as long as it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a sword's length or similar in size, and the edges cannot be brought together, then sew them together, as I will describe for wounds of the abdomen, by stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed and deep, but only temporarily affects the skin, then treat it with medicine, replace the bandage with hard leather, and instruct the patient to eat substantial meats, such as tests (liver), cooked wheat, and also poultry, and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find putrefaction in the wound or leather that has not reached the bone and destroys everything, then drain it thoroughly; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein from which blood will not stop flowing, and medicines cannot stem the flow, then tie it with a thread, and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is light: it is that you put this powder which sticks so that the fire moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The method for the powder is as follows: take one part incense, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts of the living coal, mix the powder finely, apply it to the wound, and tighten it until it spreads well and joins with all its blood; then bind it tightly, and do not loosen it unless it swells, for the medicine is not removed as long as it remains healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never should one use only the coal alone, unless one has incense and neither dragon's blood, but that the fire does not move the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has moved the wound, especially if there is no such powder applied; but place some prepared herbs or flour of barley made with water and honey onto it until it boils; then apply other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a bone fracture occurs with the wound and it is small, then extract it with delicate pincers; and I will tell you below about fractures of the skull.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the collar (or neck).
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound appears on the neck and it is simple, with no distinction between it and another from the top, but if there is damage to the nerves of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, then there is no other remedy but to let them heal and put nothing restrictive on them, as that would harm the nerves and cause them to retract; do not apply anything sharp to the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation extends to the brain, which is the highest member. But use medicine according to this method: wash with warm water and mix with rose oil, also wash with warm water other compresses made from various herbs, and moist compresses.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is great, cutting it open wide and binding it, then apply treatment until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and infected, full of pus, pierce them to the bottom or even deeper; and if an artery is cut, and blood flows, leaving it untreated can lead to further complications such as gangrene, so cauterize it properly; and if there's a pinched nerve in the throat or heart, do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural position; then tightly bind it and leave it for no more than a day, applying treatments without delay until it heals; and if the wound has pressed against the bone, break any bones that are stuck together, those that cannot be broken leave as they are, allowing the wound to fester and become lighter and easier to heal; and for fresh wounds, apply the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones and a fistula in the wound, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and deep, then consider the disposition of the wound as the patient alone can: knowing thus that the wound is mortal; but if it is not too deep, and still full of blood, do not apply powder in the first hour, nor bind the wound tightly so that the blood does not coagulate and return to the body, and aggravate the patient; but apply a drawing ointment, and change the bandage twice a day; and if you have no ointment, place old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient lie on the wound for three or four days, or even longer; if there is no spasming, nor trembling of the body, no extreme pain, then know that the wound is healing.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Cure the wounds with various remedies and others, as long as they are healthy; and if they cannot heal, know that there is a fistula; then treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is shallow or deep on the front, back, or side, treat it accordingly; if it's large, sew it up; and if it's small, use powder; and if it has penetrated into the bone, and there are pieces of bone protruding, dig out the foreign bodies if they are visible; and if they are not visible, let the wound heal on its own, and make the extraction easier. And for other wounds in other parts of the body, judge them as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	disruption of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The disruption of the belly is great and medium and small; from a large wound there will never be any leaking of the intestines or the nerve of the intestines, which causes external insertion; and stitching is more difficult, and never worth less than a small wound than a large one, because we do not apply as much skill to the intestines when they are smaller, so they do not stay in place as well, and for this reason it is better to move a small wound, because we must first bring the intestines back into their proper position. And know that the rupture of the belly occurs in four ways: common stitches occur in the stitching of the belly, and the stitching of other wounds on the body, and other specific stitches are common to other wounds; however, they are more suitable for the stitching of the belly, and I will explain each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and nothing internal is affected, and it is a difficult thing to heal, then it is through one of two methods: either because of the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to the injury.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a thin cloth with hot water only slightly, or cook in water with squinant (a type of herb), cipre (another herb), and spique (possibly a spice), and straighten the intestines as soon as the swelling is gone; and never use wine to constrict it, but rather let it be until it is completely unswollen.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, if the intestine is filled with water or any other liquid, and the veins are closed, for this lightens the entry of a little thing; and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to move that which cuts, so we do not cut without great need; and this is the instrument to split: it cuts into the vein and does not divert, and see how it looks.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound has enlarged and the intestine is protruding, if you can return it to its natural position in its proper place, do so if you have the ability, for it is beneficial.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it's in the lower part of the belly, you should make the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it's in the lower part of the belly, place the head and buttocks higher than the lower parts, and also ensure that the tear in the belly is in one of the two halves so that the injured part is higher than the other; thus, it is necessary to apply what I say to both large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, you should prepare what is necessary, then take in your hands a clean and soft material to cover the entire wound, and gather the edges together; this is the common method of stitching. You insert one or more needles according to the width of the wound, leaving two spaces at the beginning of the wound, and sew with a strong thread; then pierce both layers of skin with the needle from inside, gathering the edges together, and assemble the two ends of the needle three times. Then take another thread and double it around the needle from both sides, then gather the edges of the wound properly, leaving two spaces, and insert another needle; fasten the thread like you did with the first needle, and continue to do so until the entire wound is secured. The needles should be medium in thickness, neither too fine nor too thick, as fine needles can pierce through the flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter deeply enough. Therefore, they should be medium. Do not pull the needles too far from the flesh and skin, or they will open up the wound before it heals; then cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient during sleep, and place bandages or cloth over the wounds to hold them in place until the wound is healed. This stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because a single needle or two is enough for the second stitch, and you gather together both layers of skin and the two edges of the cut with a needle that has a strong but medium thread; and when you have pierced these all four times together, return the needle to where you began, in the manner one sews clothes. Leave spaces between each stitch about as wide as a finger; this stitching is useful for men, and I once sewed up a wound on a man's belly that had been cut with a knife, and it was over an inch wide, and went deep into his intestines, and the wound was in the middle of his belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine to its proper place after it had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed completely within fifteen days, and he was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they marveled that he did not die, and this was a miracle; I did not cure him with any treatment, for I was in a place where nothing was found, neither any medicine; and I put clean cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey-water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle, and thread it from the outer part to the inner part; when it has pierced through both entirely, bring the end out at the top where you began stitching, and make it pierce from the inside to the outside again; and the listening to this stitch is that you sew as a tanner does leather, leaving the thread on one side and taking it up on the other until the stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second way of stitching, which Galen properly calls, is like nothing so much as when two parts are joined together in a natural manner, and one of the ends is applied to the other with great care: insert a needle or a point near by, and pierce only through the outer layer, leaving the inner parts intact; then turn the needle and pierce from the opposite side towards the inside, passing between the two parts; then pierce each one from the opposite side towards the inside, in another pair of parts where the points are on either side; and this is the most effective way of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen refers to this method, and no one testifies to it more effectively than the fact that the stomach must be sewn with two needles, each having thread; one needle should be passed from one side, and the other from the opposite, in a manner similar to those who sew up wounds; and know that when the rupture is within the stomach, the stitching will be more difficult than for other internal wounds.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is the same as for other wounds: and it is that when you pierce the fresh wound to all its blood, and the flesh moves, then reapply the bandage and the dressing; then sprinkle the healing powder over it; and if the flesh moves again, apply any present remedy until the wound bows; and let the thread tighten, and seal with balm and mirra; then treat the wound as for other wounds, until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, apply at once, as soon as it begins to bow, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you need no other medicine in addition for simple wounds; and if you doubt that the wound does not affect any principal members, it is enough to moisten light linen with warm seasonal oil, or rose oil, and place it around the wound, and under the armpits; and if it feels pain or putridity in waves, and this often happens, then give it enemas of red wine, especially if the putridity reaches the intestines. Puncture inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestinal organ called "young" cannot heal when it is irritated, and this is due to the condition of the veins, and the subtlety of the entire body, and the nearness of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	If the fat (or tissue) jumps out of the wound, reset it back as with the intestine, while it is still fresh; and if it has become old and turned white or black, you must hold the black part still, as there are veins and arteries within; then cut away the tissue between the ligaments, and hang the two parts from the opposite side of the wound until the fat (or tissue) falls out, thereby facilitating its removal.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the bowels
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is ruptured and the wound is small, it cannot be restored in any man, as I have seen one nobleman's navel or abdomen pierced by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, it became inflamed and fistulated, and there issued forth excretion and flatulence; I applied remedies according to my ability, and did not cease to try different things until he was healed and his strength returned.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him heal, I doubted that the patient would not suffer pain in his belly; but he felt no pain, only improving in condition and appetite; and none of the experienced physicians said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated in this manner: take a large reed, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the reed has opened the mouth, place it between the two lips so that it draws them together; then cut off the head of the reed, and this will hold so that he cannot open his mouth; then put another reed in the same way as before, until the wound is entirely closed; and then dress the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	This chief is sharp within the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient, and it is possible to sew up the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in this way: take the tip of this intestinal thread that is very stripped, and then tie it to the tip of this thin linen thread twisted, then wind the thread into the needle, and sew up the intestine, and rearrange it at the rupture; and this method of stitching is not stronger than according to reason and hope; and if the wound is large and deep, especially when it is in one of the major intestines, no one can heal it except with great subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	whether it is a fistula or wherever it is located.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Every wound or abscess, when it opens, is generally called a "fistula", especially when it is filled with pus and has an opening.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	A fistula, according to the true nature, is hard and white, without pain, just like the quill of a bird; it does not clear easily, sometimes being thin and other times thick; sometimes soft, and other times firm; and it can be due to one of the nine causes: the thickness or hardness of pus or scabs; its malignancy; the presence of hard matter inside and on the lips that prevents the formation of moisture; excessive bowing; corrupted or bad-quality flesh; improper medication; the corruptive nature of pestilence; tardy digestion due to regional properties, leading to delayed healing and flatulence; or the presence of veins or bones. I have already discussed all these causes, their symptoms, and the appropriate medications in the previous division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I make you know the treatment of the fistula which is performed by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	You know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that affect major veins, arteries, nerves, or organs such as the bladder, intestines, or kidneys, or any of the ribs, or the spine in the back, or any joint in the hands or feet, and if they affect the vital organ of a limb or similar structures.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All types of fistulas in this manner are difficult to heal and require hard work and knowledge; therefore, if there is a fistula that does not come to the surface as I have described, and you believe in the cure, and you understand it, take a thin blade of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight cut it as desired; but if it is curved, seek a very delicate plucking tool because the pressure from the plucking should follow the curvature; and if the fistula has an opening for the fingers and you cannot reach it properly with plasters, wash it out through one of the openings; for moisture travels quickly from one opening to another and cleanses it. Then cure it as I have told you, and dig out all foreign matter and corrupt flesh, cutting it as deep as desired. When you are certain of the depth and location—whether it is near a joint, nerve, artery, or vein, or any of the places I mentioned—cut it completely through, and wash it with hot medicated water, placing moist bandages over it until the medicine corrodes away all excess matter at the bottom. Then cover it with fresh, healthy bandages, and if it still does not heal, cauterize it as we have said; if the bone is damaged by the fistula, cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve does not affect the principal members, as we have said, and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, treat it with the king's power until the corruption is completely removed; then take care of the ensuing conditions as well as possible while it is still sound. And if it remains unsound and bows back as before, know that you are not yet safe: expose it and leave it until you reach the bottom, remove all the corruption, then restore it to its place; and if it becomes healthy in this way, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If the corruption is too deep and you cannot do anything about it; if there is no other remedy but to let nature take its course; and if there is a small bone corrupted, which can be extracted with tweezers suitable for this purpose, extract all of them without leaving even one; and if moisture makes things worse and there is no doubt or fear, dry and warm it, and relieve the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in one hour, apply something putrid to the wound, and let it fester until the pus has formed around the bones; then they will become easier for the bones. And if it is a large bone, like that of the leg or thigh, scrape away the pus until the blackness is completely gone, then treat the wound; and if there is a great deal of corruption extending almost to the bone, you must cover and protect it all up to the point of corruption, and then heal it as quickly as possible. And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take an example from it and use it in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man around thirty years old who had a pain in his leg due to something that came from inside the body, causing matter to accumulate in the leg, and he had a large abscess that would not open; but because of their foolishness, they worked so much on the abscess that it opened, and many corrupt materials came out, becoming a fistula, and there were many ruptures through which all bowels and moisture from the body leaked out. And for two years, many doctors treated him, but none had knowledge in this art, until I was called to see him, and I examined his leg and the medicines used to cure it, and what was corrupt through the ruptures causing great damage to the body; and the young man's skin became red, with a citrine-like color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these openings, and then I searched all the openings, and found that some came against each other from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	Then I quickly acted, and cut into one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, which was rotten and pierced, and the corruption went as deep as the bone; I knew what appeared to be the rotten bone, and thought there could be no other corruption except that which I had left; and I began to treat the wound with medicines for a long time, but they could not heal it. Then I re-examined it and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, so I treated it and then set it, and bent it back into place; but I could not do this until I had removed a palm-width of the bone, and straightened it to its original state, after which I applied more medicines. It became healthy and healed steadily, and did not want to relapse again except for the weakness due to the patient's condition, who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because often there is the evacuation of blood, but it was completely healed, and a hard scar was left in its place on the bone, and it had a good disposition and caused no harm or damage at all, neither to flight nor to movement.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: take a rope, and stretch it across the opening of the bone, and command anyone not to move it upwards; and tie another stronger linen rope over the first one, and fasten it to the scar that is now away from the bone, pulling the scar until it is completely detached, exposing the bone where you saw it was broken. And place a piece of charcoal or a table under the bone to protect the exposed part; and it should be treated as much as can be seen and felt to be corrupt, and in this way again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if a bone is corrupted and will not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then expose the entire limb; then apply heat from beneath, and then move the corruption from one part to another until it comes out, as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, cut off the corrupt joint and take hold of the bone on either side; and if the corruption is in the connection of two joints, there is no other instrument than to cut off. And if the corruption is in the wrist or ankle, this is a very difficult matter, but you must inquire into that corruption how it opens; and cleanse it in every way you can, as long as the vein or nerve do not resist; and know that there are many instruments for cutting bones, according to their position and appearance, and their size and thinness, and their length and shortness, and their hardness; and therefore, each task requires a tool suitable to its appearance; and know that the work will show you the instrument you need, according to your knowledge of this art and the signs of the illness. Choose the instrument you need according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	Of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The joint dislocates internally or externally; and when you have treated the inflammation with medicine but it does not benefit, it is necessary to cover that limb until the inflammation goes away, so that the patient escapes from death or from the evil, which is greater, of the defect in the limb; and the sign of this is that the limb turns black, as if burned by fire, and then the inflammation spreads throughout the body; therefore hurry to cover it, and if it is caused by the bite of some venomous beasts, such as scorpions, snakes, and similar ones, if the inflammation is at the top of both limbs, treat it immediately and do not give it time to come to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches the hand, cut off the bone at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, cut through the bone; and if it passes through the bone, it is death, and there is no cure outside of its quantity of virtue; and thus do the same when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it affects the first joint, cut after the other joint; and if it comes to the foot, cut through the entire foot; and if it rises in the leg, cut at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die; and the manner of cutting or binding the member is that you tie it above and below, and stretch one assistant with each cord, and you sever the tissue between the two cords with a wide spatula, until the bone is exposed; then cut or bind it, and place a linen drape on each side so that the linen does not touch the healthy part, and bring about further injury and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if the flow of blood occurs when you open it, cauterize the wound carefully or apply certain powders to restrain it; then return to your medicine until it is completed, bind the injured member with a suitable ligature, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to this man in all respect: he had a blackening that seemed like a burn from fire, and that ulceration came first on his right big toe, until it discolored the entire toe; and when he saw the ulceration, he covered his foot, and it was healed. And a long time later, the ulceration returned on his left hand, and he came to me, and I placed him on repulsive things after purification of the body, and the ulcerations would not stop; and he begged me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to do that, for I had hope of overcoming the material. And I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, because the strength of the man was weak; and he became completely desperate, returned to his land, covered his hand, and it was healed; and I have heard no other report but this one, if one does otherwise, when necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No abscess forms in a fatty tissue, and it lingers so long that it causes great bowing of the limb; then it rots and pierces through, causing the bone to move as if a vessel, and the flesh around it becomes weak, just like a delicate cloth, and does not extend to the bone or nerve, and this disease is called "sain" (ulcer), and not "fistule" (abscess); but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone completely, it is called a "fistule". The flesh around it should be cut away entirely, especially when it is delicate, like a cloth. And its corruption should not be left unnoticed.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you believe the skin is infected and the corruption is not completely healed, and the skin is dry and brittle, then cure it with a cleanse: check if the breast is swollen and emits a foul odor, then cleanse it with Egyptian medicine made as follows: take equal parts of salt, oil, lithargyrum (alkali), and place them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey. Then, according to need, mix it with water and honey, and apply it to the breast, constricting the opening; leave it for two hours, then drain it while squeezing; repeat this several times until the breast is cleansed and the infection healed; do not cleanse with water from ashes if this medicine is not available, but instead crush ashes of vine bark and pour water over them, then strain it and use it to cleanse, as long as you know the breast is clean. And if the patient cannot tolerate either the Egyptian medicine or the water from ashes, cleanse him with a mixture of water and honey containing a little lithargyrum; or use honey and mead, allowing the honey to purify and wash, and the wine to aerate the flesh; when you have done this and believe the breast is clean, cleanse it with a substance that produces heat in the body, and make an application of rosin mixed with wine; or use certain other medicines and ointments whose properties have been discussed in the section on ointments. If the opening in the breast is very small, and the catheter cannot enter, widen it slightly with a hot iron, and apply a thin layer of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened. And if the wound is too large for the catheter to enter, and the pus is discharging from below, then make the opening higher or lower than where the catheter enters.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowel is in perfect condition, it does not allow itself to be dilated; and if you cannot cover the opening of the anus as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bowel moves to the lowest level possible, for when the bowel is perfectly aligned, it does not allow itself to be dilated, and if you cannot cover the opening of the anus as you see fit, arrange it so that the bowel gently flows downward, leaving no residue from the bowels; and take consolidative medicines to place over the wound, and wrap it with a linen cloth that covers the entire area; then press as hard as possible in the direction of the aperture of the anus, making it wider than before; apply a soothing dressing over another piece of cloth according to the size of the aperture, and place it over the aperture of the anus to lighten the load from the bowels, and do not remove the large cloth outside until after many days. And whoever is over the aperture of the anus often removes it to release the bowel, and you must know what flows from the bowel, whether it be poison or a little or enough or digested or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or no, and when your medicine has taken effect in such a way and you see the nature of what grows on the aperture of the anus, then know that the bowels have opened, and bring back health; and then unbind it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change to another cloth and renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast becomes bowed and distended after many days, knowing that it will not open.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons appear after a long time, do not despair of health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are people to whom tardy purifications of wounds are beneficial, and others for whom the opposite is true; and if the breast becomes bowed and distended after many days, knowing that it will not open; and if the breast refuses to open, and remains distant, then apply medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as a final ointment, because there is much vitriol, which is the last medicine; take the final ointment and mix it with rose oil, and add equal parts of old wine; then conserve it and use it; and do the same with honey thickened with cooked grain, when final ointments are not available; you can also use myrrh, aloe, and incense, crush them and make a powder over the honey once it has been removed from the fire; then spread it on a cloth and place it over the breast; do not administer any alogues or roots of celestial lily, which is like flour of times and centaurium; use simples or composites; grind them, make a powder, and mix with the honey I have mentioned, and apply. And if the cure prolongs, and this cure does not help, then know that corruption has reached its peak, creating pressure in the bones, or in hard members, or in the ligaments; just as we said before about the treatment of fistulas.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	A nail abscess is a infection that forms under the nail of the hand, or foot, or occasionally in other digits; and when it becomes old and care is not taken, it can lead to a deep abscess, causing pain and discharge until the root of the nail is destroyed, or even the entire nail. It leads to corrosion reaching the bone, producing a putrid odor, and the skin around the digit becomes swollen and red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	If, as we have mentioned in the previous section, you treat it and the treatment is ineffective, then you should remove all debris stuck under the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound; and if the nail catches fire among other things, and begins to burn, then you must place the right tool under the burning nail, turn it upwards, and gently cut off the charred part, and apply hot and corrosive medicines to remove all of it; then treat the wound with ointments until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	If the corruption is in the bone, cut it away and pull it out, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see both bones corrupted, remove them as mentioned above, then treat it until it heals; and if it is burnt and blistered, and causes great pain, first treat the wound; then cut the nail with a sharp spatumile at an angle across from the charred part below the nail, and be careful that the cutting does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, as the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, apply something soothing.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain from the deep wound causes the hand to ache.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The adjustment that is born in the hands of no one by chance is entirely fleshy, and by chance it has a joint or bone, and never does a fingernail grow, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, where birth is not in any way desired.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	The one that is born in no way in the joint does not move, and the one that is born at the joint of the joint, by chance it moves; the size of the one that is fleshy is very light, in this way: cut it from its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the jointure is difficult to cure: if you keep it covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	As for those who are born or have an injury elsewhere, it is necessary that you first cover the wound thoroughly up to the bone, then cover the bone with a suitable cloth, and then treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The deformities that come at any age come either from birth, or from the healing of a wound, or from burns by fire, or similar causes.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you need to secure this joint, so that it must be repaired according to their natural forms; then place between two damp or oiled cloths, so that they do not stick together; or between two pieces of fine cloth, as long as the limbs are joined, as appropriate.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If dislocation occurs on any of its fingers with the palm, then secure this joint as appropriate.
des vils	Des vils" translates to "of the
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Their veins are thickly wrapped, full of melancholic excess, which comes to many members of the body; and more so in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary for you to administer purgative neither at once nor immediately after food, but afterward.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of fire is according to two manners: one is with the use of cups and drawing out the black blood; and the other manner is that you open the vein and draw it completely out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The incision is made according to this manner: first, raise the affected leg with hot water, until the flesh becomes tender, then stretch the leg of the patient downwards from the knee to the ankle; next, cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a broad knife, then squeeze and draw out the black blood in your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the sick person can endure; and then bind it, and command him to keep himself warm with flesh that turns black; and repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, and harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Lift the affected leg and if there are many hairs, immerse it in a bath, then raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you have no bath, heat it over a fire, then press the long part of the vein from the top of the knee to the ankle; then open the skin at the point where it touches the vein, until you can feel it; and it appears red and black, and when it enters under the skin, it looks like a white cord. Then turn the leg outward until it is raised from the skin, then press it gently at the next hook, then continue to press in this way every two hooks, then open the skin over the vein as before, then raise the leg, just as you did previously, and press it at another hook; then repeat this process if needed, then raise it and apply a soft cloth dipped in wine and rose oil to the wound until it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if you see that it is contracted and twisted and rolled up together, and it is not straight at all, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cover it; treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The way to do it is to bend the eye gently so that it does not cut, only when it reaches the vein; it must be done with great care, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but since it is thick, as we have said, this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the main vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is located in the legs, in warm regions where no herbs or trees grow, and on land where there is no moisture; and sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, which happens due to putrefaction that arises from beneath the skin, just as it comes from within the body winding and twisting.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein appear, it is characterized by a severe inflammation in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to emerge forcefully, just like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein opens, it is necessary to wrap around a piece of cloth from one and a half to two fingers thick, leaving the cloth on the leg, and whenever there is no exit at the surface, you must re-wrap it around the cloth, and do not cover its root until it is completely emerged; for if you cut it, it will return to the flesh, causing an abscess, putrefaction, or other illness. For this reason, it should be treated little by little, and nothing should remain in the body; and sometimes this vein appears when it has been cut from five to ten fingers in length, and after cutting it, a plug or hole remains, and you pierce it all the way through, so that everything comes out; and the substance inside is drained, and medicines are immediately administered to the vein to prevent putrefaction for as long as needed, then treat the abscess as usual.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never again touch this vein, especially when it opens in the joint of the foot or leg, and there is much bleeding; treat it then as we have said above.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers that are born between leather and bone
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "bull disease" in our land because it often affects bulls, and it is a small worm that is born between leather and bone. It spreads throughout the body, moving from one member to another, causing great pain as it eats through the skin until it reaches muscle or other tissues, and then it moves deeper into the body. It is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, just like worms, snakes, lice, and roundworms in the stomach; and its malice is uncertain, for when it spreads throughout the body, it ascends to the head, and sometimes reaches the eye, where it may enter and destroy it. This happens frequently.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it healing and draining, it cannot be done except when the pus is gone: therefore, it is necessary that you lie the limb above and below with a strong, tight bandage, then cut and drain it thoroughly; if the pus is still present in the wound, cauterize it with fire until it heals; and the greater damage it causes, the more oil it will leak, as we have said; and if you see the swelling coming near the oil, tighten the bandage below the sore eye, then cut and drain it; and it is important for the patient to use purification of the body with solvent medicines to remove harmful humors, and bathe in warm water to prevent putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From the pain that comes from flatulence.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in no particular member, but can move from one member to another; and I have seen this as I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the breast; and after that, I noticed it rising up towards her shoulder, as alive as a piece of silver when it is cut from one place to another; the pain left that area and went to the shoulder, and then, shortly afterwards, spread throughout her body, reaching the other breast; then she told me that she felt it moving around inside her body, as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marvelled much at how it moved from one limb to another, for I had never seen this disease in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had noticed that many people experience great pain when moving from one limb to another, but I hadn't understood why, as I observed in women; and I thought it was because women have dry skin, exposed veins, and this constraint appears; and I didn't see the same reason for those who are healthy, with moist skin and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see this disease heal, and the patient feels that pain as we have said, if it appears again from above and below, press firmly until that constrained windiness in the limb is gone; then cauterize the limb; and if you cannot do so yourself, cure it with those who know how to remove windiness, like foul pills, serpentary pills, and others similar.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows vary, according to their appearance and the parts of the body from which they originate.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Their diversity lies in that they have varying tips—some are large, some small, some serrated, and others smooth; and there are those with curved angles, elongated ones, and those with barbs. They can pierce different parts of the body in two ways: into vital members like the head, body, liver, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it comes out in any part of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears: it is necessary that you fight for the extraction of this arrow, because death comes later with various dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear, and the arrow is not fully extracted, pull it out, and heal the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the signs of the brain when the arrow comes out and pierces the bone, and if there is swelling on top of the brain, it appears dark and sore and twisted and red alone, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of speech, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is no discharge from the nose or ears; and possibly he loses his ability to speak and sing; and there is also a white moist discharge from the wound resembling pus, and it smells bad like rotting meat; and if these signs appear, since you are in charge of treatment, remove the arrow even if it is not completely embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of a shot when it leaves the body or heart is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were stuck in hard matter, not empty; and sometimes the arrow remains silent like the pulse, there appears black blood, coldness, cold sweat, fainting; therefore, know without doubt that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that never affects the liver is that no foam appears from the wound, the throat swells, the patient's skin changes color, he breathes heavily and loses strength.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow breaks in the deepest layer of flesh, it damages the small bones; it causes great pain and makes the patient gasp for breath, and all the muscles around the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow pierces through the stomach, perhaps something from the undigested meat might fall out.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow pierces through the belly, and there is no healthy passage through the intestines, then there is little hope for treatment or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow pierces the bladder, the urine flows out with force and the patient feels severe pain; know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, as they feel and their pain and pressure in the throat, shoulder, joints, back, knees, feet, and legs, and appear similarly, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you, because you do so.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	There was once a man at my home with an arrow that had pierced his cheek or ear lobe: I attempted to remove it, and pulled from the other side beneath the ear's fat, and he was healed without pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And once, in play, an arrow pierced the fat beneath the skin, but the shaft remained below the paper-like skin, and the arrow was completely extracted, leaving only its tip towards the bone, and it was a large arrow with a turquoise bow, without causing any harm to the ear; the wound healed, and no ill accidents came of it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And take an arrow from the throat of a Christian, which was an arrow with ears [a peculiar description for an arrowhead]; I cut off the barbs, and drew it out as much as I could, and healed the Christian.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I pulled out an arrow that was stuck in a man's body, which had pierced his gut, and thought he would die; but after thirty days, he showed no change in condition; so I cut the arrow at its base, wrapped it, and drew it out, without any bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man with an arrow stuck in his back or chest, and the wound is deep; and the arrow remains inside him, and he shows no change in his natural condition, and finds no harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And look at another man, to whom an arrow fell into his face and the wound became deep; he remained thus without suffering great pain; and many others similar.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I extracted an arrow from the body of a prince, the king, which had become lodged in his neck and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded, and I was called for treatment after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I gently probed it, and I felt nothing; however, there was a sensation of pressure and pain behind his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow I placed a soothing plaster on the shoulder because the muscles were not tense; and I noticed the arrowhead.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the plaster firmly and then dressed the wound, allowing the patient to rest for a long time, until they no longer felt the arrow inside their body; and it came out on its own.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a strong corrosive medicine to the wound for a long time until it opened up, and I tested it, feeling the tip of the arrow still embedded in the flesh; then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that same medicine until the head of the arrow became visible; and after four months, the wound had healed so much that I used pliers to pull out the remaining parts, moving them from side to side, but I couldn't remove it; then I continued to try subtle and clever devices until, in the final section of this chapter, I describe how I finally removed it by pulling and cleaning the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And they believe most highly that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I nevertheless restored it, and the wound healed, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have also told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you pay attention to what I say, as books cannot contain everything; but wise masters compare well very small and present things, true new works, and new instruments, for the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come out of members except in two ways: either through the vein where they enter, or from another part; and when they exit from one side, it is because they have entered into their flesh, and they will never come out again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out now, let it stay until the swelling around it subsides, and make the opening larger; and if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days, and move it each day, and then it will come out, piercing through all the tissue inside as the swelling around the joint is enlarged.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in a bone at its base and reaches up to one of the cavities in the brain, and none of the remedies I mentioned help the patient: do not pull it out, but let it stay until the swelling subsides each day, for if the arrow reaches too far, death will follow.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not embedded in the bone alone, and does not heal sufficiently, and does not leave the patient without a bad outcome for several days with skill to draw it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot come out, then administer heat around it, as I have told you; then heal the joint while it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is returned into the flesh of the body so that it cannot be seen, even after trying everything; and if you feel it, then use any suitable instrument; and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound or the depth of the arrow, or there are no bones, muscles, or nerves nearby, then leave it until the wound is severe; and pull the arrow if you can, and if it has roots by which it holds onto something, then cut out the portion that is embedded in the body from both sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the arrowheads until you are able to pull it out.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the swelling around it subsides, then treat it, for extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If the signs of blood poisoning appear to you, apply what we have said in that chapter about treatment; and be careful with incision near nerves and veins, and use every device you can to extract the arrow safely, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the position it was in when the arrow entered, for this is the greatest aid, and if you cannot, put him in a position that the symptoms indicate.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another direction, where it opens something within, causing the skin to swell in that place as one can see or feel: then cut there, until the pincers can grasp it, and then pull it out: if it jumps out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters the bone, widening it, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then try to extract it again until it comes out; and if there is still an arrowhead in the wound, let it stay, and then use a tool with a sharp point, so that the arrowhead enters the opening of the tool; then pull it out, and if the arrow is removed from the wound, use the tool to push the opening inward, easing the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if an arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you remove all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow has pierced the body, whether in the belly, bladder, or side, and it is accessible, and you can remove it, then do so; beware of damaging the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and subsequently dress the wound, as required, and treat it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The instrument used to extract arrows resembles a bird's beak, and here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways to do this: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape pointing downward is like the quill of a bird, to drive the tip of the arrow, as follows:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of pincers for driving and gripping, as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are 31 veins from which one can draw blood, of which there are 16 main ones: two that run behind the ears, called "dubbed herbs"; and the two arteries visible in the temples; and the two veins in each arm, called "aspirations"; and the vein running across the forehead; and the vein at the crown of the head, near the eyes; and the two glands on the collarbone; and the two veins located above the lips, which are called "augerich"; and two veins below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The common veins from which one draws blood are five in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, located on the inner side of the left arm, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fast", composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and the common people call it "vein of the body"; and the basilic is on the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", located above the fascia, and it is the one from which they draw blood that clearly opens up on the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the cure is the vein that lies between the little finger and the ring finger, and if it rains; and in the leg there are three veins: one below the ribcage on the left side, and the second is at the ankle on the right side; and the third vein, called 'nasse', is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg, there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The cleansing of the veins behind the ears aids in the treatment of old catarrh and migraine; and the quality of the healer, as I have said, is that you raise the patient's head and rub the affected area with a rough cloth; then tie the patient's collar tightly around their neck until the two veins behind the ears are visibly dilated depending from the head. Hold them thus, and where you feel pulsation below your right hand, take care; then take the lance, and insert it beneath the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein upstream, and cut and the skin and flesh and vein well in two, straight through, and draw out the blood until you see; then tie and dress it, while it is still healthy; and I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	He heals the two arteries that are in the temples, as if they were an old and severe migraine, and a sore, accustomed to weeping, and at the source of the hot tears; and the quality of the healer is such as I say: and it is that the patient pulls his neck, until the two vessels open wide; and he feels the pulse beneath the index of his right hand, and then signs with the needle below; then gently presses the heart on top of the artery on his right side, and draws the needle below, and gently opens the vein at the top, and the clot, as you did for the other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need; then release the patient, and place your right hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton; and then form a bandage and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their healing and extraction, as mentioned at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The surgeon of the vein on the forehead is as valuable as the surgeon of the skull for facial diseases old and new, and for migraine and redness; and its quality is such that the patient pulls his neck by twisting, until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "denter," which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, allowing the blood to flow out according to the amount you see; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein as long as it remains healthy, never opening a wide wound.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, one must not let the flames be too intense; and do not burn from across, for the bone is close, and by chance may break the flame when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The health of the two veins located in the arms is beneficial for many things: it helps with itching, redness, swelling, and facial diseases; and its quality is such that the patient's skin remains taut without any distortion, as before. Then, the treatment should be such that the flame is neither too thin nor too thick, for there is no middle ground.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, they may break; then draw out the blood, as much as needed, and then bind it with cloth, and tie it securely.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The health of the vein near the nose is valuable for colds, sudden fever, and facial ailments such as migraines and redness that appear on the face, especially when it is old. The quality of the health is such that the patient tightens their jaw, strains their nostril with their left hand, and inserts the subtle flame longwise between the two nostrils, since the vein does not open well enough, and the blood will begin to flow. Do not dig too deep, and draw out blood as needed, then bind it for a night, for it is quickly restored; this is the form of the flame.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The holy water of the two eyes is helpful for narrowing the eyelid, and at the beginning of inflammation, and for many diseases, and ulceration, and corrosion, and herpes, and swellings; and the quality of the water is such that the patient pulls his eyelid from both sides, as we have said; and the master should be on top of the head of the ill person, and the sick person sits in a certain place, then clean the vein with long-drawn blood slightly, then treat with warm blood as necessary; then repeat the same thing in the other vein, then loosen the bandage, and tighten the veins moderately so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, until the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the cleansing of the veins
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The cleansing of the veins above the lips helps to heal the mouth, and the corruption of gums, and cracks in the lips, and pain and swelling around it.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the cleansing involves having the patient sit before you, restricting their collar as I have said; then turn the lip and examine the veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, which can be recognized by their black color and small surrounding veins: therefore cut both, and if you do not know them or are in doubt, cut the thicker ones from each side, and do the same with the two veins above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	From the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The health of the veins beneath the tongue is of great importance after treating the health of the head, and it applies to the constriction of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the healing is such that the patient should bite between their fingers in the light of the sun, soften the tongue, and examine beneath each side for a dark vein: then both are healthy, but do not press too hard, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the body, commonly healed in two ways: either by pressing with a hot flame, or with an olive-sized, thin tool called an "anesil", and they are wide or thin depending on the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame burns intensely if it is very renowned, and it is wide as you can see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it requires skill to open veins with thick blood that is clearly visible, and which contain great blood and pus; and this is the form of the olive-colored flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and is for healing the fine veins, where there is subtle citrus-colored blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The healing of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, is very helpful for illnesses that are below the throat, and the collarbone, and the chest, and the belly; and it is important for the healer to heal gently and wash the artery below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it affects the artery, and blood loss occurs, if it is necessary to stop it, as I have said; and the flame should not be gripping but cutting like a knife.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the vein does not open clearly, it is necessary that you extract it and choose another one; or if you wish to take any part of it, do so in the vein between the arm and the shoulder: it opens clearly; and cut it with a knife, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you come to know the place of the vein, it is necessary that you extract the arm, touching the vein until you feel the pulse; then mark the place with a sign and bind the arm, and cut the vein with a knife, cutting gently; and be careful not to injure the artery when you see it dilated, for it is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it gushing out from above like the urine of a child, and the wound is red and tender, know that this is an artery: then hurry, place your finger over it for a long time, then remove your finger when the bleeding has stopped, which often happens; let the arm be still and do not move the patient; be afraid, and do not move it until it heals.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound does not stop bleeding and it becomes necessary to open an artery, since the pressure is great, and the wound remains open, then press the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of fig bark, and cut it, and take one half of it and bind it tightly to the other side; if it stays unstained, that is good. If not, cure it as we have said, with powders that stain blood; the staining is not too grievous in many dispositions due to the small size of the wound, and the power of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The wound healing is more effective if it stains blood from the top and from inside, because it is composed of both basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; and the healer should wash himself for the nerve that is inside, and if he does not do it properly, and touches the nerve, it swells and the healing is affected, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtlety, then you must use an antiseptic instrument first, and avoid touching the nerve.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if the vein is between the two bones, cut it lengthwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The treatment for headaches that originate from the head is to draw blood from the neck, which helps the limbs; and it is better to use olive or myrtle fire because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not affect any nerves or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is better to choose the lightest vein, and do not be concerned if it hurts the first time, just try again; and sometimes, the veins may swell up in some people when they are cut for the first time, but this should not cause any harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it should only be done to preserve health and prevent future illnesses; and blood should be let in one of the three veins: these are the cervical, femoral, and basilic veins. One should bloodlet at the beginning of a meal, and in autumn and winter after meals when the signs of saturation appear; and one should bloodlet on the first day or third day, after two or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Bloodletting to treat illnesses has no set time, but should be done as needed each day or according to diet, at any hour and in all seasons; and it is not appropriate to bloodlet children under 12 years old, nor pregnant women after the first three months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	One should not treat the old who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone wishes to be cured, in any way whatsoever, it is necessary for him to cleanse the bowels with a light enema, if he has a great deal of feces retained, so that the veins do not draw out from the intestines superfluous and harmful toxins to the principal limbs; nor should one cure oneself who is too salt with meats, or drunk, as long as it persists, or a hydroptic; and wash after colic, vomiting, intestinal cramp, frequent urination, much sexual activity, hard labor, staying up late and fasting, and everything that weakens or harms the body, whether by weapon or illness; then subtilely remove humors, if they are too abundant, through foods and drinks and medicines, if you have them at hand; then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to sublimate the blood, and cure the vein from below in the third hour, as we have said; and guard yourself that day against work, exertion, luxury, and similar things; and be calm and cheerful, and let the cure be better than that of others, and rub the arm twice or three times, then gently press the ligament above, because when it is too tight, he cannot correct it without hurting himself; and then rub it with his hands until the veins become swollen and warm. Then moisten the wound with a little old oil, and place his left-hand finger under the vein opposite where he wishes to be cured, so that the vein does not go away and injure itself.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow as if they were strings in the body of a sick person, and if they are of such kind that they are filled with windiness, when one applies heat, the blood retreats from the flame, and the vein cannot be opened, thus becoming one of these cases; and if the vein is opened, the wound is too narrow, so it is necessary for the healers to be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; but if not, it begins again from the previous place or with greater difficulty, as the limbs are not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the joint is swollen and the patient fears, he should let it be for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: perhaps an abscess will form. Do not enter the bath, then recommence the wound care if it pleases him; and if the puncture is small, pierce it gently and you will doubt that it does not exude as much blood as you see, so proud of that very puncture to all the flame straight; and work a little slowly, otherwise the joint will swell, for this happens often when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the joint swollen, do not recommence the care of the wound, and apply a little oil, for it lightens the body from blood, and the oil moves in this swollen joint that the oil; and thus administer the oil of wine to each wound that you heal the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and the same treatment is effective and good, when one puts it on the joint; it gently softens and spreads when it is too hard.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess occurs, which happens often, especially when the opening of the vein is small and you are not healthy to do it, then act quickly, and place a moistened sponge in water and a little hot salt on it, and hold it for an hour; after the blood drains from the vein, you should do this, and if it stays on the wound for several days without turning black or green, it will not harm him; and if you see, apply aloe or myrrh mixed with calament juice, a plaster, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often an abscess and swelling appears at the wound of the basil (a type of surgical incision): so place your hand on it, and if you feel the flesh is soft under the pressure of your hand, then this is a bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid putting anything on it that we have said, for perhaps it could cut without an artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the joint, then apply another remedy until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each case of pain according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the pain.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the pain is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it swollen, leave it until it becomes smaller; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is patient and strong, and has the skill to extract blood, to make a wider wound, and have broader flames; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and treat him more gently and often, and one should heal him by cutting across, not by pricking; and this way of healing is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and it moves faster than long-term healing.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body requires healing, it is necessary to apply moist heat from the juice of pomegranates; if he is overheated, he should be treated with bloodletting three or four times. And if he has a cold complexion, before the healing, he should moisten the wound with mild bread in syrup, or in syrup made from aromatic honey with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints at the sight of blood, after a great flow of blood, it is necessary that he drink a brew of char and subtle-scented syrup, and use other things as we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to raise his arm and heal it better at another time, when he is weakened by much blood, he should clean it gently and gradually, according to the amount of its strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wishes to raise his arm after the first cleaning, and there is a strong crust, he should clean it seven hours after the first cleaning, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if he wishes to get better from another angle, then he must heal himself on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood in the body that has been heated, causing fever; if it is necessary to extract a large quantity, and widen the wound until it takes the shape of a palm, then after you have done all things according to health, and placed your hand on his pulse when he is healthy, so that death does not come in place of healing, and this happens often when healing is neglected; and it is not right when you see the arm loosen, and cause blood to flow again, and the wound close, pressing strongly; nor if he is curved, should he stretch the arm forcefully, for that would be harmful; but leave it until it heals a second time. Or you can apply a pointed flame to the tip of the flame, until the blood that has congealed at the vein opening leaves, and put a little string soaked in water on it, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not squeeze it until the abscess is healed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it becomes necessary to drain blood again from the abscess a second time, either in the same place or in another vein or arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthier than the one in the neck because it is composed differently.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method for vein extraction is as follows: The patient should hold his hand in hot water until the veins are red, then tie it moderately so that the vein appears well, and now extract through it, not too wide or too long; the punctures should be large, and the sainie (vein) should be extracted close to the joint of the hand, and if it cannot come out, return the hand to hot water and let the blood flow in the water until you have enough; and if this is done, do not pull the hand back into hot water again, because more heat is applied than necessary. The vein extraction from this vein is safer than from any other, as there are no arteries or nerves nearby.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The salve for the salvation of the hand, if applied with due skill, is effective against all diseases of the flesh: stretch the hand and immerse it in hot water until the vein is filled; then twist the wound and press from all sides, without causing any pain; do not apply too forcefully, as the nerve ends are entirely exposed, and then reimmerse the hand in hot water so that if any part of the salve remains in the wound, it can come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as well as your skill allows, apply oil and silk to seal the wound tightly, and do this for each person.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The healthy person on the left hand side is beneficial for the illness of the mouse, and does everything just as I have told you towards the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The health of the soul is beneficial for all diseases that affect the body, such as diseases of the marriage (reproductive organs), retention of flowers (perhaps referring to a type of inflammation or infection), diseases of the kidneys, and old legs and similar ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of his soul is such that the patient finds rest in hot water, rubbing the vein until it bursts, and binding it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and extends much towards the toes; healthy then, or a wider wound, or at the ankle, whatever moves him most.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you apply it to the foot, be careful not to harm the tendons that are beneath, and clean it as if you were stitching; and the flame should be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	If the bone cannot come out, place the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if you clean it the first time, repeat the process a little above, because the tendons are stiff; do not doubt the nerve, as we said, and do the same thing for the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein's lion is at the ankle's heat, and its health corresponds to the pain of the back, when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its health is such that the patient feels pain in the bath and needs to stretch it three times around the ankle, otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, the health is in all ways as you wish, and flowing; and it should be moved slowly, because the lion (vein) is intact, and it is greatly relieved by manual manipulation.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you cannot open it, let no blood flow from the vein that is opened on the back of the foot towards the little toe, and be careful not to tighten the bandages; and make sure the blood flows as well as you can, then loosen the ligature, place cotton on it, and tighten it; now the health (vein) is cured.
des sainies de ventouse	From the suction of the ventose.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horns, or iron, or glass; and suction is performed in two manners: either by pricking and attracting blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction, performed without pricking, is done in two ways: either it is completely hot, or without heat; and the suction performed by pricking and extracting blood is done in twelve parts of the body, with some on the top of the head; others between the collarbone; others on both sides of the collarbone; another one under the chin; another on each shoulder; another on the knees; and others on both legs; and others on both ankles; and the suction of the veins should not involve blood, except from small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken anyone, as is done with vein punctures; and it should not be performed gently, nor completely hot or without heat, in any disease caused by overfullness, until all parts of the body are emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of disease or habit it seems to be necessary to vomit, we should allow it each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in every season; for there are such as, when they have need to vomit, have a heavy head; and some who suffer from fullness and redness in their face, head, neck, and arms; and such as find a drop of blood in their mouth, have their tongue swollen, and bleed; and those who dream, see blood, feel pain, and suffer similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, and especially in the middle of the month, we order vomiting after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The healer of the muscle should aid in the separation of the joints with a gentle touch...  it is not advisable to do so after evacuating all bodily humours; and this procedure is done by the doctor of the head, and it is not appropriate for those with a cold complexion or scrofula, as it causes them great harm; and for that reason, the elderly or those with cold headaches should avoid it.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who heals it often becomes obstructed, and for that reason, a cup should be placed slightly lower down out of doubt about the obstruction.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The windward position over the collarbone is contrary to the healing of the head and basil (possibly referring to the base of the skull); for that reason, it causes tightness in the chest, division of the duct of the penis, constipation, and other ailments; and it should be applied gently, as if it presses too hard, it can cause obstruction or pain in the stomach and body.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The puffiness of the chest with a pain in the head, eyes and temples, strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, is in the location of the blood flow from the basilic vein; and it is necessary that you command the patient to extend his hand when placing it, not to cut the artery, and let no bleeding occur.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The puffiness under the chin indicates a mouth disease, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases in the mouth; it is related to the blood flow from the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The puffiness of the shoulders indicates a disease that arises from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventilation of cuts is as valuable as three veins in the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the healthy one not to press too hard, for the tissue is devoid of fat, and knows how to sever and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The ventose (suction cup) on the rump is as valuable as a hemorrhoid from the anus, and helps with internal ailments. It should be large and made of iron, so that it can effectively extract; but if it is too delicate, it may break and cause great injury.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The ventoses on the legs grip tightly as they draw blood from throughout the body, and are as valuable as chronic pains in the joints, and in the bladder, and unblock them; and they are located on the two knees and two ankles, but they weaken the body after prolonged use and cause numbness in various places.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying a cupping glass is as follows: you apply it at first while it is empty and suck gently, then press it firmly and move it equally, without ceasing until you see the red and inflamed skin appear, opening the veins' redness; then release it, and reapply the cups, taking care in the placement of the glasses, for there are those with thick skin and others with thin skin: it is enough to make one single pass, and it is necessary to make wide incisions and quite deep; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the veins are thick, it is necessary to pierce twice: first to open the thick vein path of the blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the pain is very sharp, it is necessary to strike the third time; and when we want to draw out blood little by little, we are content with only one strike.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, let us strike often; and if the pain is sharp, make each blow count, so that the veins burst immediately; this is suitable for those with thick skin and hard flesh, and who have scaly pores. In such cases, apply oil to the suction cups: either stimulating oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil from pumpkin seeds; and if it is in winter, use oil of watercress, or daisies, or chamomile, or any similar herb.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take amber oil, or balsam, or donkey oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if anyone has a tendency towards a hot and swollen joint, it is not appropriate to apply oil, but instead, after purging with rosewater, cold water, water of morelle, water of cucumber, or porcelain water, or similar, one should wash it.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those with much moisture should raise themselves up with myrrh water, sumac water, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have great excesses should rise from old wine, or holy water, or decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not advisable to use a vacuum pump before the bath or after the bath, but an hour or two later; and one should not sleep after vacuuming, and it is necessary that he bathe, as required for vacuuming and when vacuumed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And be wary of those who have a temper (coleric), and those who are too hot and inflamed; it is necessary that they apply cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, lettuce, and similar things; and eat little, and chestnut food, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And he who has a cold complexion should take syrup of honey and fragrant wine, between old and new, and eat little, and eat acorns and small birds and pigeons; and on the day that he opens his pores, he must drink more than he eats; and it is fitting to give any man at times triacle or mace before or after opening the pores, to strengthen the principal members; but it is a subtlety without which those who are hot should not drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are applied without causing harm are those placed on the liver, and the spleen, and gout, and the belly and bowels and joints and the spine, for these members do not endure injury easily, and they are only done so to draw blood from one member to another, as we place them on the mammary glands when nursing; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we apply suction cups to the belly and bowels to reduce the member; and it removes pain, when there is congestion or a stone, as it may by its attractive virtue draw away the congestion, or abandon the stone from its place; and thus it does when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained windiness, and these suction cups are left empty to suck only; and they are never at once hot and cold, nor filled with warm water or water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cup (ventose) applied with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it should have two-and-a-half palm widths in diameter, and on one side there is a small hole, as if to push an needle, and it should be made of metal, soft enough not to hurt the patient when placed on the body; and at its center, there is a crossbar of metal, either iron or steel, to hold a cloth for better grip, and their sizes vary according to the illness and age of those who use them; for the cups for children are different from those for adults, and smaller for the thin than for the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And thus one should place this suction cup over the member: take the wax or linen cloth and put it through the hole in the suction cup, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup that it does not burn the patient; and then place it over the member, and your fingers should be on the opening we mentioned, so that when you want, the vapor goes out, and remove the suction cup; and take up the linen cloth as before, and repeat often, if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the case of the suction cup used to treat pleurisy, a condition characterized by sharp pain, it has no opening or hole, and it is only effective when it is filled with water. It should be placed over the affected member only when it is empty; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without wounds that are amenable to poultices except in members where it is impossible to apply them due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and when they are bare of hair, like the skin of a dog or cat, or other parts; and the condition of the wound, if you find wounds that are in clear, sweet water without putrefaction, take them; and place them in clean water for as long as they remain firm, and have nothing within their bellies; then clean with vein and poultice, and rub the member until it turns red, and apply the poultices; and when they become sore and chafed, if it is a part where a poultice can be applied, apply one, for this is much better.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If the lion is not calm, raise it from its resting place and then water it well, and hope; if the joints are still sore after the body has healed, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and place it upon them until they are relaxed; if the sores multiply, apply vitriol or gall, or similar substances, until they are healed; or you can put half-peel fava beans on the lion, leaving them until they adhere to the wound, which will now heal. If you need more, take other lions.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the lions refuse to be caught, rub the wound with fresh blood, or insert an needle into the sore until it bleeds, and then apply them; and soon as they smell the blood, they will stick; and when you see that they are chewing, sprinkle a little aloes and cut silk or ash powder on top, and they will stop.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	We begin the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear reader, that the fools' gaze deviates from this chapter, for they have never seen or read it in any ancient books. For this reason, the science is strange in our land, because I never found a good one; and I know nothing of it except through the knowledge of ancient books, on which I have studied so much that I have mastered the science, and through experience and the custom of my life. And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abridged it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we explain in this prologue of this book the principles of speech and the chapters where the wise men apply their understanding, stopping on truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	When a fracture, dislocation, twist or sprain occurs, it is necessary to hurry and treat the patient on both sides, if nothing helps, such as weakness of the body, sickness, or old age; or if he has a high fever, or it is too cold, and he consumes cold things like ice, and avoids wine, does not eat any greasy food, and does not fill himself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about the heat of an abscess or the swelling of tissue in the member; then the patient returns to his former state as if he had never been ill.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that we ease the patient of the flesh that causes great swelling, or has a thick consistency, like cooked flour in water, and laughter, and tears, and pressure, and bloating, and weakness, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For great swelling returns repeatedly, and the fracture does not heal as quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones of the very old and frail cannot be well healed or fused according to their nature due to the stiffness of the members, nor those that are too tender, like the bones of young children; but do not worry, hold fast to the broken bone with strong grips that join the member together as it was before, as long as it still has strength; and feed it with substantial foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, and in this chapter, I will tell you all manners of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another when sharpening, like the edge of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, then the fracture is at every small fissure.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each condition has its own mechanism and specific means of restoration, according to the memory that arises in the place where it is; and the fracture of a bone is recognized because the limb is twisted, and it opens well from pressure, and sounds when pressed with the hand; and when there is no distortion or pain upon touch by the patient, there is no fracture; but it can have distortions, or splits, or small fractures.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You should not move it with the hand, but apply remedies that will be mentioned later, and then gently tighten it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture that goes up in the air, where the two parts are separated, it is necessary to bring them together equally, so that the abscesses follow one after another; and if hot abscesses come, you should leave it for a day or two until the abscesses subside; then place it equally as gently and carefully as possible, and know that the restoration of such a fracture is lighter than the restoration of those where pieces are missing; then tighten it, as will be mentioned later.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if a bone is broken into pieces, if it is fractured from two parts, whether it's the hand or foot, or one of the smaller members, or two tendons, or a tendon and your hand; place the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are aligned, rearrange by all means the additions to their original positions until you can, and be careful not to cause the patient any injury or pain through your work; adjust both joints of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And if you feel well in your hand and it seems to be correctly aligned, but not tightly enough: treat it neatly, without excessive strain, do not press as those who, through their work, cause heat and contraction in the member, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is completely numb, be very careful not to move it, neither awake nor asleep, nor in any other way; and be sure that the limb is so secured that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels no pain, it is only completely numb, and you must be sure to put it in a position where it feels no pain; and be careful that it is placed correctly, so as not to develop any deformity as it heals; and the quality of the damaged member will depend on what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You should know that the damaged member can be different in size and shape, and in its form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Because it has small members, as bras and legs and such: it is necessary to envelop them in soft and fine linen; and those that are large, like the thigh or leg: it is necessary to wrap them with a wide and firm ligature, for the wide ligatures embrace the entire large member and tighten it equally from all sides so that there is no movement; then apply light tourniquets, three times or four according to the member, and tighten your hand slightly on the entire ligature, then go above the break and tighten less, so that the break moves away a little; and soften the ligature little by little, as much as you press into the healthy part of the limb, then take another ligature and tie around the broken part again; then return to the under-part of the break and tighten moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first chapter above; then place between the firm linen ligatures soft cloth or bandages, until they are all even, then bind everything with a broad bandage, and then place your well-made staples on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an inflammation or abscess, apply a hot compress to it, which reduces the swelling, and leave it for several days; then strain your eyes, and make them half the width of a wide cane sharp, or of wood used to make chisels, or of palm leaves, according to this figure.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the thread placed on the break be slightly thicker and wider than the others; and just as long as appropriate for the size or length of the limb; then tighten the thread on the eyes just as you did in the first layer, and tie a thin thread on top, as in the first layer on the fracture; it should be tighter at the end, but less so afterwards; and the thread should be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax; because if the thread is thick, just like people who make their bindings from twisted flax strings do, it's a great error, because the binding cannot be even if it's too delicate, and it is not appropriate for there to be less space between each eye.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is angry because of the pressure from the stars after dislocating their joints, he should place soft cloth or other padding over them so that they are not hurt.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the vessels are broken, I will describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not appropriate to straighten all the broken stars on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not appropriate to apply stars too soon, but after 5 or 7 days, or according to your judgment regarding the healing of the hot apotheme; and here you see the ancient method of applying plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour that clings to the walls of the mill, mix it with enough egg, and make this paste, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common method for applying a plaster that restores fractures in many positions, especially for women and small children, as it is neither too hard nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to make a plaster that restores fracture and dislocation and torsion: take wolfsbane and ladanum and frankincense and myrrh and gum arabic and mugwort, each in equal parts; add mirra and aloe, each in five parts; and ales (a type of resin), nine parts. Mix them into a powder and blend with egg albumen. If the patient's body heat is high, use this plaster, as it is of good composition and restores broken bones effectively and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another plaster for torsion: take mugwort and wormwood, each in ten parts; mirra and aloe, each in seven parts; acacia in six parts; and Armenian bole, ten parts. Grind them well and mix with vinegar or egg albumen, then apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of setting joints and realigning bones in their sockets, soothing the pain that arises, and using the saw to cut the bone, and the fracture: take a fresh new cloth, and soak it in hot ash and oil, and place it on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Cysts cannot be restored, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses, and for carefully removing pains from the bones.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of setting broken bones: take dried fig leaves and terrestrial pavot (opium poppy) leaves, crush them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of bandaging to restore broken bone, and to lessen the pain of healing.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of chamomile, violet flowers, each in equal parts; grind them and mix with wine, and apply to the affected members, which should be heated first. Also mix with fresh coriander water or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another stronger method of bandaging when a hard abscess forms to restore the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the roots of chamomile, flaxseed, balm, melilot, and fennel, each in equal parts; grind them and mix with salty water, or sweet water, or wine according to the heat of the member and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates writes in his book that to restore a broken limb, one should use a plaster made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and it should be between two extremities, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen suggests that one should apply dry and slightly heated substances to the broken limb to restore it, such as mirror, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plastering that is effective for injury and pain: take mugath (mistletoe) and chevolz (hair from a human's head), or feathers from an owl, and wool, and cut them to equal lengths, then grind them into a paste and use it as a plaster.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then dislocate it a little later, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, and that the bone has not moved from its place; if it dislocates by itself, and there is no pain, or the bone has not shifted, then quickly dislocate it and remove the splint immediately; take a light bandage, and a moist sponge, and dip it in water, and elevate the limb until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed; then rest the member for an hour, and place a dry cloth, moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it with a nut, as long as you are certain of the hot abscess; and relieve the inflammation of the affected member, and let the pain go away, then continue with the delicate process, and use a little splint, and not so tightly as before; gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is red, swollen, painful, and full of pus, and you need to apply plaster and bindings, then repeat it as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if the limb shows no improvement after what we have said, do not dislocate it until after three, four, five, or seven days; and never leave a fracture untreated for more than twenty days, as long as the healing process continues, and the joint approaches its normal position; then tighten it more than before, and thicken the flesh as I have said previously; and if you notice that the limb is drying out more than necessary, know that treatment cannot be effective. Then apply warm water each time you dislocate it, every third day, and gently massage the area; by this means you will cure the limb, and prevent the harm caused by the foolish practices of those who twist the limb incorrectly: it is harmful and involves great risk, and I see no other solution than to leave it alone or do it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various methods of breaking (or dislocation)
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many ways of breaking bones, with various shapes and causes; for some breaks occur from the impact of a sword, and the chisel cuts through all the bone down to the soft tissue, like a hatchet or axe; and for this reason, this type of break is called "haichure" (axe-like).
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or, the sword may cut through the bone without striking it, and this is called "absolute" break; and this type of fracture has a large or small wound from these two breaks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded impact, or a crack, or a stone chisel, or a blow on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a recent fracture, which approaches the skin just beneath the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound has healed around the bone so subtly like a hair, and it is a small fracture, then this dislocation is called "capillary"; and if the wound is caused by striking with stone, or falling, or something similar, and the bone fragment enters inward, and the limbs are bent as the blacksmith does when he works on the cauldrons; if it gets stuck between the stones.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often with those who have moist bones in the head, as in an infant's head; and it occurs in all these ways of fracture that small fragments are dislocated as if they were broken; and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all the ways of fractures from traction on them, and inquiry at close range, and by the corrupt flesh that is above them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the fracture is recognized because, when the bone is discovered and rubbed with the finger, it opens up the broken fragment.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be cautious of accidents with the sick person, and if you notice any ill omen, such as vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, extension or bending of the limbs, paleness, ague fever, sudden heat, or other similar symptoms in various dispositions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming accident and hope for healing, then begin treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if this happens, if you hurry to remove the bone on the seventh day, so that the tissue around the bone is corrupted, then come the complications that we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone breaks down to the tissue covering the brain, it is necessary that you split the affected part in this way: and it is important that you press the patient's head with pain, and expose the bone in every way possible, and gently uncover the wound, if a pus pocket appears upon exposing the bone, or an abscess, use what is appropriate help, and fill the cavity with moist, rosin-infused cloth; then rest the wound until the abscesses subside and be sure of no further pus discharge. Then begin to remove the bone, and this should be done in two ways: one way is to cut very tightly in front, and this is its shape...
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I use another treatment even greater than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second method is that you have many different shapes, some narrow and others wide, and they are sharp and made of iron indelible; and perform the operation gently, so as not to damage the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and dense, you need to drill around it, so as to administer cuts with intervals, without going through the bone too deeply, and there should be a margin or curve on the tip to prevent it from passing through the bone; and you need many of these, so that each one goes in its place according to the density of the bone, so as to have intervals for all bones; and this is the form of the three types of intervals:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to perceive around the broken bone is that you apply pressure on the bone and return to your fingers until you know the bone is perceived; then place the pressure elsewhere a little later, and do this all around, then cut with incisions the space between the cracks in the bone, and do it as subtley and lightly as possible, while handling the bone with your hand or any tool like pliers or pincers, and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinew.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have perceived and treated the bone, it is necessary that you observe the delay of tightness remaining on the bone compared to any other tool resembling an incision, but it should be more tender and subtler than the other incisor; and if it does not leave any small bones or scales, gently remove them with a suitable instrument; then treat the wound with bandages and remedies as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is that which Galen says, which is safer; it is very powerful, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you expose a part of the bone, either by opening the fracture wide enough, so that when you have exposed this part, you will place the blade of this crescent-shaped knife underneath, which has this shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, but expose the acute part on the second side, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike gently with a small hammer over it, so that you gently press the bone all around, and be very careful of the membrane that lies underneath; if it is detached from the bone, lift it gently, for it can be lifted without pain or harm.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the skin, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to smoothen these rough edges, and remove the scales with a delicate rasp, having various quantities of it, in order to make each part as suitable as possible, according to the severity and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you encounter great rasps (or tools) and then even more subtle ones, do not stop until it is done well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair cuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary to make the correction according to its location; and this is a matter that is not easily answered for one who has dedicated their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if it pleases him to reveal himself, you should then press the linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it with rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; do this as lightly as possible so as not to burden the flesh, then apply another bandage, and do not tighten it too much until it only covers the wound; leave it thus for one or two days, until the abscess is calmed down, then remove it, and administer medications such as fennel roots, meal flour, incense powder, aristology, and similar things; make a powder from these things and place it over the wound, and continue to apply medications from around the world without scarification; ensure that the wound is always clean, do not leave any treatment, nor let pus accumulate, for when pus accumulates on the skin of the head, it corrupts and rots, and causes great harm to the patient, because when a sharp object is placed over the flesh, it can pierce through.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed therefore, if no ill accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is questionable without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if darkness comes only because of the medicine placed upon it, to see if it has any virtue, then you should apply a part of honey and three parts of rose oil mixed with a cloth over the sore; then cure it in the manner of cures that are appropriate until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	You should know that the two parts of the bone above are never broken, either together or separately, because they are two bones; and the inner one is cartilage, which does not break, but only bends or twists, then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, you should fit your little finger or a thin tool into the gap, and place the break back in its natural position on your index finger, and hold it there until the joint returns to its normal form; do this gently, and ensure the patient feels no pain from your actions.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the joint and the fingers cannot be moved to their normal position, you should place a thin stick across the top, slightly thicker than the finger itself.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in both parts, repeat the above process and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day (when the swelling has subsided), then place thin linen strips over the joint, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or turn to another part, if it is broken, and make the splints so thick that they fill the gaps in the bones.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say that no restoration is required to make the splints moist with butter, and each day they must be changed.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened with egg albumen and flour powder; then remove the splints, as soon as the bones are hard and the cartilage firm.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never apply the fat of duck or goose to a wound greater than smaller, and if it becomes inflamed around it, hold the break still, and blow air into it; or do what you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess appears near a new wound while you are treating it, apply a poultice or moist cotton in rose oil, or in a small bag of hyssop.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If an abscess does not form, apply a paste made of flour and frankincense powder mixed with egg albumen, then place light bandages on it and do not tie the wound; if the fracture is small and the bone is broken into fine pieces, use suitable instruments to remove them, then clean the wound with hot things, and cure it with poultices and dressings as necessary; and if there is no injury inside the wound, treat it externally with plasters until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	from the dislocation of the mandible
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is dislocated and there is no external wound, the fracture is only slightly disrupted, not in two pieces, but it has a support from within, if you know how to recognize it gently.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is in the right side, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left mandible, insert your index finger from your right hand, gently disrupting the fracture, and with the other hand, pull it outward, making it equal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is severe in two places, then you must administer an extension to the lower part, as long as it remains even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the teeth occurs, or rupture, by applying tension with a golden or silver thread or silk, then place cerate on the broken jaw and put a double cloth; and place the cloth on the tooth a large star well made, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jaw, and tie it to the muscles that you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you notice that the figure changes on the third day, then remove it and reset what was changed; and apply plaster above, with fine powder ground with enough egg or sesame flour after removing the cerate; and put on a thin layer of plaster, and if the plaster hardens, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is healed; often it heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess appears, it is necessary to do as we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both a fracture and a wound together, do not attempt to remove any part of the bone that is still intact; use gentle and suitable instruments instead.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, stretch it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and it does not delay, clean the wound if it is wide, and place suitable patches on it to draw out pus, as long as it remains healthy.
de la forcele	from the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps break many times near the shoulder, and the fracture is in three manners: it may be broken and separated into two parts, with pieces, and is easiest to restore; or there is a fracture with an accompanying wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And for the work when the fracture is without a wound, you need two assistants: one should hold the aid, which is the broken forceps; and the other extends the collar towards the affected part. Then place the fracture evenly with both hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is no bulge or depression.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend it further, place a round spike of cloth or wool beneath the shoulder of the patient, as thick as required; then stretch and gently apply force, holding the spike with your hand so that you align the break correctly.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the spike from the depth because it is stuck completely, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on his side with his shoulder beneath the spike, and have assistants raise the spike's other end until the bone of the fracture is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then address the fracture with your hands, and if you feel any debris, it is necessary to cut through; remove the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join together despite your best efforts, place a second spike beneath the first as a support.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it looks like a spoon, and is not crooked, and is as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and it has two prongs, as you see, one wide, and the other narrow, just as the cut of the wound that you made when you split the bones; and when you are sure of the hot abscess, if you cut the wound deeply, or if the incision is small, then you doubt a hot abscess, applying drapes and tenting the wound according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses occur, then moisten the drape with rose oil and linseed and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The binding of the bone, when it is sensitive to wounds and cuts, is to place on the bone the plaster of very fine powder and egg white, and lay light bandages on top, and insert a spear under the joint, if necessary; then take a very wide strip of cloth, about a palm length, and place the bandage with the plaster on it, and wrap it around the injury; take a thin, long, three-dois wide steel and wrap it around the cloth so that the edge of the cloth is hanging down; place the steel on the fracture, and turn the bandage back over the collarbone, and under the healthy joint and the affected joint; rearrange each part, and when you see that the string holds the fracture well, and clearly see that the steel does not move on the broken bone, reward it with this each day, and as the ligatures loosen, tighten them; put the patient on his back and place a small pillow under the collarbone to raise the affected area; lighten the fracture by aligning the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it for twenty days unless a bad accident happens; then recommence the plastering, if necessary, tighten it, and leave it so until it is healed; it is healed in no more than 28 days, and less for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	from the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	If the shoulder is broken or dislocated, it does not respond to external touch; if you realign it according to the shape of the dislocation and restore it to its natural position in every way possible, then apply a fine powder mixed with egg yolk and a little wine, and cover it with light bandages. Place a broad and thin plate above, slightly wider than the shoulder, and secure it so that it does not move from its place; examine it daily. Whenever it tries to dislocate, tighten the bandage and realign the plate if it has moved. The patient should lie on his side, and after ten or fifteen days (or twenty-five at most), carefully release it, being sure, because it is not a bone that can be easily put back in place.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone sticks out and is not pulled away from the heart, it causes inflammation, and the bone, and does what we have said in the weakening of the heat of an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	from the weakening of the heat
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The flesh is never broken open, but it happens little; but it often breaks at the heat.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken open, it declines away from the heart, and the patient feels great pain, and weakness, and sometimes bleeds, and opens up the cheeks in the broken bone, and feels all better.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and places a cushion between their shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and aligns the ribs with both hands, subtly making them even in all ways as they should be; then apply plasters and bandages over the delicate skin of salt or another light material, and wrap it in a cloth, binding it to the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the ligature around the back, tightening it properly, and checking the wound every hour, if it becomes softer, tighten it; if it needs to be released due to decay or itching that occurs at the site, or pain or abscess, act quickly, release it, remove the plaster, and address the cause of the condition; then apply the plaster again, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	from the fracture of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	You know that the fracture of ribs only occurs in the upper back and at the top, and they do not bend unless they are broken; and this causes great pain to anyone who suffers from it.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is that you put it back in place as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, tightening it with a stick if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inward, it causes the patient to feel great pain and stabbing, as if from crying, because the bone pierces the skin; and he loses his breath, coughs, and vomits much blood, which is a sign of grave illness, and old physicians have devised great remedies.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And for those who say it is appropriate to administer foods that cause bloating in the stomach to push the fracture out.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not claim that hot applications will not come if they have not already arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes back, as healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say none of you should use cupping glasses on the skin, as it forms sucking marks, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the cupping glass might draw away excess fluid from the body due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say none of you should cover the skin with moistened wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to even out the heat around it, then treat the cure for pleurisy, flesh, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure by the bone that holds the skin, then doubt is in the patient, and it is necessary to cut into the broken ribcage, and put a tool to stop the bleeding; and then one must break the bone, and draw gently, and then sew together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with bandages, until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses form, one should place moist, oil-soaked rags on the affected area and put the patient on their side; and treat while the abscess is present, resting the side where it is located, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	from the break of the collarbone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No break occurs in the collarbone bone, and rarely does it happen if it rains; also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to a person, and you want to know if they will recover, take care to see if their hands are softening, swelling, and turning pale, and if they cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Knowing that it is deadly in many ways, if they are silent and feel well when you hold them and touch them, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and that the patient will be cured if proper treatment is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing occurs in the lower back, you should know if it is healthy or not, taking care if the feet are softened, and if there is an accident involving the hands, and on the back, excessive sweating and ejection without will; and when it is remembered on the belly, it has excessive ejection without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is remembered on the back and wants to press, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Knowing it is deadly: therefore, do not labor in its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen, then it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is as follows: if there is an abscess that is hot, apply rose oil or egg yolk oil to it until it is soothed; then place a comforting and drying plaster on it and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until they are healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is separated, it should be covered with a bandage; then remove the bone, and stitch together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, then apply a healing poultice, until it is healed; and if the fragment of the bone is broken off, which is called the "fragment of the fracture," press your palm with your left hand onto it, and place it level with your other hand, then apply the plaster and the splint, if necessary; then tighten it, and if there are any separated bones, reduce them, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	from the fracture of the bone in the shoulder blade
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the bone in the shoulder blade is fractured, and there is no significant reduction in size at the site, it causes the patient great pain, swelling, and inflammation at the fracture site.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over the fracture site, ensuring you understand where the fracture is and its shape; if the fracture is only at the top, then make an equal cut, maintaining its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, it declines inward, then place the patient on his stomach until the healing of that fracture becomes apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And once you have made it even, place a splint on it, then put a board or a hard material over it and hold the fracture still so that it does not move; and keep the limb beneath the ribs until the bone is aligned.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess appears and is not touched, it should be calmed down until the abscess is healed, and then apply what we have previously said; and afterwards return to restoration, holding it as appropriate, unless there is some adverse event; this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The joint (ajutoire) is that which is between the shoulder blade and the top of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it should be restored using one of two methods: one is to take a straight, thick stick, approximately as follows:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And hold the two feet, and bend them up, and look at the patient in a high place; then throw one broken arm over the leg, until it becomes loose, and put a piece of wood between his hands, and hang something heavy on it so that he extends his fingers together, until the fracture returns to its proper position.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another method is to place the patient on his side, and tie his hand to his neck, then command the assistants to one hold what is above the fracture in his hands, and the other hold below at every joint, and extend them according to their parts.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, then hold it tight at the break, and on the break, stretch each of the assistants to their side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the break is close to the shoulder joint, it is necessary to place a moderate link below the acromion and another towards the neck, below the break; and likewise, if the break is on the side of the neck, a light link should be placed without strain, as long as the break is level on the bone, then align the break correctly and tighten it, but without causing discomfort.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess forms after it has been extracted and the wound is not healed for seven days, place a moist cloth with rose oil on it until the abscess subsides; then grip it, and the way to do this is to put the splint over the fracture, then bring the arm back into position, and place your hand on the shoulder or the breast; cover it with a drape, and grip the arm and the joint, so that the arm remains immobile, unless something prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone has not moved and use splints, place a wider and stronger splint on the fracture, ensuring there is a gap of two lengths between each splint, and make each splint so long that it extends three gaps from each side; then grip the splints, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter regarding the fracture, by making them stronger and farther apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the stars and the constriction, as we have said, when you return the broken member, and you doubt the heat of the abscess, leave it attached for up to seven days, as we have said; then every three days examine the wound, that no inflammation arises or comes to the place, so that the healing cannot come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it responds, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accident happens, do not release it until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back with his hands on his stomach; place a flat cushion under the dislocated member, equally covered with wool, and observe it every hour during the day and night to ensure that the shape of the dislocated member does not move or become relaxed. If it responds to medication, give him food as we have mentioned, in such a way that the food is the finest; and when he begins to regain strength, it will be significant.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the joint and leg should be re-set after forty days; and then one must loosen and administer baths and medications with oils to correct the position.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the contraction is severe and tight, it may take forty days or two months to loosen it.
de la brisure du bras	of the dislocation of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fossa", of which one is small, adjacent to the elbow, and the other is large, located below, towards the small bone; so sometimes only the large fossa breaks, or only the small one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, healing is light and quick; but when the large ones are broken, healing is poor and more difficult than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bones that are broken, then it is necessary to extend slightly and align them equally.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bones, then it is necessary to pull stronger; place them on a cushion and position the palm higher than the others, with the small bones lower, crossing the patient over itself. Then, extend the healers' hands towards the part below their hand, or to the joint, and another helper above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then set it even with the eyes, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture, each piece is set in its place, and if none of them grasp the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place by making it whole again, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is an open wound, I have spoken of it in detail in the previous chapter; then take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of restoration there appear abscesses, first apply a bandage made of oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and wrap it gently around, until the abscess is calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the plaster, and mix the pouder from the fine mill with enough egg, then place the needles, making the needle of the break more firm and a little wider than the others; know that there should be six needles or more on each arm in different positions: whether the break is in one bone or two; tighten above the break more than elsewhere, but always less distant as mentioned at the beginning of the chapter; and make the cloth covering the break soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread from which it is pulled be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after no days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if no adverse incident occurs in the limb, such as itching that arises in the limb, then it is necessary to raise the limb with hot water until the itching is relieved; and let the limb not be too tightly rested.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then repeat the process, and if the ligaments loosen and the bones align themselves, and such things, then address it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if stiffness prevents the limb from moving, because it is too tight, then it is necessary to loosen it slightly and leave it for a few days until the stiffness disappears, and then tighten it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said comes to the patient, then he should be dislocated for up to twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If uncertain, then tie his hands to his chest, ensuring his collarbones are even, and guard against movement and digitation, and have him sleep on his back. Know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or forty-five, or perhaps in twenty days, depending on the combinations and complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that on the back of the hand and at the joints there are often small fractures, and it brings only pain many times over.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the hand's plant is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient cuts across the affected area, and holds it straight in front of him equally; then he places his hand on a flat surface, and extends the broken bones with the aid of another person, aligning them properly; and applies a poultice and bandages if an abscess does not form, and wraps it up in a linen drape according to the size.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is near the stomach of the hand, make a ball of cloth and instruct the patient to press it onto his broken hand; then take a long strip of cloth, and form it into a ball as large as the hand itself, and apply pressure as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is at the end, then you must place one stick on top and another underneath in the socket, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it tightly around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the fracture occurs in neither of the joints, and it is dislocated, place it evenly, as appropriate, and tighten it with the socket; if you see that putting a small, straight stick will raise the dislocation without moving it, do so, and bind it tightly. If the fracture is in other joints, like the index or any others, place it evenly and bind it to the healthy joint afterward; either hold all of them together firmly, or put a stick on top, as with a dislocated joint. Take care during restoration and positioning near the abscess, and support what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	from the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The hip bone is often broken, and one can clearly see it when it returns to its position in front and behind; its restoration is achieved by binding it tightly over the break and from below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then each limb extends equally to its side; this is when the break is between the bones.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the hip, one must bind the limb towards the knee, and the others bind below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is close to the knee, then the ligaments of the knee should be loosened, and the extension adjusted; then place the splint with both hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and tie it, so that there are no further problems.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, leave it to heal, then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is made in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary to wrap the broken leg with a hard bandage, cutting off the excess, and then return the leg until the heels reach the root of the toe, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg below the knee, and come up with the thread over the top of the leg bone; then place the splint on top. Put a star on the bone of the leg; then take the remaining cloth and make eight folds between the leg and the thigh to ensure equal tension, then start tying three or four turns around the splint; and as you go higher on the splint, loosen it; then take the two threads that you have threaded between the leg and the thigh, and tie three stars on top, then return to the bottom with the thread, until you reach below the foot; and tighten it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, and if there is no further problem, no abscess or swelling or anything similar.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens that it becomes dislocated, and you address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that cling, it is necessary to do so whenever possible; and if it cannot be done, it is necessary to break the joint and pull out the foreign body; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never should the foot be broken in this way with staples, as is done in the aid of the arm; nevertheless, in this way of restoration, it does not benefit the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the foot is restored in 7 to 10 days, or a little less or a little more, depending on the diversity of the constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the alley of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	You know that in the alley of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, even if it is only a crack or a hole, it becomes an open wound, and feels like a wound, but the patient feels no pain.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when you put back what is broken in its place, as much as it can be adjusted; then apply the poultice, and put a round bandage if necessary, and tighten it appropriately, then follow all the arrangements that we have mentioned for other fractures, like an abscess above or any similar condition; apply whatever is suitable for each case, as long as it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	from the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "the thigh bone" and the other "the shin bone"; and a fracture occurs in the leg just as it does in the arm, and its treatment is similar to that of the arm equally. And if both bones are broken together, the leg recovers from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, they heal forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain, and its deformity is visible; and it heals slowly.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply an extension, and set it even, and tie the stars equally; but nevertheless, it is necessary that the fracture be ugly, and there are several parts, so that the extension is less and lighter; and alight according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your task, take two strips of cloth that are red and cover the leg on both sides, extending from the knee to the ankle; then wrap two bands around it above and below, and tie them in the middle, so the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus is well. And no one should apply any bandage along the length of the leg, but if it is made of cloth, place the leg to prevent movement, and properly treat the fracture where there is an abscess or any other accident; move the leg each day to see if there is a relapse or another complication; and cure it as soon as it heals.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot can be fractured in various places and there is no strong reason for it to occur in any particular disposition.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If the bones of the foot are fractured and you see them stacked on top of each other, so that the patient feels great pain in their foot on the ground, just as if they wanted to walk, then put your foot on theirs, raising the broken bones, and press it until they return to their proper place; then apply a splint and bandages above, and under the belly of the foot, a small wooden board with two holes, then tighten it around the foot properly, and wrap it with cloth and other things as needed.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three days or four have passed, if you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones even, either broken or discolored.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if none of the bones are broken, and they need to be restored, as we have said regarding the hand's joints, then take a stick according to the length of the bone and make it slightly wider, and place the cloth from beneath, as I have said, tightly around it; and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, take a stick for each, wrapped in a piece of linen, and bind the cloth beneath the foot; and let the edge of the cloth extend over the top of the table, towards the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, when we have discussed them; and treat each accident as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	On the break of the bone in the hand.
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When a woman's bone in her hand is broken and the swelling subsides, then tilt her body towards the affected part, holding it from behind. Next, fill the space with cotton and also pack it tightly; then raise the woman up slightly, and gently massage her back, little by little, until the cotton reaches the opening of the wound, and the bone returns to its place. If she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven or eight days. Then the break will be healed, and if she still has pain, take a bladder of goat's hair, tie a tube to the opening, and completely fill the bladder inside the wound. Blow into the tube until the bladder is inflated within: the nature will heal the break; then pack it with cotton and leave it like this for several days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said in the hipbone; and these fractures are not hidden from one who puts their study and skill into it, and listens to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture indicates various arrangements for the right way of restoration: understand this therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When a stick is broken, take a goose throat and insert it into the stick; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three or four days until it heals naturally.
de brisure avec plaie	from fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is important for someone with a fracture and a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bones of the leg or shoulder or similar, to seek medical attention immediately, so that the healing process we have described can begin.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, but there is still residue of poison, and you have no other remedy, then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or day that the abscess appears.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscess appears again, leave the healing until it is completely healed, and do not touch it for at least a day or two, lest you bring on a bad outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears on the heart's surface when it is exposed, you should gently place your hands over it with slight pressure and a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not appear to be equal on both hands, take this instrument made of iron, with seven or eight inches in length, and adjust its width according to the size of the wound; and for this purpose, it should immerse three or four times, depending on what is needed for each fracture treatment; and it should be round and slightly thicker, so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your work, but rather is sharp in front and thick in the middle.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", so that the dislocated bone should be placed on the visible head of the joint; and press it once, until it returns, and becomes even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, it is necessary that you hold the head of the bone, while the instrument has purchase.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, with a suitable instrument, such as a chisel or a saw, within your power, then remove what is remaining in the bone of roughness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reduced, and the patient feels great pain afterward, knowing that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do your best to put it back in its natural place, then moisten the cloth with a drying wine and apply it properly; do not put any bandage or other substance on the wound that has oil, otherwise it will cause putrefaction and corruption. Then administer herbs once you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it around according to the size of the wound, and be very careful that the wound is not constricted by the break; and many times this has caused great harm to the patient, or even death, or corrosion. And the compresses should be milder and softer than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or great, and you doubt that a bad accident may come of it, as we have said, and feel pain in place, if it is not suitable to lay on bandages; but cover around, instead of bandages, with hard cloth, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days the wound swelling, then remove what you have put on it, and apply healing ointment to the wounds, such as four-ingredient ointments and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the member twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is swollen and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be dislocated in such a way that the bowstring moves slightly downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it persists for many days, and it cannot heal but keeps reverting to the bow position, knowing that there are small fragments of bone, then you must want to open the wound with a knife and remove all these unwanted pieces causing the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula appears in its place, or any other form of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it according to what it says in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when a bone is broken and opens up on the limb, such as the bone of the calf or the shoulder, or other similar bones of large limbs, do not pull it, for death often results, but let it fester until it heals; perhaps after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can; if not, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	burns that come from the solder
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the healing of the burn, especially when it is near a joint, and it is a terrible sight to see the disfigurement of the limb; and by chance, it may not be able to perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then, if we must treat it: if we administer astringent medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, so that you press any of these things or all together, and preserve them in stoppers with astringent wine or with abundance of heat or with cold; and place them on the wound firmly, and do not loosen them for many days; and then dislocate it, and begin another, until the swellings are removed; or you press a well-made plug of lead, for the property of lead is to remove all swelling from the limbs; and if the nodulation has already turned into hardness like stone, it must be removed, cutting off the excess above, and making it apparent; or you shave it with a razor, until it is removed, and treat it as long as it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The weak member after treatment.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored and the weak and delicate member remains, it happens for many reasons: one is because it was tied too tightly and not tied as it should be; or because there are too many bindings and it cannot assume the normal shape of the member; or due to excessive bleeding; or because of too great movements, not at the right time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body firm, until the blood flow multiplies within him; then administer baths, and give joy and relaxation; then apply pitch to the member, so that the pitch attracts great blood flow, and often moisten it with warm water, until the circulation reaches the member, and it recovers its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	Both members are twisted after health.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the members are twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the form of the member is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish ones who say one must break the member from the very beginning, and many foolish practices have been done in our land; these practices are blameworthy, and great harm, and perhaps death, come from them. Nevertheless, if the dislocations and tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they be treated with hot water, or gentle herbs cooked, such as fennel leaves, roots, melilot, and similar things; and apply an emollient, like a good-made ointment, and take the mucilaginous part of fennel, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make an ointment from it. Or you can use fig fats, and grind them with colon powder, and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never should the node be broken by continuous and lengthy friction with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And allow the limb to move every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the swelling and hardness is like stone, and needs to be cut with iron, then it should be done carefully just below the bone, with a subtle, light incision; and apply compression and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations occur from a joint moving out of place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs unexpectedly, it may be necessary to act immediately to reduce the pain.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Because if treatment is delayed, the limb may swell, and upon resetting it, one might cause additional pain; therefore, it is not advisable to move the limb when it is inflamed. Often, this leads to swelling and other pains. However, once the inflammation subsides, the patient should be made comfortable, then apply hot water and oil, gently reset the dislocation, and treat each member as appropriate for its specific condition.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the shoulder joint all the way to the foot.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the mandibles are dislocated, and this dislocation occurs in two ways: either they are slightly out of their sockets, somewhat bent; or they are completely dislocated, hanging down towards the chest, and preventing the mouth from closing, so that the person cannot hold saliva in their mouth, cannot close their lips, and their tongue moves around with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns to its proper position through more or less orderly arrangements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is entirely and fully healed, then you must reset it forcefully, without delay; in such a way that the healers place their hand firmly on the patient's head, and pull the lower jaw gently from the root of the dislocation inside the mouth, where the dislocation is from two parts; and the other two hands should be extended, making them equal. Then command the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And make the other hand equal, until it returns to its proper place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is brought back, it should be carefully done, especially when both jaws are involved, by using hot water and oil, gently realigning them; do not delay in bringing them back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are realigned equally, and the patient's mouth closes well without straining, moistened bandages made of rose oil and wax should be applied, then gently tied with soft ropes; and let the patient sleep on their back, with their jaws resting between two pillows, so that they do not move to either side, nor make any efforts to open them wider, but gently chew soft food until the pain is gone and the jaws are healed; and then eat what they wish, without opening the mouth wide for eating or drinking, until the jaw is fully healed and strong.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be properly aligned within an hour and do not return to their original position, then there follow fevers and persistent pains, and perhaps intestinal distress or purulent vomiting.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, know that it is a sign of great danger; and often those who experience it die within seven days.
de la forcelle	(referring to) the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fork cannot be dislocated from any side within the continuity of it, and it is never dislocated properly outside, and one feels it very much.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then he presses the joint firmly in your palm, and it will return; then apply the plaster and bandage and tighten it; and the part that is towards the shoulder cannot dislocate; if it does not, or if it dislocates once, then you must put it back into its place, as we have said; then apply the plaster and bandage and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; and in this way the part of the shoulder is also brought back when it is out of its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	**Shoulder Dislocation**
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	You know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one is when it dislocates at the acromion process; the second is at the part of the scapula; and sometimes dislocates towards the top, which is rare; and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside the nerves; often it dislocates downward toward the acromion, especially in those with little muscle, because to them it goes easily; but for those with sufficient muscle, it barely dislocates, and returns barely.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to no one that a bone is shattered or broken, and causes an abscess in the hot shoulder, and they think it's dislocated because of that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary for you to test it, until you are certain; and then begin treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And dislocations are known when they turn towards the joint, and distinguish between the affected and healthy shoulder, and you will find their diversity manifest; and you will find in the top of the shoulder a hollow place, and by pressing on it, feel the top of the shoulder as if it were one; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his body, or move in any way; and also, if it is dislocated higher up, unless it is hidden, for you will find it manifestly by touch; and this type of dislocation is not merely to be reduced when it is new, or if the enemy is afflicted.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the healer places his hand on top of the patient's ill limb, then puts his palm beneath the joint, and pulls the joint upward with force towards the bone; and the healer lifts his hand and extends it overhead, then places it underneath; this will bring relief.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	If it does not come as described above, within a few days, then the patient must be bathed in hot water; administer gently a soothing and softening treatment, such as an infusion of fennel and melilot in water, and attend to them. Then, have the patient lie on their back and place a piece of equal thickness of wool beneath the joint, not too soft or too hard, then position their heel on it, and with care, pull up the head of the shoulder; massage the hand of the patient who has the illness, so that it does not move. This will correct the shoulder immediately, as you can see if done correctly: and make sure there is a witness present, someone stronger than the patient, who stands by the side of the bed, straight against the patient's ribcage; pull the patient's shoulder away from the joint beneath it with their hand, pulling it upward so that the patient's arm hangs down. Another assistant should massage the hand of the patient with the illness downward towards their stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, so that any heavy thing causes him trouble, then the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it is also remedied in another way: take a long stick and insert it into the ground so that the end of it is as bright as a pistol, neither too thick nor too thin; then place it under the patient, but ensure there are soft rags on top, and the patient's limb is extended along its length; then bend the patient's hand downwards from the other side, forming an arch, and the joint will return to its place naturally; and if it does not want to come back for all the reasons we have said, do this cure: take a stick from both arms, wide enough for four fingers, with a pointed end that can enter completely under the bone, according to this shape.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then he places a heavy cloth over the head, so that it does not hurt the patient, and puts the affected limb on top; then he extends his arm above the head, and attaches the aid to the head, and the arm to the wrist of the hand, then places the arm on the edge of a wide spatula, and extends his hand downwards, and lets the body hang from the other side: the joint is now realigned.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is aligned in any way, it is necessary that you place beneath the limb a spike of equal wool, then apply a poudered plaster device with incense and eagle's egg, over all the shoulder and around, then remove the spike from the limb carefully, and tie the bandage again on the plaster, and embrace the hand to his chest, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he move the dislocated part little by little, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it will heal faster; and then after one or two days he can move it; and if it remains stiff and is not softened, then it heals.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is stiff due to moisture or any other cause, it is necessary that you apply fire cautery in three places, as described in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and after seven days the dislocation releases but the joint does not hold, and the patient cannot raise his arm above his head, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut, stretched or damaged; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place again.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the worst side, and affects the joints, often occurs due to a sudden movement or stretch of the hands, and should be treated immediately; and cure as soon as it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after healing, if the member suffers from stiffness and movement is delayed, the patient often uses their hands repeatedly until the stiffness disappears and it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation, cost
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the dislocated joint is weakened to a degree, and it returns slightly; but if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not corrected because one can see and feel it well, then it is treated according to its form.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased part with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor reach its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in such a way that the vein does not close again, for if the vein closes after resetting it, it will be difficult to bring it back, especially when it is at the rear; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and possibly death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is possible when it can be brought back, that you extend his hand with both of yours; and his arms should be spread out, and the hands turned towards each other according to the cost around, from inside and outside, and bring the joint to his palms together, or to the base of his palm, until he returns to his place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his palm, and turn the base of the palm towards the joint that is out of place.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, apply a strong extension; and have the other minister extend the arm, and press it with his hand so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth around it; and when you see the joint aligned with the hand, rub it with no oil to soften the joint, then pull the joint firmly, until it returns; and once it is in place, apply dry plaster with egg white, and strain the limb, and bend the arm towards the patient's chest, and leave it for several days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firm in its place, loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not pull well, repeat the splint and bandage, and leave it for a few days, until it is firmly set; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if the patient feels pain after resetting the joint, and it becomes stiff, bathe and massage it gently, applying pressure until it is relaxed; or place a piece of fat sheep's wool on the joint, leave it for a day and night, then remove it, and give the patient a bath. And when the swelling has gone down, rub the joint temperately, then apply the wool again, and repeat this process twice or three times until it is healed; and if necessary, use fine moist warm wax with butter, and strain it over the joint. Then it will return to its normal position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand joint moves slightly and returns to its place, more so than other joints. It is important to bring it back into place gently, especially if the limb is swollen or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And when you bring it back, place the patient's hand on a table and extend their fingers, ensuring they are even, so that the palm rests over the joint, holding it in this position until it returns to its place. But it is important to check if it is back in its proper place; then place the patient's hand with the back of their hand on a table for extension and bringing it back.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, have the patient lie down on their hand on a table, and look closely at the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, then this is good; otherwise, if the pain of soothing abscesses persists, and it does not begin to heal,
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place for several days, then the joint remains crooked; and it does not cause any harm to the patient while the hand is swollen, and nothing can be extracted: then know that a nerve or an artery is severed; there is no other mechanism by which cautery can be used to extract it, and perhaps there is nothing else that helps.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, if you put the plaster we have mentioned on it, then pull it and leave it for a day, then loosen it and leave it so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well and there is no fracture, then moisten it with hot water and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	on the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	The fingers of the hand should never be dislocated at each joint, neither at the back of the palm nor on the palm's surface; then pull the finger and straighten the dislocation as it regrows, then hold the top of the finger, and bend it towards the joint where it is separated; leave it for a day, and then repeat this process every day until it heals; and do not bind it, as we have said, but loosen it each day and move it, and then re-bind it; and do so often, while it remains stiff, and also do the same if it is dislocated on the palm surface, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and also do this when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	dislocation of the spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine or the neck is dislocated, and there is no cure, the patient's condition worsens quickly, leading to death.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the patient's limbs jump spontaneously without their will, they cannot hold them, and often the muscles of the legs or arms or both become weak, and sometimes the spine becomes rigid in four parts; the part that becomes rigid at the back is called "gycosis". The treatment for this is to reward the patient if the gycosis has been present since childhood; if there is no cure or recovery from it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And for that which comes from a fall or impacts or similar events, the ancient methods of treatment speak in grand words, offering no great benefit; but I have abbreviated it according to my understanding and formed tools in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the stiffness that comes to the penis facing down, no one has a remedy; and also for that which comes straight to the side, and it cannot be cured from outside except by the one who comes to the back, as I said; and it is that the patient should lie on his face equally in the first position, and have traction underneath him so he does not move; then insert a stick into the ground forming an angle, and another at the pelvis, and tie a band around the patient's limbs, and another at the ankles, and at the knees, and at the wrists; and these practitioners know the bands, one on the head and the others on the feet, among the two sticks; and they should be well secured, the stick as we have said, and let the pain come back.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a table three feet long, cut through the wall from behind, place the patient on their side, and turn the head of the table away from the wall; then place the middle of the table over the spine, and put both feet under the other end of the table, pressing firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see fit, do this in a rotating motion that turns towards your hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And take two sticks, each a foot long, and place them at the head of the patient on one side, and insert two more below the feet on the other side; between each stick, dig a groove deep and wide enough, and make an opening in each stick through which it can rotate, so that they do not move; and between the two rotating sticks, there should be a smaller stick to facilitate rotation. Then tie the stick that connects the handles to the rotating part near the head, and the other handle to the feet at the other end, and let each assistant turn their handle until the entire spine is aligned as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, apply a dry plaster with plenty of heat, then the compresses, and then the end of a tablet three fingers long, which should adhere to the area of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the patient's gentle rest, until they are healed; and if any thing comes about at the end of health, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the help that we have mentioned above; and never should a piece of bone be administered, nor does it ever appear in the rear spine, and one should not think it is dislocation; and it is the opening of the joint, for which one must not have presumption, for perhaps death would come about.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of dislocations of the neck.
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You know that the joints of the neck and the joints of the shoulder only result in dislocations, unlike other joints; and the joint of the neck is misaligned according to four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more so inside, and less so at the front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is such that when you join the affected leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and opens up the affected knee more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee fully; and it is the inflammation around the abscess above that causes this, because the root of the thigh comes over here.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who experiences this in the dying, it is that this event is contrary to what has been said before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who experiences this beforehand, it is that his leg is sound according to its strength; nevertheless, do not bend the knee without pain, and if one wishes to make it walk, it cannot do so until later, and it retains urine, and the ankle swells, and when he tries to stand, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who experiences this afterward, it is that he cannot extend or bend his knee, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the muscle of the thigh sticks to the bone along the sides.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	They must reset this appearance of dislocation if it is an old dislocation that persists according to its nature, as there is no cure; and one must not let him have any pride.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for him whose dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, act quickly to reset the joint, bringing it back inside and aligning it correctly, both forward and backward; perhaps then it will return, and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, one must use a strong assistant, extending the leg strongly with two hands or binding it at the knee; another assistant should place his hand above in such a way that he flexes his hands beneath his armpits, then pulls firmly on a strong ligament on the calf; another should hold the head with a ligament; and all at once extend it upward and downward until the patient is lifted from the ground and remains still.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to all three positions, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If it is not, then it is necessary to take care of this appearance. When the dislocation is in the hidden place, it is good that you remind the patient of his healthy side, then tie him to the root of the thigh, and the limb that is detached from the wound, then extend the tie upwards towards the wound and against the force; then ask another helper to grasp the patient's arms, and embrace the large limb of the afflicted thigh, and stretch it in the opposite direction: it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot hold it in the manner we have said, then it is necessary that you bind both feet of the patient together with a strong, soft cord on their heels and knees, and let the sick leg be extended two fingers longer than the others; then hang it from the top of a post, and let it hang above the ground by two long arms; then command the assistant to embrace the head of the thigh, and have other assistants hanging with the patient, who embrace the thigh, for the joint will now return healthily.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when dislocation is outside, if the patient lies as we have said in the case of gilbosity, then tighten the bandage precisely on the sick leg and also on the foot; then place two hot coals, one at the head and one at the foot, and insert a hot coal between the cuisses of the patient, forming it; and surround him with wet cloths so that he does not hurt himself, then stretch each assistant towards him, and make them put their hands equally on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it does not return, place it on a table and press it as we have said in the previous section, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the diseased leg forcibly, as I have said; and place the bandage so that the pain does not remain on the sore angle, then press with the other hand and stretch it downward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the joint, it does not suit to extend the patient down or lift him up from the ground, but rather he should remain as his hip was dislocated earlier, just as we have said gently on both hips; and it should be done on his face, and the limb extended as we have said before, and all should press on the joint on the table. And it will be perfect when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even. Then adjust the thighs, and apply the plaster, and wrap a bandage tightly so that the hip does not move; and rest for three or four days, then release him and apply the plaster again; and if you see them to be even, tighten as before, and leave it for three days. Then release it, and make him go gently until the member is healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From the dislocation of the knee.
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The patient is dislocated in three ways: internally, externally, and posteriorly; but not anteriorly.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if he does not release it at the knee, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place his face on your hand, and place his foot on yours. Then take the patient's knee in your palms, and pull gently between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee joint; and another assistant extends the patient's foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he releases his leg slightly at the knee. And apply a poultice, and raise the leg at the knee, and bind them together firmly for three or four days, then release it; and let not the patient move about, until the member is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not fully extended, apply strong stretching as we have said in the treatment of the shoulder, as long as it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	On the dislocation of the heel.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is neither completely dislocated nor fully aligned, and it moves both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and there is tension before the part that is dislocated; the reduction is light, and one should gently extend their hand to it when it is slightly dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated from all sides, it is necessary that you make the patient lie straight, and hold him by the leg, above the ankle; then take the foot in your right hand, and twice with your left, then stretch it up high, and nicely bring the foot up high; do this twice more, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, begin the work again, for it will return; and if it cannot return in this way, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and insert a firm stick between his thighs, and wrap cloth around him so he does not hurt himself; then have each assistant hold the thigh, and others extend the foot to his hands or to the ankle, that it be held fast with the foot; then stretch each assistant equally, and the stick should remain between the patient's thighs to keep him in place when stretched; then put the mirrors equally on both sides of the dislocation, and another assistant hold the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return firmly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at the right length, he should apply a poultice and compress, forming a strain around it, and fasten the foot to the leg, securing the stirrups behind on the ankle, so that the ligature is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the strain subsides, remove it on the third or fourth day, and let the patient walk for four days; and if he improves further, it is not certain that he will not recover completely.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess forms, it is necessary to calm it, as we have said elsewhere, while it is still healthy.
des dois	Of these two things
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the fingers are dislocated, if they need to be extended without strain, it is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any other part of the foot or leg, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back or on a table completely upright, and place your foot on what opens up from the joints, then press with your foot in a forming motion until it returns; and when it is even and nothing opens, place a wooden block under the sole of the foot, then pull it with force, and leave it for three days, then release it; and make them rest until they are healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	From wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and it needs to be restored, often the patient dies if they are not careful in its treatment; so, do not be presumptuous in the cure, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, nor quick or merciful or tardy. In the beginning, use hot poultices on the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if there is no hope of healing; but when there is hope, now reposition the limb to its place, so that the abscess heats from below; and when the limb is in place, administer soothing poultices on the abscess, and treat the wound as appropriate with desiccated herbs; and if with dislocation there are broken bones and small bones are out of place, reset them, and do what we have said for simple diseases; and beware to enter a path of fear, according to what I have said, because that will move you according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your arm and body.
Amen	Indeed
