O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, most dear children, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science, its fulfillment, and have finished it through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I completed this with a treatise, which is the part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And since the work of hands is practiced extensively in our region and is strange to all, the knowledge has been lost and cut off, and there is no longer any record of its power other than small descriptions in old books about what the hands have done.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this, error and vanity have arisen, and intentions are closed, and knowledge is estranged.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will revive this treatise by organizing it according to the order of exposition and explanation, and by providing an overview; I will bring together the forms of cauterizing instruments and other tools used in the work, along with adjustments to their declaration and preparation, as is required.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who wishes to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, must know the judgment of the members, their forms and conjunctions and separations, have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins, and the number of their branches, and how they move and rest, and from where they emanate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And Hippocrates says that knowledge without practice is useless, and practice without knowledge is dangerous; especially in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that he who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, risks falling into error and misleading others; as I have often seen happen with many who undertake this science without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a terrible sight, which affected the scrofula of the neck of a woman, and it affected the arteries of her neck; so much blood issued forth that the woman died in the woman's hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another strange sight where a stone was removed from an old man's bladder; the stone was large. It took with it a piece of the bladder wall and the man suffered for three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; I knew well that if it was not cut out, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another wonder which took in hand the treatment of our land's duke who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had an open wound; and all the learned, out of ignorance, held fast to the fracture over the wound as if by strong bonds, leaving no space for the wound to heal, and left it thus until the end; and ordered that he should not loosen it; and so delayed that the leg became completely swollen and painful, and eventually perished.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I quickly went to loosen the leg; and when I heard it dislocate, it was as if in peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way of corruption was already confirmed in the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was entirely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I have seen another wonder that the abscess, which had been healed, then burst again due to the malignancy of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For the ulcer, when it is free from melancholic humor, it is not appropriate to apply iron if it is not in a place where everything that is corrupted can be completely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the art of healing is divided into two parts: that is to say, work involving danger in various ways; and I will show you in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Therefore, guard against any vain imagination that the foolish might speak ill of you. Take up your weapons with courage and undertake your sick with gentleness and firmness, using the best means so that by God's grace you may find salvation and be saved; banish diseases filled with despair through health; lay down your arms if they cause doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the other in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in none of his warnings: "Do not take any illness too seriously, lest you be called a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterization and the use of bitter medicine, and it is ordered from the head down to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the tools for cauterization, and everything that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and the use of poultices and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is ordered and includes the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar conditions; it provides instructions for using the right tools from head to foot, and the shapes of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore, in remembering the work, it is necessary that I describe the qualities of each aid and its harmful effects on each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and their harmful effects are the most extensive knowledge and subtle science, and these secrets are revealed; and many wise men spoke of them and agreed upon this; and I will content myself with a few words, as I fear lengthening this discussion.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally for every condition where it has matter, whether it be hot or dry conditions: that is to say, a hot condition with material, and a dry condition without material.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In both hot and dry conditions, matter is present, and they devised different opinions, some saying that cautery is great help, and others saying the opposite: that cautery is of no use for diseases arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with heat for hot diseases, neither by heat nor dryness; and he who says the contrary states that cautery provides great help for hot and dry diseases that come upon the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of a man and its moisture to the complexion affected by fire, you feel the body is hot.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any case, no one should attempt it unless they have tried it themselves, and know through long experience the chapter of cautery, and the variety of human complexes, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the outcomes and the passage of time; for other complexes we only have fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all agreed and assembled around the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, son, that cautery brings together fire, which is a secret of healing, and moreover, it is much gentler than medicinal burning cauterization.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	Because fire is simple, and it does not come from outside the burned member, and it does not harm any other member.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Medicinal burn treatments travel from one member to another, and they cause the afflicted member grief and prevent healing; and sometimes the fire does not harm the patient because of its high quality and the goodness of its substance, as long as it is not excessive.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And because I have found it through experience and the long service and study that I have put into the art, and it is in accordance with the truth of the matter, I will excuse myself for the length of the speech, for I do not like to deprive you of the secret hidden within fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives diseases from the body, as the philosopher demonstrates; consider it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know this, my son, that there is agreement among them as to when cauterization should be performed and the best tools to use.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the pain-relieving effect of cauterization removes the harm; and indeed, cauterization is often necessary in cases of severe and urgent pain that cannot wait for a more serious illness to affect the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear child, as they do who follow folly; for the illness that is healed by cautery has no return; and it must be so. But it is not like how they care for it, because cauterization is only a medicine that alters the complexion, dries up the humors that cause pain, and moves more quickly than other medicines due to the worth of its action and mastery.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And another thing that must be known is that the illness comes according to the state of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and excesses accumulate within it through the acquisition of foods and similar things, except when cauterization is applied in moderation where there is little excess and moisture, as in the cauterization for pain and similar conditions, and this kind of pain does not return; but that happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last of medicine, and that's true; but they do not believe that cautery has any value after medicine, for when we administer treatments in any illness, and they are useless, then let us use cautery, and it will be beneficial.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it becomes clear that cautery is indeed the last of medicine, not at all according to the understanding of ignorant people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that gold cautery instruments are better than iron ones, and they only spoke of fire for the quality of the gold and for the nobility of its substance; and they said that the heat of cautery does not burn, but this is not true, as I have experienced it myself, and I have found that it does indeed burn in everyone; and gold cautery is more effective than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat the gold instrument, you are not certain if it is hot through and through because of its golden color, and as soon as it cools down; and if it is overheated, it becomes damaged; thus there is ample hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use fire cautery because we have equipped ourselves with the necessary tools for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	You have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, so that the way may be easier to follow.
dou cautere olivaire	olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Cyst cauterization is applied to the brain using moisture and cold, and it is effective for conditions caused by a disease called "soda" and due to many humors that descend from the head to the ears, and for frequent dreams, toothache, throat pain, and especially for diseases arising from cold, such as paralysis, soda (a term possibly referring to a type of stroke), apoplexy, and similar conditions.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient is purged with a solvent medicine, cleansing the head, either three times or four, according to the virtue, age, and custom of the patient's illness; and then the head is allowed to dry again.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make it rest crossed in your hands, placing his hands on both sides of his body; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his neck between his two fingers; and let where your thumb and forefinger meet, if it bleeds, then heat up the cautery called 'olive', which has this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Mark the location with an ink sign, and repeatedly descend and stretch your hand while gently trembling; then lift your hand carefully, and check if you see the bone move slightly; if not, repeat the cauterization until you see the bone as I have told you. Afterwards, take some string, put dry and soft cotton inside, place it on the wound, and leave it for three days; then cover it with butter-moistened cotton, and keep it until the scalding is gone; finally, treat the wound with a preparation called 'tetrafarmacy' while it remains clean.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they say that the older the wound, the more it purifies itself; and for this reason, it requires more help.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one should not leave the fire cautery to burn off part of the bone, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it will be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another says that one should leave the cautery for a long time, and pull so hard to reduce the bone as if women were opening their wombs to let humors flow out; and one should keep the wound open for a long time; after which, it must be cleaned and dressed.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cautery do not seem good to me at all, except for those who have no choice but to suffer; and I think I should leave them; because the joint is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, just as we witness in other members; and even when the patient's joint is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery seems safer and more mobile to me, and from this I use it accordingly.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain in the head comes and lasts for a long time, patients should use herbs and pills called "cough drops", as well as applications of poultices; and if one performs the cautery that we have mentioned above, it will be ineffective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient's joint is of strong nature and not too frozen; then cauterize it from below, using the cautery as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterizing each horn of the shoulder joint, as we said before, and cauterizing the one called "vessel," which is where the suction cups are placed, hold your hand aloft so that you do not see the bone. The patient feels much greater pain from this cautery than from others, and I will speak of it then; it is necessary that the cautery of the horns be more precise than that of the middle part of the shoulder, and this is its form.
dou cautere dou chief	For fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in a part of the head there is sudden pain, and the disease extends to the oil (or perhaps the brain), and the condition is purged with medicines according to the methods described in the division of diseases, and all these treatments are ineffective, then one must resort to cautery, according to two methods: that is, using hot medicine or fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with hot medicine is when you heat a piece of alder, remove the bark and dip it in the wound as deep as the tissue, and then make an incision where the pain is located in such a way that you can push the alder under the skin; and when it is pushed under, hold it there tightly for twelve hours. Then release it and treat the wound with hot compresses for two to three days, after which apply a plug soaked in butter until the infection subsides.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the healing treatment, as long as it is healthy; and if you see that something similar to what I have written about burning medications or the dosage for treating them has been done.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery instrument with this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is shaped like a clot with a small amount of curd, and in the middle there is a slight appearance; place it on the painful area, hold your hand, and turn it slightly so that half of the thickness of the heart is burned; then remove your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is dangerous, and an abundance of blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton in awe of the string, and putting it on the joint for three days; then he covers it with moistened butter, and then dresses the joint with medicine until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called 'cultellare', be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have previously described in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cautery mentioned provides no help, then you must reheat the cautery called 'cultellare' until it is white; then seal over the painful joint with a line half a finger's length long, and remove your hand once, so as not to cover the artery and not let blood come out; be careful of the jaw that moves when chewing, and let the nerve pay no mind except to move and avoid spasms from affecting the patient; be wary of the bleeding from the artery when it is cut, especially for someone who lacks knowledge or experience, and leave the work in the middle. But I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and show you where in this book it is mentioned.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice against the disease, and the patient suffers, burn the affected area again as we have said, and treat the wound until it is clean; and if you observe, apply the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of arteries, with a cautery having two blades; and this cautery is better and more helpful than the other.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	regarding the pain of the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold, and various soothing medicines and other treatments as mentioned in our divisions have been applied, but the pain persists, then use this cautery called "point," which has the following form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncturing the entire painful ear, or both ears if they hold pain in either, and pulling slightly away from the root of the ear after marking the place with a sign, take ten points around each ear; then treat the wound until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	regarding the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture that requires cautery is limited to those that involve fluid movement, as we have discussed in the sections on disease; and do not perform cautery on areas that exhibit dryness, rust, or nerve pain.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this kind of pain that mutates from fluid of water and purging from the head and gargarism, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little farther down the temple, and the third on the adjustment of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that opens healthily, and make the cautery on the top of the ear above a little below the brow, and another in the temple just as far; and leave the cautery until half of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it resembles the cutting tool that we have previously mentioned, but it is a little more subtle, and it is necessary for the knife to be slightly thicker; after that, treat it as I have said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then do four cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, one on the forehead, and one on the liver, which is called "vassel," as we have previously mentioned, and do not cauterize anything on the mouth of the stomach; treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	De litargie" translates directly to "on lith
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large and pure mental rest; then gently turn the head of the sick person, and place on his forehead an application of mustard plaster, as described in the preparation of plasters; and this is the manner of cauterization: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy thus, good; and if it is not, make three cauterizations on the inside of the thigh down to the bone, and leave two large spaces between each cauterization, and treat it as the others, and if you see it becoming inflamed, and the patient is suffering, make one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and treat until it is healthy; and this cauterization called 'olivare' as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from the cold at the top
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be purified with earth and water as we have said before; then wash the patient's head, make a cauterization between the chief and each horn, and three on the spine of the collarbone; and if you need it, and the flesh is moist and the patient suffers and the illness is severe, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most tender heart is burned, and then ease your hand. After that, treat until it is healthy, and this cauterization called 'olivare' as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery unless they are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to purify the brain with years and other treatments that we have discussed in the section on great pain and suffering from medicinal failure.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an evil spirit that cannot endure this, then gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meats; after the ruler places his head in the middle, perform cautery as we have said before, and cauterize the veins and each horn. And if the patient is weak and suffering, perform cautery as I have said to one with paralysis and softening of the limbs, on the spine and neck, and cauterize with olive oil according to the manner that I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is ill, perform a delicate cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When, due to melancholy, there are excessive or corrupted moisture and thick fluxes, then perform cauterization with partial cautery as we have said for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if, due to melancholy, the excessive moisture declines into melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be purified, as it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After preparing the patient's head, make an incision around it neatly, just as you would draw a circle, and place it back on the head; let the patient lie with their eyes crossed and firmly held from all sides; then apply the dressing, and use a small amount of old sheep butter; warm the mixture at a moderate fire, so that the patient can bear it; afterward empty the circle inside the head, and leave it to cool; and repeat this treatment for the patient once each week with another suitable remedy until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you must cauterize it, make several small incisions throughout the cauterization.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery moistens the skin increasingly; then place cotton soaked in butter and gelatine upon it.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes first show signs of displacement as described in the previous section, then treatment begins and the patient is given something to drink, a purifying remedy for the head, and care is taken of all moisture, and sudorifacient or bath is administered several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After instructing the patient to look straight ahead, he should be made to gaze up at the ceiling, and then two cauterizations are performed on both temples if the eye movement is in both directions together, or separately if it moves only in one; all veins and arteries beneath the heart should be carefully cauterized, and the cautery should be long according to the width of the temple, and care must be taken to prevent bloodletting, and if too much blood issues, it should be stopped as you see fit.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you, in the extraction of arteries and in the incision, how to do it carefully; and never should one cauterize or burn the bones from behind.
dou cors des larmes	The pain of the heart.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are long-standing and habitual, and are in the veins, where the arteries are visible, then one should apply the fire cautery that I spoke of at the beginning of this chapter: one cauterizes over the eye, and two cauterizes on both temples, and two cauterizes behind the bones; and if more is needed, one cauterizes sharply across the eyebrow with all the small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Let the body weep through the eyes.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the previous section, and it does not improve, then give the patient three drops of a mixture of herbs; after warming his head, perform cauterization in the middle of the cautery with olive oil; make two cauterizations on each shoulder with the cautery called 'clavilis', slightly below the hairline; and be careful not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called 'clavilis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the skin is softened by disease and moisture, then use this cautery which is called "olive-style".
de coi ci est li forme:	Due to which the form is:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you perform the cauterization on both sides of the wound as long as the scars are; and do not let go of the instrument until one-third of the skin is burned, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that is not yet oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time does it happen that the hair of the wound is converted to a different color, and it pricks, and one performs cauterization according to two manners: namely, with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a clean bed; next, draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as large as the wound is deep, and make it at the beginning of the sign among the hairs; then apply moist cotton in egg white and musk from persil over the wound, and then heat the cauterizing iron with this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the affected area little by little, burn the surrounding skin; and the signs of healing are that you see the paper-like skin retreating, and the hairs standing up at the tip of the oil; then gently release your hand and leave it for three days, after which apply moistened cotton in butter until the burning is gone; subsequently, continue treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs grow back, and the paper-like skin becomes soft, then resume cauterizing in the same place as before; and if the hairs are burned, cauterize again while the skin is raised to its natural state, and it is even, and the hairs do not poke into the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medicinal fire cauterization is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment shape of the leaf of mirta (myrrh). Take French soap and bright charcoal, each in equal parts, and grind them together thoroughly; apply it gently so as not to chill, then spread it over the form made like the leaf of myrrh, and place paper on top. If the illness persists in one oil only, one must operate in one way, and similarly for both. Put cotton soaked in warm oil underneath, and the afflicted part should be in your healthy hand; apply your finger showing the medicine, press gently and slowly every time the patient feels the sting of the medicine, because it stings as if from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	As you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine from your body.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has passed, raise the limb from below, and reward if you see the papery skin raised as it was before by constraint of fire or incision; and if it is thus, so it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply more medicine to the limb, as long as your work is even and your fingers precise; then place moistened cotton on it until the burning of the herbs is extinguished, after which cure the limb with the dressing called 'dyafenis' and others, as long as it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have to take care of yourself, guard your work carefully so that it does not deviate from the cure at all.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hairs poke in the oil, repeat the treatment on that place which has become soft from the paper, just as you did before; then cure it until it is healed; and this is the form of the poultice with great care.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the needs of men vary in size and extent, and according to your circumstances; and do not turn away from the right path those who have study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of a fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have discussed in the sections on illnesses, and your treatments are not helping, then you must perform cautery on it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in a healthy position, and hold their arm's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or wiggle, keeping their head still. Afterwards, apply moist cotton or persil juice over the oil. Next, heat up the cautery tool until it is hot enough. Position it on the head, making sure it covers the entire area like a feather, or like a tent, but at all times, ensure that the edge of the cautery is curved for your convenience.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, open it and drain the pus and dry it; if it closes again, repeat the process and apply hot cautery; hold your hand over the cautery at the affected area above the oil, so that your hand does not cause harm; place the cautery on the fat of the oil and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you start the cautery close to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If that does not work, repeat the cauterization once more, or as many times as necessary, and leave it for three days; then apply moist cotton in butter, and continue the treatment of the drying dressing until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is still not healed, apply a corrosive medicine to the exposed bone; and the remedy should be according to what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for a fistula that no one among the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand the fistula and locate its origin; then, place a fine, sharp tool into the gap, thereby forming:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and make it in the quantity of a drop of blood; and hold your hand firm, so that the patient does not move at all, until the splint is completely formed; and it is necessary to put a piece of moist cotton on the wound to prevent infection or harm: the splint will loosen the fistula from its place and heal it wonderfully.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the ulcer is healed by the cautery we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If this does not happen, it is necessary to administer warmth or cold, and return the ulcer to the body according to what is appropriate for its own place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks appear in the lips, called "poil," especially on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	As you treat these wounds of which we spoke in detail, and the cure does not benefit, then heat a small surgical knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	and insert it into the wounds until it reaches the bottom; then treat the skin with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms in the throat's root or tonsil, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it causes putrefaction, swelling, and becomes a fistula; then you treat it as we spoke about in detail, but it does not help: in this case, you need to perform cautery according to the size of the fistula. Remove or open the fistula's hole, and keep your hand there until the heat from the fire reaches the bottom, without touching anything else; do this once or twice after treating it as we described for wounds, until it heals; and if treated in this way, it will heal well. If not, you need to expose the affected area and remove any rotten bone, as is explained in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	without any joint movement
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it does not help, then put the afflicted part of the mouth in a healthy place; afterwards, heat the cautery with which the shape will come as if you placed a candle on the tooth; and insert the hot cautery deeply, holding your hand until the patient feels the warmth reaching the root of the tooth; then release your hand and repeat the cauterization according to your desire; after that, have the patient fill his mouth with salty water and leave it for an hour or so.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the teeth that were moving will be firmly set, the gums that were softened will be restrained, and the moisture corrupted will dry up.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of teeth comes from coldness or frost or chill, and medical remedies are ineffective, then it is necessary to apply cauterization in two ways: with butter cautery or fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	For butter cautery, take some butter and press it into a spoon made of iron or silver; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a stick, soak it in melted butter, and apply it to the aching tooth with patience until it cools; do this repeatedly until its effect reaches the root of the tooth. If you find that the moisture from the wool and cotton has evaporated, and you apply the butter again while holding the hot iron over the aching tooth, then the heat will reach the nerve of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	He uses fire cautery if it is such that you can insert a piece of iron or steel, making it large enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth; then, after heating the cautery, its shape will form as follows, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be lessened on the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in anticipation of this cautery, and then quickly takes it out; and this is the shape of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And perform cautery on the upper lip where you wish, according to your ability; and this is the shape of the instrument.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is of cold moisture, and is not obedient to digestion by medicines, then apply heat to the cautery, so that after this, there are openings for the fumes to escape from the cautery in the other part; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or as it is necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its quantity, leaving it thus for three days; and then apply moist cotton with butter until the burn is healed; after that, treat the wound with oil and bandages until it is clean.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the wound:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture conquers the channels of the body, especially when it arises from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be relieved by solvent medicines; afterward, he should have cauterization at the root of the throat, and beware not to go near the throat, and only apply warmth gently.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, he performs another cauterization at the joint of the collarbone with the top of the spine, and these cauterizations called "clavicle" which we have described above; treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	from the heat
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and any sickness of the head are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or rigour, and if it is an old illness, then make two cauterizations on strong parts of his body; and another cauterization between the two members; and this cauterization which is called 'clavile' should be according to the shape mentioned above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make a cauterization by pricking all over the cauterization called 'poins', which is as mentioned above in the illness of the ears; and these points can be up to 30, or more inside.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment, reset the limb according to what is mentioned above, and make the cauterization in three stages according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because cautery is lighter, because you do it three times as often.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	On the dislocation of the shoulder.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, remember to instruct the patient about the pain they feel on their back and side; afterwards, apply the heat with your left hand, gently pressing at the joint that is displaced inside. If the joint feels better after applying heat, then form it into a shape using cautery with two thin instruments.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and burn the heart as long as it feels hot, and let the image of the burn be three burns together; and for this reason, the burn is made with a burn that has three edges, so the shape of the burn that has three edges is one burn.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never should it be adjusted on this nerve, for there are eight burns.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the burn, place a bandage with silk; then rest the patient, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated from above, this happens poorly, then apply cautery over the thick flesh with a hot cautery instrument, or many cauteries with sharp instruments.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	Because the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach while it is being drained of its humors, the catarrh increases in him and the usual remedies are ineffective, then the patient should be careful on his back, extending his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this and afterwards make III cauterizations removing the knife from the deepest part as much as a thumb's width, claving it firmly, and two cauterizations exiting from the two sides so that the shape of the cautery is at three angles, and there is such space between them that they are not joined together when they rot; and let the cautery be so perfect that it sears both parts of the heart, and the shape of the cautery is according to this form without adjustment.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you are cauterized with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and he who is afraid of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and signing on the stomach at one point according to the amount you see fit; then cauterize the entire cautery called 'point'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment we have previously mentioned, as long as he is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver experiences pain from gallstones, moisture, and excessive flatulence due to excesses, and it is out of its natural state, the patient is treated as we have previously mentioned, which does not benefit them. It is necessary for the patient to rest on their head, and signs of three cauterizations should be made according to this form, figure, and quantity on the liver, removing the bad humors from where they originate; there should be enough space between each cauterization, about the thickness of a finger. The cauterization should be long in duration but do not press too hard with your hand over the entire cautery; burn only the middle part of the liver gently, and the patient should be on their feet with their legs extended and bras relaxed. This is the method:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish to cauterize these wounds with a steel instrument, if you are skillful and wise in the art, be careful not to burn the entire heart, for you would cause great damage throughout the body; and do not let it come to boiling, for the blood vessels are very delicate in this place, and only the skilled will see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you need to know if it is inside or around the liver: if it is inside, the patient feels a moderate level of pain; but if it is around the liver, they feel excruciating pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure requires attention, the patient must rest his head; then he should apply a signet to the joint where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a rose, in the following manner:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize the cautery until the veins are burned, and the pus comes out completely; after the cure, according to the treatment of the wounds, as long as it is healed; and it is not appropriate for this cautery to be used by anyone other than someone who has studied medicine extensively and whose hands have never failed in treating these illnesses.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can safely move it, but I still think it's better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	The cautery of tears" does not appear to be a standard medical term in medieval
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should perform cautery on tears with the root of an herb called "aristologe", and in this way: take a long root of aristologe, the largest you can find, dry it, and make it as thick and as long as your hand; moisten it in oil, hold it over the fire, and cauterize between the eyebrows and the bridge of the nose, and small cautery a little lower on the face below the beard; and cauterize between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly behind; and another cautery across the middle, and another on the stomach, and between the shoulders, and along both sides of the lower ribs, deflating the cautery between the shoulders. Do not press your hand down, but hold it open as if smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they say that no ancient person should use fire cautery resembling a razor, and burn it and place it between the ribs, until it reaches this abscess; and there is great pain, as we have said about the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this case, there is fear, and the patients die now, or a fistula forms that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse according to the divisions of treatment we have mentioned, and it does not benefit, then they resort to three ways of cautery, all of which are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Remove the dislocation in such a way that you make three cauterizations, or four, following the length of the bone, according to the shape of the cautery of the fire that we have mentioned above; and do not rush your hand over the entire cautery, and let the patient be cautious on his back; and another way to cauterize is to heat the cautery with two nails, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and remove the nucleus located at the bone, where the patient feels pain coming from the left side, and raise the elevation by which you remove the nucleus according to the direction of the bone, following the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After you have pulled the two nails, ignite them until the nucleus is pierced on the other side, and then quickly remove the cautery; in this way, there will be four. And if you see, cauterize the entire cautery with three nails.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when he has had fever for a long time, and this requires more care than the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	Dyshydrasia" is the modern term for
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not effective for the hyponatremic, except in the manner known as "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	If your treatment according to the methods we have discussed in divisions is not effective, then you should perform four cauterizations around the waist, one on the stomach, one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the anus; and these cauterizations should be close to the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the fire cautery open for a long time to allow pus to drain, and not letting the patient touch it afterward, healing will be swift, and both intentions (of healing) will be achieved with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the stomach should be a clamp as we have shown before, and for the back, it should be olive-shaped, according to what is depicted above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of stones
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the stones are swollen in an hypochondriac person and filled with yellow pus, you should cauterize just below the foot's little toe and ring finger; and gently apply the fire cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And don't enter too deeply, so as to prevent the citrus heat from penetrating, and perform the cauterization according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make two cauterizations on each leg, at the tip of a sharp knife; and let the cauterization be long, one on the inside of the knee joint and the other on the outside, along the leg; and leave the cauterizations to heal for a long time without cleaning, so that the wound heals; then cure the other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	of the joint
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the problem in the stomach comes from cold and moisture, weakening the retention and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines, and it cannot be cured by any means; then you see the patient suffering greatly and possessing great strength, so perform a strong cautery on the stomach as he has spoken of before, according to the cautery for the stomach, with subtle fires around, and three fires on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundance of moisture and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each joint, and small cauterizations on the stomach to lessen the great pain, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	On the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are of old standing and consist of corrupt, cold, moist humors, they are treated as we have said in the previous divisions, but they do not benefit from cauterization.  Make three incisions along the spine of the back, starting from the bottom and working upwards in a triangular pattern; one cauterization below the anus two fingers deep; if you believe the stomach is chilled, the meat does not cook, and there is bloating visible on the face, then apply a hot cauterization to the stomach as mentioned above, and another to the liver, and yet another across the entire area with a heated iron; leave the cauterization open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, reset the joint as long as it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	from the fleshiness called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you deal with the fleshiness called "thelul", if the cautery appears too sharp, then cover it entirely with a hot compress; leave it until the heat reaches the vein, causing no harm. Do this once or twice, and if there is much "thelul" (flesh), cauterize each part as we have said before; afterward, apply beneficial remedies as long as they are healed, and if you cauterize a large area with a hot tool, it will be of greater help.
de plaie mal curee	From the poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we shall relate in its place, such a disease arises that can only be healed by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a vein becomes fistulated, swollen, and discharged with putrid pus and corrupt moisture, you must try all subtle remedies, and be sure to know the effect of each remedy in detail.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery to a sharp point, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the tentacle has entered, and repeat the cautery as many times as necessary—once, twice, or three times—depending on the quantity of corrupt and putrid material; and be careful not to burn the sensitive nerves or large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	He punctures the bladder and intestines, if you guard these joints, and do not make fires except in the flesh, and think that it is not harmful; afterward cure the joint as long as it is healthy, and if the joints are stable and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the joint is entirely healthy; and if the matter is not removed, know that the joint is weak, and the bone is corrupted at the bottom, just as we will say about one of these in its place.
de la maladie des reins	regarding the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of kidney stones and severe windiness comes and does not allow a woman to bear it, then you must perform cautery on the kidneys from both sides with a cauterizing iron that we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a row, and it will bring greater relief.
de la vessie	from the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from fluid and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then it should be cauterized in the upper part on top of the bladder where they begin to feel hair, both on the right and left sides, and each cautery should be as long as a finger; and also cauterize it at the back if necessary; and make the cauteries shaped as mentioned above.
de la marris	of the mare (female horse)
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the wound is cold and moist, it does not allow healing, and the flowers (scabs) form poorly and take a long time to fall off; when they do come off, great pain is felt. Then it is necessary to perform three cauterizations around the wound, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back; and these cauterizations should be done with a nail, as we have said.
de la hainche	The term "de la hainche" is not present in the
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends into the chest of the hinch (a term for a condition affecting the joints), this causes it to be immobile, and the signs are that the affected leg appears longer than the other when measured together; there is a visible swelling in the affected joint, and it is necessary to cauterize the patient above the chest of the hinch with a circular cauterization, marking around the joint as it moves, so that the joint remains within the circle; and the cauterization should be similar to that used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present for you, then make three cauterizations from the large olive, and let the cauterization be as perfect as all the others; and treat until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain arises in the back, due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured as we have said in the previous section, but the treatment is ineffective, and the illness is chronic, then you must purge the patient of the bad humors with foul or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	Afterward, he performs cautery; and the manner of cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, altogether burning medications, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is performed in many ways, of which some are: You cauterize along the ribcage, making three triangular cauterizations according to this form, ensuring sufficient depth and width, with a space between each cauterization equal to the thickness of two fingers, and they are olive-shaped. Never perform cautery in the middle of the chest, for there should be three according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, cauterize with the cautery around the circle that we have spoken of in the dislocation of the shoulder; but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the shoulder, and all the parts of the heart are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain is localized in the shoulder and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the pain reaches the thigh and the leg, make two cauterizations at the point where the patient feels the pain, and one on top of the ankle, slightly to the left; these cauterizations should be with a cutting instrument, and they should burn the thick parts of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain spreads towards the knee or near it, cauterize there, at the point where he feels the pain, three times or four times with the cautery called "point.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain comes from the knee towards the thigh, he should perform a cautery with a cutting or circular instrument, and be very careful in all his cauterizations so that he does not leave them untreated for too long, lest he burn the nerves and major arteries, and do further harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I myself have seen many who have performed a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left them until the leg was completely swollen, and the ankle as well, it became pierced and corrupted throughout the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal solution, he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, perform cautery on both, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise ones say about cautery for the hinch, which is the manner, take a needle of iron, also as thick as a new date or slightly thinner, and make it intertwined from one side to the other with spaces the size of a thumb's nail; interweave them across both parts, making them as straight as possible, and use a well-made iron tool; this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it turns completely red and begins to exude blisters, then place it on the wound of the diseased hinch, and turn towards its healthy side; perform cauterization once again after the first cautery, leaving it for three days; then apply a paste of butter, and keep the wound open for a long time until it heals.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use this cautery sparingly due to the danger of its power, and we should see few who employ it; nonetheless, these are good cauteries, which one can endure, and where they are needed.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The hot medical cautery is made by attaching a tool with a descending edge to a handle, either of iron or steel, mounted on a long pole. It should have a width of about the thickness of a finger and be open both below and above, joining together in this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the hot plate of the cautery on the patient's healthy side, and quickly covering your hand with a cloth over the plate, pour between the two circles of the hot awl, which has been heated over the fire, and leave it for an hour, allowing the patient to feel the heat and burn.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it has true cauterization just like fire; and when the cauterization is passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hair gently, leaving it for three days, and apply butter until the blackness from the burn disappears; and leave it for three more days to ensure the healing of the wounds as long as it remains healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, apply the instrument with gentle force according to what you did for the hair, increasing it gradually; and this is the method of hot pain, which I have written about in the treatise on rectifying medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, both in equal amounts, grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	If he has a small opening, make it wider with the point of a razor, and put the pot in another well-sealed pot, and pour the mixture of alkali and lime over it, stirring gently until there is a thick layer on top; leave it like this until the liquid has completely evaporated. Then take all the remaining liquid, pour it over the lime and mix it as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And thus it becomes very useful in many medical works and cautery for other limbs, as it performs the same function as fire, and with other medicines such as feverfew, aniseed, lime in soap, all these ingredients mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment by which a noble man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic nerve, and he says that no other remedy was done, and he was completely healed once this cure was performed, and he bathed as he teaches below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says to do this in the following way: you press and grind fresh and dry lithargy with a little fat, and apply it to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and wrap it; and leave it for three hours or according to the amount that the patient no longer feels the burn.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter into a bath as long as the body is slightly aroused, and let it enter into the wound, and the pain will depart entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery with such medications unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it provides great aid; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take some lint and grease it with old oil, and apply it to the fossa between the big toe and the one called the crescent.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking a piece of dry chamomile, heat it in the fire until it becomes ash, and place it on the cloth, leaving it until it stains; and do so again, and do not stop doing so until you think by sense that it reaches the hunchback, and that the pain stops; and this method of cautery is called "chamomile cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	of the severe pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain arises in the back, either from sudden impact or excessive bloodletting, or from a similar feeling of cold, expanded matter, none of these signs warrant cauterization, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after the patient is voided of foul pills or other similar things, that one makes them on the back where the pain persists, in three lines marked with a signet, and on each line five cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cauterizations are made according to the cautery called "point"; and if you see fit, make three or four cauterizations at the median clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight and painful throat when they swallow, and fear; and you will find in the rear spine a sharp pain extending into the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and observe it being cured, cauterize it with the cautery iron according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	The cautery should own each part of the wound equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the wound with the cautery iron, piercing two or three lines, and let the points be close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the treatment, reset the limb as healthy according to what we have said, and beware not to apply cautery to any numb parts that are affected by a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is caused by moisture that spreads throughout each limb, and when the pain comes on suddenly, they call it "podagra" accurately; and when it is due to a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicine, then cautery is the cure in this manner: make several cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary to prick on the face of the foot, make a cautery with what they call a "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, this happens often, so he does cautery on each knee with three or four cauterizations from each part, using olive oil; and if you need more, do so, but don't hold your hand too tightly until the expected heat is gone.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, he should administer the cautery that we have described in his chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make two small cuts around the bones; and if there is no pain left in the fingers, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part and do good governance for the patient and apply medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you govern it well and drain the fever, it will be healed by God's grace.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When dislocation occurs suddenly, the muscles contract and it is necessary, when you attempt to cure it, not to move the patient that day; and he should take things that ease the stomach, so that the bowels descend from his belly. After that, have him lie on his back between your hands, and command him to keep his breath until the swelling in the joints is repaired, and arrange them to your liking, and sign beneath the dislocation on the bone of the wrist, and make a mark in the shape of half a circle above the body; then take the fire according to this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and it sheds scales.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their proper place; and have the attendant place his hand so they do not return to their previous position; and open the patient's thighs well, and put cushions and supports under his thighs, and another one on his pelvis which holds his hands; then apply the cautery to the sign over your entire hand, holding it straight, and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not touch the bone the first time, repeat it again until you do; be careful that the bone does not move when you perform the cautery; do not burn it; and ensure the patient does not die, or suffer any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not go to the bone with cautery, your work is useless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cautery of children be delicate according to their measure, and also for adults according to their size; after three days, treat the wound with butter until the scald is healed; afterwards, cure other injuries as long as they are clean, and lay the patient on his back for forty days until the wound is well sealed; and it is necessary that his movements be restricted for a long time so that the boils do not appear when he moves to his room.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, a well-made bandage is applied to him and left for another forty days; and he should have good rest, working little and guarding against excessive drinking and eating, and excessive noise; and when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will now describe the treatment for tailoring your chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known to not grow any further, they should be treated with cautery according to their quantity, and the third of the heart should be burned; after which, follow the treatment as we have mentioned; and no one among the ancients said that it should be cauterized at three angles according to this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the shoulder joint with a sign and draw a line across its width above the rupture, and another one behind, and hold your hand steady over the entire cautery clamp.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the initial cautery is lighter and more gentle.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain arises in any member, whether from a fall or an injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the application of medicine is ineffective, then it is necessary to cauterize it with a cautery called "a point," and the cautery should be applied according to the length of the member and its smallness, strength, virtue, and the location of the twist and the degree of pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is calm after the first cautery, that is good; if not, start over with another cautery on that part, because it is usual for it to move in the limb next to it, so you must perform cauteries until the patient is peaceful.
de meselerie	De meselerie" translates directly from Old French as
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	These illnesses are never helped by cautery alone, especially the disease that arises from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	You can treat it by cautery, taking care if the disease is in its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the previous division, and does not linger or delay, and you doubt that the corruption has spread throughout the patient, then make V cauterizations on the head: first on the new growth, then at the end of the hair on the forehead, next on both horns, and finally behind on the nape; and leave your hand so that the cauterization goes down to the bone, and as the crusts come off, let out the vapors of the thick humors so that they can drain. Treat the mouse according to what is appropriate.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the misfortune is widespread and clearly evident, then you must cauterize these cauteries that we have mentioned in the beginning, and cauterize on the spine of the nape, and cauterize on the spine of the back, and heavily cauterize on the crupie and another delicate place, and two on each shoulder; and two on the elbows, and two on the tender parts of the pis, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the fossae of the hands; and beware of the nails that are on the bottom of the feet, that you do not burn them. Never make a cautery on the bone of the wrist, or another on the bone of the stomach, or one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you perform cautery, the greater the help it provides and the better the outcome; and know that the patient feels no pain from cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be deep and gentle according to the members and joints, as you will find in the manner of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, cleanse the wound with flour and honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling appears in any member and is cured by medicines, oils, and bandages, but it remains unhealthy, then make cautery on the member according to its size and shape; and the cautery should be slightly inserted into the heart of the pain; then apply treatments until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And one should never perform cautery on the hand, foot, or back, at the end of the nerve that causes the member to move, and thus if the swelling is removed; nevertheless, no one should intervene unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the issues of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	from albars (or perhaps referring to the white part of
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is ignited, and the medical arts are of no avail, then cauterize with a hot iron according to the quantity of thick or thin cure, until the white (or perhaps referring to the affected area's color) is removed, and it changes color; then prepare a cure with flour, lentils, oil made from roses, plantain leaves, collench (or colon, possibly a type of plant), and alder bark, each in a separate part; mix them all together, wrap it in cloth, and place it on the affected area until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of cancer by cautery.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancer appears in the beginning and you wish to stop it, cauterize it with a cautery that seems like a circle, all around the circumference of the cancer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	However, wise people say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the cancer; nevertheless, I do not find this good, as I fear it will ulcerate and corrupt, and I have never seen it work for any patient before; and a more correct practice is to cauterize around it, in a circle-shaped cautery, as we have said regarding many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	from the flesh that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has a disease called "adubelati," and they do not want to die, or because of the excessive discharge it produces, or because of the great age of the illness when it becomes debilitated (that is, too much), and there is little blood, or because of the time; and you see them hastening to die: then cauterize around with many small cauterizations by pricking; after that, leave it alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	Because it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced throughout with cautery, make sure the cautery is as hot as it should be:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	Place your hand in the middle of the disease called 'adubelati' while the cautery is pierced through the heart, and make sure the cautery is like this so that the patient feels relieved in this way that the course of the putrefaction is eliminated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, ensure it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	Heal the fire with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease is called "corrodens," which is nothing but a wasting away of the members, for it wastes the members just as fire does dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a member that can be treated with fire cautery, then heat the cautery cloves both very small and very large, according to what is suitable for the member or the disease; afterward, cauterize all parts until you reach all the corruption, and leave nothing of it, so that everything that is corrupt is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and apply the heated cautery to the member, ground with oil, until any burning from the fire is removed, and all the corruption is healed.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds causing pain.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days the wound does not heal, it is good; and if not, the cautery should be repeated on what has remained of the corrupted flesh.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this mixture is sometimes cured with hot medicines instead of fire cautery; but nevertheless, the fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already spoken about the treatment with cold medicines in the previous section: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	from the liquids which come as wounds
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often it happens that a wound due to some defect arises a disease called "foul" according to our understanding, and is a large misformation which damages the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is according to two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know, the cautery of fire, and the cautery of hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	For the fire cautery, take a hot iron that is also as sharp as a feather of a dove; it should be made of good iron to pierce the nail from all sides and have subtle margins; after placing the hot iron on the nail, turn your hand around the entire nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; leave it like this for three days so that it begins to putrefy; then make a poultice of wild mallows ground with silk, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will break off and be pulled out from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then clean the wound with pure salt until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are moved by heat, the body's strength is often broken and many times it becomes infected in hands and feet; in such cases, it is necessary to apply cautery with hot water: take a cane of iron or bronze, or a pen of leather, and place the nail and the mold on it, that is to say, warts; then place the cane around it so that it embraces everything, and add a little hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning until the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and finds the hot water path deeply to the root; let the patient endure a little the burning of the hot water for an hour; then leave it as it is, and it will come out at its roots entirely.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	First, do one after another, until you have straightened all those that are in the body, then treat the wounds that cause pain.
li cure dou trembler	it cures the shaking.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone shivers from cold or quartan fever or another illness, it is necessary that you perform four cauterizations or five on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization on the fish, and one on the stomach with an olive cautery; if this stops the trembling and hastens the healing from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	from pus-filled pimples
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never appear through defects in the body's baths, or pus-filled pimples, which come from large amounts of corrupt matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	if it is necessary to treat them at the first appearance, one should perform a cautery on each pustule: a delicate cautery with fustic wood, of which the tip is heated in the fire, or from long aristologus root, or with a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never should one cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, nor can they grow worse in the future, but it disrupts the excesses from which they come, and heals them; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times, severe consequences arise from the blood of an artery that is cut during a wound that reaches the extreme, or during the incision of an abscess, or the cauterization of a member, and similar events; and it is very sad to experience this.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Nevertheless, if this happens to anyone, hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and stretch it out very strongly until the pain is completely alleviated from your finger, and no more blood flows; then take several small and large olive oil cauterizes, as hot as possible, and apply them to the vein until it is entirely red. Then, according to the size of the wound and the position of the artery, place the cauterize on that vein where you are holding your finger, and keep it there until the pain stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if a sudden burst of blood occurs while you are opening the vein, and the cautery is finished, quickly take another cautery from the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to apply them one after the other until the bleeding stops; be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and prevent any further harm to the patient; and know that when the blood does not subside from the artery, it cannot be properly stopped, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: either through cauterization, or extraction when it has not been treated, or tightly wrapping it with strong thread, or applying medicines that have the power to stop bleeding; and do this carefully and gradually.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers relief tightly binding them with cloths or placing burning objects or similar things upon them, will not be of any benefit.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he has no other medicine at hand, he should place his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, pressing firmly until he feels relief from the wound and the vein; and he must not move it, but moisten with cold water frequently until it becomes very cold, while the blood is congealed and thickened and relieved. And prepare in advance the things he needs for cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	We begin the second book of surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about every illness in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or burning medicine, and we have discussed the applications, causes, instruments, and forms of cautery; I have placed that chapter under the primary heading up to this point, and I will proceed in this chapter along the same path for those who wish to find these things more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, before I begin, it is important for you to know that this chapter involves more risk and danger than the first one on cautery; therefore, greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	Because many ways of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from such who are so afraid of their illness that they die slightly because of the severity of the treatment they find for their illness, and of the greatness of their evil; of these one must be afraid.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who give you their consent and say: "Wait, I am bleeding"; and the illness is despicable.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not give consent to those who approach you with such behavior, but rather put more emphasis on your honor than your greed, and act prudently, not violently, with what is certain and what you can be sure of taking and letting go; and use prophecy and indication in treating your patients, so that health may be restored; and this will help you gain a good reputation, glory, and a lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Most noble son, our lords grant you good understanding and rectitude, and if you desire the holy inspiration from his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter for you, in considering according to chapters, as it is before or the chapter of cautery, which I have devised from the beginning until the foot, so that you may find easier what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	chief filled with water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	You know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when the child's head is too tightly constrained, it causes great pain; and never does it come from a known cause as one cannot intervene.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease but in children, and to all those that I have seen, death comes quickly; and for this reason, it seems to me that I should give up the work on some treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose joints were filled with water, and the head swelled each day until it could not be supported; and the moisture was so great that it led to death, and this moisture gathered under the bone next to the syphac, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, so you make a wide cut in the head where the moisture flows; and it should be as long as necessary until the moisture goes away; and see the shape of the sponge:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more deep, and the abscess greater, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the openings of the abscesses on each side of the head wide open, and there is a sharp, strong discharge when you press it with your hand from inside, and it has not healed yet, then you must make three cuts in the middle of the head in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture thoroughly.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After holding the cuts of drapes and powders, and applying wine and oil, leave it thus for up to five days; then untie it and dress the wound with bandages and poultices, and stretch the joint evenly, and give the patient dry meat from a pouch of moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is to observe the size of the abscess and its connection to the water, for it never appears in front or behind, nor on the right or left side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut the abscess open and drain the water, and make an incision according to your ability; be careful not to harm the artery; then come flux of blood, so that the patient dies gently from the flow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of the root
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a disease called "cataract" either in one or both eyes, and the disease is old, and the cure with medicines does not help, then the last remedy is cauterization by cutting the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, as soon as you have cut the arteries, make the patient raise their head; then rub the wound with a rough cloth until the arteries open; then pull the cloth firmly over the wound; then check where the vein is located, and ensure that the edges on both sides are behind the ears, and are not protruding; then mark the edges with a sign; and cut each one with a sharp spatula from two sides, reaching down to the bone, making sure to do this from the back of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, turn the spatula away from the artery and cut through the clot above, cutting as it should go through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, it bleeds continuously from above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open when pressed, you must measure the quantity of space in three parts, then sign with a cross and make it bleed until the bone; and what amount of blood is to be let out is six parts, or perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear and the filling of the artery; then examine the wound: if there is no discharge from the socket where the abscess is, dislodge the wound and bind it, and apply treatment until it heals.
de emigrainne	Of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes with catarrh due to moisture in the eyes and sockets, and the pain is intense, and similar conditions have persisted for a long time, and various treatments have not helped, then we drain the arteries of the eyes and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The method for extracting them is that the patient combs back the hairs from their temples and locates the artery which opens in the temple, as it opens clearly due to its pulsation, and is protected by no covering that any man who is too quick might remove; if it is uncovered, the patient gently pulls on some cloth, then rubs the area with a rough cloth, and applies hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then take the instrument in the shape of ...
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the skin lightly as you come to the artery, then treat it with tweezers, and pull out the threads that adhere to each part; and if the artery is thin, turn it to the tip of the hook, then cut off that part according to the quantity of two joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it does not heal without great pain throughout.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat the vein with fire from the sixth to the third; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it with two threads of strong silk so that pus does not come before the healing of the wound, and avoid complications from venom; then cut off the excess between the two threads at that very moment, and if you see fit, cauterize the wound with a hot iron until the joints are cut; this is the most effective treatment if the patient does not have fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauterization is help to end moisture: therefore it is of greater help with moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or, for the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the space with thick cotton and place several well-made bandages; and when they are removed, be careful to apply dry medicines that produce heat, and more bandages, as long as the wound is clean; and if you cannot find these things, immediately cover the artery with vitriol and press it with your hand so that the wound is stained; and if you do not have this at hand, place ice on the wound until it freezes, and then remove the ice with cold water as long as the wound continues to bleed, and bind it properly. The more mobile and lighter the extraction of the artery is, the better it is to cauterize the vein with this same cautery, cutting from both sides, but make sure the cuts are well spaced to maintain heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they lose their warmth.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two blades a good space, and then when you have signed with the pen the two joints, and place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two joints; and they should be spaced between the two joints because this cautery is not well fused throughout all; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes flow down into the veins that are under the skin of the head, and no medicine applied helps, you see the face of the patient contort in pain, and feel their forehead twitch as if from a tremor; and if the eyes are red and moist, so that the paper-like membranes become detached, they are scorched by the heat of the tears, then this cure is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called this the "old cure for contusions", and what you do is pluck the hairs on the forehead of the patient suffering from this illness, then make three cuts on the forehead equally along its length; and one cut should extend all the way across the front, and the others two to each side of the bones beneath the skin, but be careful not to incise the arteries that are on either side of the bones. Avoid touching the area where the mandibles meet, and make sure each wound is as deep as three hairs grow in thickness; then use a piece of sponge and clean cloth to wipe away the blood, and mold it into the shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is made on the temple down to the second incision; and scrape all the heart that is between the two slits to all the satisfaction that is on the bone, then make another from the middle incision down to the other second one, and then extract this spatule.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you insert the instrument called "cultelei" into the first slit, it should be very sharp on one side and slightly curved on the other, with this shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting side towards the far edge at the heart, and the curved side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle slit.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the joints, so that the incision is continuous until it opens the heart, and then make another cut in the middle, reaching the other side; then extract the blood evenly, and press the limb to remove the blood; then place a thin strip of wet cotton in each wound, and cover them with damp cloths soaked in wine, oil, and lard, and ensure that no abscesses form. On the third day, loosen the bandage, and administer a strong tepid water bath, then apply basilicon treatment with rose oil, and other treatments to cure wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	your joints
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When any catarrh comes that has become a habit, and you see the eyes swollen and small, weakening sight, and the mucous membranes burning; and the hair falls out, and it feels as if something is in the eye causing sharp pain, and the patient sneezes, then know from these symptoms that this matter and catarrh do not come from a single cause, but rather from multiple veins, and the movement of the cure that is necessary.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And instruct the patient to press his forehead, then make a deep cut across the middle of the forehead, and another one very wide on the side.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And from the cut on the left temple to the right temple, make the incision down to the bone; and move your hand away from the muscles of the temples that close when they eat. And when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood out with a sponge, then separate the two edges of the cut and place old cotton in it, and cover it with linen strips. Then wrap moist cloth soaked in wine and oil over it and be careful not to get any hot water on it; when the bone has healed, you must rub the bone until it feels hard again, then apply drying substances that cause itching.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheatflower and three parts of colophony, mix them together to make a paste, and apply it to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	ear infection
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Anything that causes an infection in the ears is one of four things: seeds, animals, or mineral stones or similar objects; or seed-like substances such as peas, beans, and other legumes; or flowing things like water and mud and similar substances.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When the chip in the ear or any other object that does not adjust itself to the ear is stuck in the ear, it does not enter the ear, so place the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a chip, distil no drop of violet oil or hyssop oil, then proceed with extraction; and it will bring up discharge from the condition, and it stops the nostrils when sneezing occurs, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and raise the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often, this treatment brings sudden improvement; and if it does not come out, extract it with fine tweezers, of which the shape is as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If she jumps out of the pincers, that's good; if not, perform extraction with a fine, small tool; and if she doesn't jump out, make a hook of iron and press it deep into the ear canal, sealing the wax inside so the wind cannot enter with the hook. Then treat it thoroughly, for this happens very often as we have said; if it does not come out in that way, grasp it firmly, taking care to use sharp tools, and apply a bit of cotton around it; then press the hook onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If she does not jump out after trying all these things, quickly cut the ear so that the abscess hardens and stops spasming, and the cutting should be done as follows: first, prepare the patient with the appropriate treatment for cephalica, and extract the blood according to its quality. Then place the patient's ear upwards and cut a small groove at the base of the ear where the fat or cartilage is attached; make the cut in the shape of a crescent moon until you reach the stone, then remove it carefully, and suck on the wound thoroughly with your mouth until it heals.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is stuck and swollen, then administer extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, then apply a thin, subtle spatula according to this form.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and apply an incision to that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not attempt this if you think the grain is moist from earwax, as long as you have made many attempts; then extract it with thin forceps and suck gently, as we have said, so that the extraction is light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water where the chunk breaks off in the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use a sneezing of warm compresses first, and expand the ear with fine cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lay them on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it pops out, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If the pop does not come out, take many small threads according to the length of your finger, warm them slightly over fire, and insert the patient into one or more holes in their ear, from another side, and make another hole on the stone already in their ear; continue this process of thread against stone until the water comes out completely, and thus it pops out entirely. If you see any remaining threads, take another thin thread, heat one end over fire until it becomes very hot, then insert it into the ear, passing through from behind; do this several times until all the water has drained out, as we have said before.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	During the removal of the beast, if it is of small size, like a flea or similar, treat it as we have said in the previous section; but if it is large and one can feel it, use pincers for its extraction; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When removing worms from the ears, if you treat it as we have said in the previous section and you are dealing with distillations, but the cure is not effective, you should examine the ear in sunlight. If no worms are visible, use very fine pincers to remove them; if they still cannot be seen, take a closer look to determine their shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be cut deeply from below and widely from above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And then insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the amount of suffering felt by the patient, then suck strongly throughout the entire canal; do this often until all the moisture is removed.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, stop up the canal with cotton as I mentioned before; and if they do not emerge as we said, administer distillations that the ancients have tested in the treatment of worms, and you will find them or treat them through distillations; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear using these instruments, forming them as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And take a thin piece of silver or gold, cut into small points, and place it over the tiny opening to distill; and with a well-made brass instrument, press down within the distillation; then take a razor and wrap cotton around the tip carefully; pour in your oil or juice, and add whatever medicines you wish, and put the candle in the ear; then insert the razor into all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or the warmth reaches the ear; let the patient feel it within, and the distillation should be warm like when it's distilled in the ear; beware that it's not too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of ear pinching
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with a perforation in their ears, and the same thing happens to adults due to ear injuries or foreign objects inside the ear; this perforation never fully heals in the ear unless one can see it; and it never becomes weak, and the hole can be seen clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	When the perforation appears and one cannot see it, it requires careful treatment in multiple ways. In this case, you should place the affected ear towards the sun; and examine it: if you see the hole clearly, check if there is any accumulation of wax or anything else that could be blocking it.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And make incisions and cuts all around, front and back, so that the ear is not damaged; if the inflammation is from a foreign body or the cartilage of the ear, hold it with delicate pincers and cut it gently until the entire cartilage is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the inflammation is deep in the ear, take a fine, sharp razor and heat it slightly over fire, then apply it to the cartilage of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the inflammation in which the patient feels great pain in the ear, make a slight perforation, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then insert into the ear a plug according to the size of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Keep the wound covered with a bandage as long as it is fresh, or take a piece of lint and moisten it in rosewater, and sprinkle vitriole powder on top; and if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary to remove the lint and replace it with another moistened lint wrapped in cerate made from rosin oil and wax, until the swelling subsides; then treat it as long as it remains clean.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if an infection occurs, immerse a sponge and drape it in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other treatments to remove the infection, which are treated through distillation.
de la char des papieres	Of the work of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Always consider that those that come in papers (i.e., written documents) when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to extend them with pincers and tweezers, taking care to extract the root with a spatula; then place over them vitriol powder.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if, after peeling, the cautery is done with a delicate lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer after incision must be moved; and often they repair themselves, as no part remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	from the fire
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come to paper some things that seem sleazy in their form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hail," and it is a gathering of great moisture on the paper above and below; the work is as follows: be wary if the hail mutes from one side to another, and it is a slight thing to know; then make them large, then scrape each part lightly, then take them with pincers and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper slightly, it will not harm the patient; and if the split is great, and the assembly has a stitch, then cure it as long as it remains healthy; but if it is small, do not use much force, for the adhesions will restore it soon and cause pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the pain is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper against it, and the pain grips in pinches, pressing from both sides; and if the paper is moved by incision, it causes no harm; and when the pain is cut, drain the water and cure the swelling with salt water until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Xerophthalmia is a fat that is embedded in the films of papers above the eyes, and this occurs more often in children than in adults, causing great pain to their eyes, and leading to cataracts in the morning, preventing them from gazing the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes. And due to this, they rest their faces downward, sleeping on them, and their papers beneath their eyebrows become moist, covered with a film that obscures and clouds the sight caused by the xerosis.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel the extraction between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of performing this operation is that the patient places his head in a healthy position, then takes a linen cloth, and sets up a tent-like structure according to the quantity of extraction from each part, placing it on top; and presses with his fingers on both sides so that the extraction gathers together in the middle of the circle; then, using a moistened spatula, they make a groove not wider than the wound made in the vein, and make the skin completely closed around it; and in various arrangements, more extraction comes out from the groove in the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take then a whole piece of cloth dipped in fire between your fingers and move your hand to the right and to the left as long as it is glowing; be careful not to apply it to the wound, do not reach too deep into it, do not touch the oil, do not blow on it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the wound does not open at the beginning of the incision, gently widen the wound slightly until it opens; then take it out as we have said, and moisten cloth with water and oil, and apply it to the wound, and bind tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such people who grind and apply something to corrupt the moisture that is stuck.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it as long as it is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the hot abscess, treat it with external applications as long as it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hair grows in paper (i.e., abnormally) and becomes irritated, it causes harm similar to other irritants, leading to conditions like scabs and mollifications of the skin, and albugine (a type of rash), all of which are caused by the destruction of the hair follicles; the cure is as follows: either through fire cautery, or with acute medicine according to the chapter on cautery, or through incision and stitching, or using bands, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the patient's head in your hand, then turn the paper from the oil on your left hand; if it rotates, that is good; if not, insert an needle through all the threads above; and take care to cut along the edge of the paper where the hairs grow out from among those hairs, and pull the thread up over the entire paper, and turn it against the razor. Then make a cut in the part below the paper, among the hairs that are close together, from the great tear all the way to the small one; then extract the thread, and place below the paper a small piece of cotton and cloth, and sign on the paper with a figure of an enche, like the shape of a fir tree, but it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you see the paper raise up.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if from this part which has the cut, a great quantity of paper is taken according to how soft the paper is; then make a small incision along all two lines that you have marked, and begin with a large tear from one end to the other; and let it be one of the slits near the natural hairs, as thick as a root, then turn the knife in one of the two angles towards the heart, and scrape it all off; then bring together the two lips with a single stitch of a thin thread of wool, and dry up the blood, and remove the excess threads from the two edges to any sticky things, if you can do this; and if not, leave the stitching and the threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without stitching using drying and constricting things, because the paper revives when the wound heals and when it is brought together, but the stitch moves (as the old ones say), and that's a work of pain; and if in another way: and this is that you mark the paper with a figure which is as if it were a pile of myrtle, as we have told it, at three points from each other according to the shape that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then take what surpasses small forces equally according to the shape that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the pliers, and the matter is not equal, take a needle where there is thread, and wrap it around the figure; then take another thread from the large tear, and the smaller one from the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your fingers; then gently lower your hand equally, and remove all the skin that you have marked, as we have said, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and cure it until it is healed; if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with wax and similar ointments that relieve; sometimes the paper-like flesh is converted. It is necessary for you to use what we have said about the incision, but sewing in one way or another is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure for a broken arm is as follows: take paper and make it inside according to what I said, then create two arms by art, and two fine ties just as long as the paper, and tie them gently on both parts where you hold the bones; then assemble one onto the other delicately over the paper from oil, and pull the two arms from the formed parts; leave it like this for several days, and the flesh that was restrained will die and wither until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed and the wound has gathered strength, then treat it as long as it remains healthy; and if the paper is dried, and the hair does not grow back, and the bones have healed, then make the two arms according to this figure and this measurement of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work involves piercing the skin with a fine needle and threading it with soft, thin silk thread; then joining the edges and tying them gently, making the length of the threads one palm's length. Next, arrange another thin silk thread swiftly and tie the ends tightly. Place the patient's head in your hands, and gently perform the procedure, declaring the work done since it is a delicate and minute task. Then, insert the needle throughout the entire wound at the root of the hair, carefully piercing the paper until you remove it from the natural skin; then pull out the hair up to the wound in the paper, and thread the hair back into the wound if there are one, two, three, or more hairs; finally, withdraw your hand when the hairs have completely detached from the wound in the paper with the natural skin.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the wound is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, pull the wound from the inside to the outside along all the thread you have threaded, until the wound comes out completely and you see through the eye of the needle; then pull the wound and the thread, close the eye and leave it for one or two days, until the hair grows back in its place and the scar heals. And if the hairs are small, accompany them with a long natural horsehair, and let it grow with the one you leave, until it becomes elongated and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	regarding the impurity of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this illness called "aleacrati" or putrefaction comes about in the body, it has two causes: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it occurs suddenly from wounds, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of performing this operation is that you cut open the wound, separate the lips, and insert pieces of linen, binding them until the wound is healed; and it is not advisable to use drying or constricting substances in the treatment of such things.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but it works through softening agents, such as fenugreek; and rosewater of water or oil, and flaxseed are cooked, and garlic dissolved in any of the eyes, and it wraps around a bandage, and the cure for this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the true power of your cure lies in ensuring it does not harden according to its previous form; and this work that we have spoken of is only a remedy for this illness, so that it does not return according to its former state.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the grease that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness, which is the separation of joints, is truly called "arthritis," and it is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accidental cause comes from wounds, cracks, cauterization, and similar things; and the result of the work in this case is such that if you pierce a needle with two strands and insert it into the flesh, it should go through both sides, so that the threads come out on either side of the wound; then the flesh swells over the needle, and the skin around it becomes large.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the shape of the paper returns to what is appropriate, that is good; if not, take a razor and insert it into the crack, turn the paper, and make two cuts on either side of the incision; let the edges of these cuts form two angles of the incision you have made, so that when they are brought together, the shape resembles the curve of a letter with a lower case 'g'; then remove the paper, according to the thickness of its sides, from what is left over, and adjust the two irregular parts by stitching them with a thread of wool; finally, apply the treatments we have mentioned for softening medicines and bandages until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from cutting, stitching, or cauterizing, it is necessary that you make a clean cut beneath the skin among the hairs, and according to what has been said before; then separate the two halves of a single wound, as I have mentioned; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and skilled masters devise various instruments to restore the natural shape, and the patients themselves, according to what is appropriate for the work and the tools in different arrangements.
dou soudement de la papiere	Dislocation" is the most probable translation for "dou soudement de la papi
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture is done in the usual manner that the paper on top is smooth with white oil, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor beneath the paper and lift it gently; and hold it like pincers until you remove what is sharp on the delicate spatula, which should not be too acute or too harsh, so that the patient does not suffer from the excessive sharpness of the spatula; and make your incision, by scraping together the gathered paper, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and all the gathered paper becomes healthy, and there is no saltiness in the oil, nor any bitterness, and raise it with sweet water and a collar. Then place between the paper and the oil a linen tent, and put on top of the oil moist wool in abundance; and after the third day use a collar and things that soften until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	from the nail of the finger
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You know that the nail has two types of appearances: it is either nervy and resembles a hard, dry tissue, or it is not nervy but appears as white, moistened congealed matter, which, when touched with iron and treated with pincers, cannot be moved; and both resemble the beginning of the great toe, growing little by little until it covers the entire sight, all the light, and the movement of the finger.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The procedure for incision is as follows: the patient places his head on a healthy surface, then opens the fingers; takes a piece of paper in their hand, then coils the nail with small pincers, extending it upwards; takes an needle, threads it with horsehair, goat hair, or oxen hair, and a strong thread; doubles the needle's point and pierces it through the nail, all the way to the tip, and ties the nail with the thread, extending it upwards, and shaves off all the hair around the nail, starting from the base towards the top, using a sharp blade; then shapes the remaining part at the root of the finger, with a delicate and small force, leaving the natural shape of the nail or finger. In no case should the nail be extended immediately after cutting; it should only be done with thread as we have said. Then, the shape takes on this form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be sure that the scalpel does not touch and tear the soft flesh, and that the cut is not too deep; afterward, pour a little of the ground silk into the wound and add some collyrium made from lithargyrum, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	If the nail is not connected to a nerve and you cannot push the needle, and the hooks cannot enter, this type of fingernail is often treated with medicine; as I have described in detail. If you see it covered, open the wound gently for the patient and take a light scalpel following this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And remove the nail gently from above, and if you see that it shrinks little by little and the reason hastens, then let it drop into your mouth from a collar made of collyrium (a medicinal ointment) and a red string, and stop the oil until the next day; then repeat the other work according to this same method, until it is entirely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If any substance in the oil is contrary to you, such as a hot abscess, then cool it, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is completely cured.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh in the eye causes harm in oil by great damage, suspending it at an angle, and cutting off a part but not all, no tears will come; then a red collyre is distilled in the oil, which is made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	on the flesh that is born on the iris
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some people are born without any red flesh on the iris, covering and restraining it with threads and strings, making it appear like a rose petal; and this is so that the patient places his head in a healthy position, then opens the eyes, and carefully removes all of the affected flesh using appropriate tools, supporting it with force. Then, cut the first piece, going around completely until the end, taking care not to damage the eye during the operation. And use the oil from crushed seeds or distill a red collyre and similar corrosive medicines, and place cotton soaked in hot oil on the affected area; be sure that the abscess is hot. If nothing remains, and there is no pus, and you suspect a hot abscess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing remedies for a hot abscess. Then return to your work as long as it remains healthy, and thus make all other cuts in the eye following this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless, it is necessary that you attend to the care of each weak oil in the natural way; and in the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not thrust your hand into any of these works until you see that this member suffers from this work.
des voines des eulz	veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These are the red veins that are covered over the eye, they steal from the sight its work and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Skill is therefore in the first place that you look at the eye itself, where there is redness, swelling, and no other disease outside of the redness; then handle it in this way: command the patient to place his head on your healthy hand, then suspend those veins throughout the entire circumference according to your wisdom, and make the incisions delicate, double according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And there should be two incisions by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then gently pull the veins, wiping off the blood hour after hour, until you remove the veins from the flesh; and be careful not to pierce the oil with the points of the forceps, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your task so that you do not leave any veins behind; and when you have done this, distil green and red collyrium into the oil to corrupt what remains in the sebaceous glands.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are unable to collect all of them in that hour, make a poultice over the wound with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for no more than a day until the pain is eased and the hot abscess is assured, then continue according to this manner as long as it is healthy; and this is the form of the veins:
de la fistule de l’oil	from the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	He calls these fistulas "arissati": when you treat them with cautery and strong medicine as I have said above, and they are not healed, there is a cause within that you must cut into the abscess, where he will die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, take all the tools mentioned here and shape them; it is called "the sharp edge", and it should be made from iron from the tip to the handle, and pointed like a file as shown in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the corrupt bone back in its position, then twist it between your fingers, and press your hand slightly until you know that corruption is removed; do this several times, then restore the joint with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the joints are fused and the patient is born that way, and the bowel's core is also fused and remains so for 40 days without renewal or abscess formation, and no bad accidents occur, then it is healthy; if not, there is another tool to bring the fistula back to the opening according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron and aguë medicines, and when it is uncovered, take care for it as shown here, and let the iron be at three angles, and the pointed part should be thinned as you see.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the clean bone of the arm, remove your hand from the blood, and go through with all the treatment until it pierces the bone and the patient feels relief because the pain goes away if he keeps his hand on his nipple; and afterward, return to the use of dry remedies, as I have taught you, and when the swelling and hardness of the bones subside, examine the nipple; if it becomes lighter, then it is a milder case for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the opening of the wound
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the wound is completely open and does not disturb or shrink the nipple, it is necessary to keep the patient; then apply poultices or sucking cups without hurting, and pour oil made from aloe, frankincense, and myrrh onto it, and then strain the oil, and put the paste on bandages and cloth; and the way of arranging the cloth should be that you make each layer soft and double them in four, and place one over the other according to the need of the wound; then strain it from above with a firm, formless bandage, and continue with the cups for sucking without hurting; then remove the cups and leave the paste strained for a day and night, and if it becomes soft, it is good; if not, repeat the poultices, cloth, paste, and cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	breakage of the skin's surface
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the skin's surface, it opens and lets out small bits like grains of resin, which is somewhat reassuring to see; then, if you notice this, the work involves inserting an needle into the base of the affected area, just above its root, and then another needle where there is a double thread from the damaged part towards the edge. You pierce it, leaving the first needle in place, then cut the double thread and tie a piece of cloth around it tightly. Afterward, you remove the needle and apply fresh, moist lint to the wound until the thread separates from the skin, and you repeat this process for each section until the wound is healed. In no case should the wound be restricted by the cloth in any circular pattern while it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the joint has a great appearance, pierce it with a thin spatula that comes from oil, and remove the white moisture and lower the joint, then insert it again as soon as possible; then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the vein (or artery)
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is not acute (sudden), but seems to be a steady flow (like a vein), and it is not a true flow; and the manner of performing this operation is as follows: place the patient in an upright position, then take hold of the head with both hands from either side, and move it until you see the vein rising towards your fingers. Then press it firmly, and if the blood does not flow down, know that it is a true venous condition, and if the pressure allows, release it as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient rest between your hands, then take the delicate spatula and make incisions in the corneal membrane along with the conjunctiva connected to the corneal membrane and the crown, until the bowel is released; and when it is released, it distills into hot clear oil mixed with honey, or boiling fennel seed and honey, then apply another cure until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	des aiges de l'oil" translates directly to "of the waters of oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have similar waters in division, and what should be pierced; if it is done according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should place the patient between your crossed hands away from direct sunlight and tie a healthy cloth tightly around them; then place the paper of the oil in your left hand if the limbs are on the left side, or in your right hand for right-sided limbs; next, take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if the limbs are on the left, or in your left hand for right-sided limbs; then place the tip of the instrument along the thickness of a single strand at the outer edge of the oil's bleached area, and press the instrument called "almagda" firmly, feeling as it enters the bleached part of the oil; and ensure the measure of the almagda is equal to the entire space from the prunelet to the end of the darkness; this is the oil's corona. You will see the bone through the paper due to the clarity of the corned cloth, then place the instrument up to where the water begins, and press it along one path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he sinks deeply now, then the patient must see the ill person before him and hold the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting briefly, he sinks down again the second time, inserts the instrument and when it is firmly in place and does not move up, gently extract the maggots by turning your hand back and forth; then dip again in clear oil and remove from that oil.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place the hot oil or any other moistened oil in a robed and abundant container, and tie it with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, apply a fine flour with much heat.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the mixture cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are many individuals with very hard eyelids, it is necessary that you press the instrument called 'alberit', which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Then pierce only the conjunctiva gently, and do not cut too deeply, but make it subtle, then inject the mixture as we have said; and after the work is complete, prepare the patient for sleep with a comfortable position, on his back in a dark place; and let him be free from all movements, and feed him light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his condition until the third day. Then release him in the same dark room, and test his vision, and make him see any objects, and then put on the bandage again for seven days; and it is not appropriate that you perform this at the time of treatment or after incision now, but you should lighten it, because acute pain rises dangerously.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When an abscess forms, you should loosen the skin in front of the seventh day and apply the remedies that soothe the abscess; when it is soothed, loosen the bandage and place a small roll on its face to cover it for some time, and then return to that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house little by little and return to its former state; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And then came to us one from the East who told us of a certain plant that, in its native land, is used to draw out water, but I had never heard of it in our country nor read of it in the books of the ancients; perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of magic, because whoever does not know them will see them as different; and they should be of pure gold.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the top of this same subtlety be in the center, and the rear in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the charm on the edge
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No one should ever give birth to or have any children with diverse aligned charms, from which there are none that seem like scorpions due to their abundance of joints; and if such exist, the charm is enchanting in its bright color, and the child is smooth with a good appearance.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In this case where the bone is soft and not yet healed, you must make the patient lie between your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils, apply the knife to those parts, and treat them fiercely; cut what you can hold with the delicate blade from one side, until you know that the bone is completely separated.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, cut it open with all the delicate and light instruments, so that nothing remains; and without hesitation, perform the incision as necessary; and if it is a malignant abscess, hurry and cauterize until the blood is dried and all bones are separated. Then apply ice and water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If he opens his mouth and moisture comes out until the gums are clean, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not come out as it should, know that there is something stuck in the bone above, preventing the instruments from cutting: then you must insert a thread of linen somewhat thick, and be careful with your hands, and leave between each a space no larger or smaller than necessary; and put the patient's tooth into the thread at his ability, and pull it out while smelling until it comes through the gum inside the mouth; and often children do so in school, and it is a light thing for him who wants to do it. Then hold the gum that comes through the mouth with one hand, and the other gum that comes through the mouth with the other hand, knowing one after the other as we are in the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do as you know, corrupt the wound with new tissue, then treat the son, wipe away the blood, and moisten the wound with Egyptian ointment, and put it back to its place as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment has healed all that remains of the wound; and then place a bandage around the head for no more than a day, if it is healthy, and if there is a need for dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, with which one distills oils and medicines into the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or gold, resembling an open lamp, like a pipe, and use it thus; if you see, make a closed pipe, and let the instruments be full to purge the head; and have many at hand for the head when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Of the pain near the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often, a sickness near the nose arises, which is called "telul," and it grows large and becomes extremely painful, such that it is a sight to behold. Therefore, it is necessary that you handle it at the beginning, remove all the flesh, then apply hot cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays in covering it until it becomes large, be careful if it hardens, takes on a dark color, or lacks sensation: do not touch it with iron, for it is an abscessed joint, because when you cover it, great harm comes to the patient. If the abscess is sensitive, not dark-colored, and you are able to completely cover it without pain, empty the patient and cover it without delay, using dry and restrictive things for the cure.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	as soon as the wound is cut and dressed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the fluid from a joint leaks out into one of these strong cartilage tissues, it benefits no one, except perhaps no one at all.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore important that no one touch where the injury is fresh; then sew the two edges together and treat it until it heals; and if the lips have already separated from each other, you should scrape all parts of their core while they are healing, then sew the two lips together, tighten them, and apply a mixture of dragon's blood powder and incense dust; and place a piece of strong or other adhesive plaster on the powders, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then treat with care until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of stitching is such that you bring together the wound: either with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home, the abscesses on the lips become hard, resembling small grains, both smaller and larger; then you must turn the lips and make a cut under each one, taking them as pincers and grinding them in each part; then apply the vitriole after the incision, until the wound is stained; then use the dry leaf, and cure the wound with moist things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	from the disease of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often, a disease of the gums called "albulus" arises, and it is necessary that you hold it with tweezers, cut it at its root, and let the blood or pus flow out; then apply powdered vitriol or other drying and constricting powders over it. If the gum returns after the incision, this often happens a second time, and cauterization should be performed; if it does not return after cauterization, these are the shapes of the tools used to cut.
des sordens	from congestion
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	No teeth should be assembled at the top of the gums, within the mouth between the teeth and gum tissues, which are unattractive and rough; no tooth should be black and yellow and rotten, as long as the corruption reaches the gum, and they stink; it is necessary that you make the patient hold still in your hands, and his teeth or gum tissue exposed in your safe place, until nothing remains; and do this with blackness and verdigris and jaundice and other conditions, until they are clean; and if what is at the first cause is removed, it is good; if not, recommence on the second day and third, until everything is cut; and know that teeth require various tools to cut them, according to what the work demonstrates, because the cutter used to remove teeth from between them has other shapes than that which cuts them within. And these forms and others should be prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when treating a toothache that you do not delay drawing it out as much as possible, for no one should do so; for it is a very precious substance, and one has no excuse to neglect it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	When the patient is constrained from drawing out the tooth, it is necessary that you be certain of the painful tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the patient feels pain, believing that a tooth is infected, and has it drawn out; however, the pain does not leave until the abscess is extracted, as we have seen with these patients; and when you are certain of the painful tooth, it is necessary to scrape around the tooth with a sharp spoon to protect the gums from all sides. Then move the pliers bit by bit with your fingers or use fine tweezers at the first poke and poke, until they are well wedged, then firmly hold the pliers; and place the patient's cheek between your knees, holding it there so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take none of these instruments and press gently from every side, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	If the tooth is broken and chipped, it is necessary to fill the gap with cloth, either from the opening or the perforation; and if it is tightly stuck with pliers, be careful not to break it while pulling; and it is very important to work gently around the gums to extract the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Be very careful not to break it, and if a part breaks off, return to the patient, as the evil of the root causes greater pain than at first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be wary that you do not act like the ignorant healers who, through their haste and boldness, often break the vessels, and fail to take heed of what we have recounted; but they bring about great illness through their words, either because of the roots where they dwell, or because of the vessels that they break, as we have often seen. And when there is bleeding, wash the wound with wine or ash and silk; and if this does not stop it, apply vitriol; and if that fails, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, with which one first mute the bleeding, should be long and thick-handed, not doubling over as you draw out the tooth; and these are their shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let the members be of good size so that they do not bend when pulled, and made of iron well-forged, and toothed for holding fast.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root persists when pulled, it is necessary to place a cotton ball moistened with butter on it for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	as long as the limbs are relaxed, then use pliers called 'algefri' to gently extract them, making them look well-cared for; and they should be shaped like a file.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots will not emerge from these grips, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is a file, of this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is hard and thick so that it does not break, and the root jumps out by itself, that is good. If not, use all the instruments, whose shapes are as follows:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument with two edges, its shape is:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments which are used in the treatment of teeth, and this tool that seems like large pliers, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	This tool should be robust so it does not break, and you should know that many dental tools exist; there are also other tools, which are not mentioned. The most skilled surgeons invent their own instruments, according to what their work and the illness show them, because there are certain diseases for which no instrument was taught by the ancients. If a part breaks or becomes stuck in another bone, or if it is difficult to extract, and he seeks the appropriate instruments I have mentioned, and uses gestures to guide him, this is the shape:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and well-joined to hold the bone firmly, so that it does not escape but can be held and removed; and then return the limb to suitable medicine, and if there is decay in the bone, even if it is small, use all these instruments.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth does not appear according to the natural shape of the body, and its form is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth has grown after the permanent one and is not in the right position, and it cannot be cut or filed; then extract it. And if it is mobile with the tooth, take this instrument whose form resembles a small beak, and let it be sharp iron:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the dentist should hold it with his hands day and night for the pain in his teeth, and because you cannot move the others, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it from one side as its shape is.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	It is also similar to how they file the points of needles; file the tooth gently with your fingers day and night until it stops moving, then in the end, it should be completely smooth, without any roughness, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, it is necessary to file away the rough spots until it is even so that it does not hurt the tongue or impair speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth aches
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth aches strongly, either from impact or biting, and the patient cannot bear pressure on it, they only experience pain when touched, and medicines applied do not help. Then they should be restrained with a gold thread, for silver wire turns green and decays, but gold never changes; and the thread should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth. If you successfully align the teeth, take the thread and wrap it twice around the two healthy teeth next to the painful one, then place the gum tissue between the smaller teeth, as many as there are, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; continue wrapping the thread tightly, carefully and painfully, until it does not move. And the root of the aching tooth should be held firmly so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the fragments of bone with pliers, assemble them, and insert them between the healthy teeth, and place it so that the tongue does not bleed; and leave it as tight as it can stay, and if it loosens, the threads will unravel, as if pulled by another thread. It should remain in this position for as long as possible, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy incisors and the two molars, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is reset in its place, freshening it as we have said; and let no one intervene unless they are skilled and patient, and never form a tooth from a bone of a weak animal, but place it where the defect lies, pulling it tight as we have said, and holding it for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cut open the tongue's surface.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No matter what kind of wound this comes from, whether it's natural or caused by a deep cut; and if it's due to an accidental deep wound; the work involves opening the mouth of the patient with care, keeping their head in a safe position, and gently pulling out the tongue; then cutting the nerve's connection with a wide cut, as much as possible, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is any stiffness or hardness, and it's a sudden deep wound, use a hook and make a wide cut of that ligament; be careful not to sever the artery located below; after finishing, raise the affected area with rosewater or cold water, then apply a linen bandage over the tongue; and keep doing this every night so that the tendons do not heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the fever comes from an infection, put a hot poultice on it; and if the pain intensifies, cauterize it with a slow-burning cautery, which is good for healing; then apply other remedies until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see it is red or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a cancer; and if it becomes pale and there is moisture, drain it with a fine needle, and dig out its veins, and free it on both sides; and if the pain persists in your work, apply a hot poultice as long as it is stained, then return to your work until you have treated everything thoroughly. Then lift the limb gently and cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	from the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No symptom ever occurs within the throat that are called "godath", and they are properly known as the two amandres, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they are not well healed, be careful: these apostemes are hard to discern by their small size and pale color, so do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is thick, do not touch them with iron, also because of the flow of blood; but leave it until it dies, and then you will remove it, or it would break on its own; and if they are of a white color again, and the root is thin, have a ready instrument to cover, but first ensure that the aposteme cools down and calms down.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient stand before the sun, and keep his feet in good condition, open his mouth wide, and press the tongue down with the instrument, so that it takes the shape of it; and use silver or fine gold, just like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You cannot press the tongue to all of this instrument and see the abscess, so take the hook and the file and insert them into it, pulling upwards as much as possible; do not touch any part of the strings with it, then cut with the instrument, forming a shape that looks like teeth; nevertheless, the tip is curved, one side faces another, and they are very sharp, made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, if it is like pliers, in this way:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	It should be pierced from one side and named; and when you have extracted one of the stones, extract the other in the same manner; then, after incision, gargle the patient with hot water mixed with vinegar and salt, or with pomegranate peel, or mullein leaves, and similar things, until the wound is cleansed; then apply the cure while it is still fresh; and no other abscesses will form in the throat besides these two stones, if they are extracted in this way as with the two stones.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was located inside her throat, namely a small abscess; and I had closed the entire throat tightly, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passageway, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained in that state for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so swollen that it had pushed two ribs through both openings in the throat.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then quickly inserted a needle into one of the openings and pulled it through, then withdrew it again and took out a large portion of pus; I did the same in the other opening, opening the mouth and pressing on the tongue. After inserting the needle into these abscesses and draining some of the pus, only a little blood came out; thus, the passageway in the throat was opened for her to begin drinking water and then wine, and I continued to drain the abscess for a long time. The abscess recurred again, filling the space that I had emptied, becoming very large. Then I bandaged it and cauterized it inside the throat; in this way, it healed without increasing. And I left these treatments, and only God knows what happened afterward.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the retina descends to the eye, and it is swollen and extended, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is detached, thick, and rounded, it is called "retina".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have described in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscess has healed, and it is small, it is necessary to drain it; and the one that is rounded and not extended too much; and it is red or of a dark color, it is advisable to avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the poor patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see this, according to the manner I have said, take the patient's tongue with your fingers and press it with the instrument we spoke of before; then insert the needle into the eye, remove it from the back, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned in making the incision on the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is important that you do not cut off any excess beyond the natural limit, for if you do, it will be painful to speak and move; after the incision, use what we said regarding the incision on the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient suffers from great pain, it is necessary that you use an instrument for cauterization to alleviate the painful sensation.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The method of cauterization is very sharp and acute.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should place their head on a healthy surface and then press their tongue with the instrument mentioned in this chapter (cauterization), using it gently but firmly, so that it is neither too thick nor too thin; and when using this instrument, follow its shape as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the physician have a fine brush, as if for stirring a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye; and have the patient lie on his side, so that the saliva and mucus from his mouth carry the medicine down, preventing it from going to the throat and causing pain; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it cease and the pain from the medicine subside; and if you observe, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and insert the instrument completely into the cloth on top of the eye, until the cotton adheres to the eye; do this often until the cauterization is complete, then leave it to dry, and after three or four days, or even five, if you need to repeat the cauterization, repeat it, and after the cauterization, wipe around the eye with cotton soaked in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; then rinse with cold water and use gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than cauterization, especially through incision; if it is performed by fumigation in this manner, take mullein and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and similar herbs, and combine them all or any of them in a pot, and put it on the fire; let the pot be well sealed with strong clay, and among the pot place a cheveit (a type of instrument) as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be of silver or gold, and one of the joints should be squeezed in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the nose, until the eye becomes numb; afterward, it often recurs until the eye dries up, and beware not to perform this at the onset of a hot abscess, as many complications arise; and do not attempt this except during the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not available, take a cane and insert within the mouth a piece of cold wool, so that it does not burn the patient's mouth; for the piece of wool does not allow the heat to weigh down the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a sharp bone or a fish spine or any such thing gets stuck in the throat; so you must treat what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, until you see the object move; and if it doesn't open and is lodged in the throat, make the patient vomit so that the food in their stomach is cooked; perhaps this will dislodge the object through vomiting. Or the patient might swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval bone, or a lettuce root, or a crust of dry bread; tie a string to the sponge and then pull it out; and when it reaches its place, it will come out, and then you can extract it further. If none of these methods work as described, take an instrument made of pure salt according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And take the hooked instrument to the throat so that it can enter more easily, and raise the head, and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest all the phlegm come back, and do not push the bone inside; and let the patient force the instrument, because it needs to move in order for the thing to clear; if it goes down, draw it out evenly throughout the entire instrument, until it comes out.
de la sansue de la gorge	regarding the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is the throat treated with medicine, as I said in the previous section, except with medicinal remedies; and if that does not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sunlight, and press the tongue with the instrument I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the wound, take it to the smallest pin or fine tweezers that are suitable for it.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if these tools are not suitable, take a horsehair strand, and insert it into the throat of the patient with the wound, then pull it out or gently warm it, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has fever all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in, letting him swallow it, and do this often; and as soon as the wound feels the water, it will close.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not break as we have said, and infuses the patient with bad smell from the instrument used in the fumigation of the eye, do this many times, for it will eventually break without warning.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	The method of fumigation is as follows: you light a pot with hot coals and place a perforated cover over it to contain the smoke. The patient then puts the end of the pipe in their mouth, sealing their lips so that the smoke does not escape, but instead fills their nose. The smoke should now clear, and if it doesn't, repeat the process several times. The patient should endure thirst and eat salty and bitter foods without drinking water, until the discharge runs clear through this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound, if it can be seen, resembles curved pincers for entering the throat; and it looks like a hawk's beak, and has the roughness of stone, so that whatever it takes hold of, it cannot let go; and here is the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many appearances of abscesses are, according to the knowledge that comes from this book, both in terms of perforation and incision; and they differ in two ways, one being in their same appearance, and those that retain moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is through the joints where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess has a different nature from that of the base, and the abscess of the flesh is different from that which comes in joints, and each one has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if at abscesses one must not pierce until the bowel is dead according to its completion; and if of such as it is necessary to pierce when they are hardened, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are in the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from damaged joints, and they are left until the pus is surrounded, it may corrupt the ligaments and nerves of the joint, which causes contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If the abscess is in the main member and you delay puncturing it until it becomes gangrenous, it will harm the principal member; or if it is in the foundation, you should puncture it likewise so that it does not become gangrenous, but instead stays open, forming a fistula, and cannot heal completely.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you should know the time for perforating an abscess that is deadly according to its completion; this is when the pain is soothed, and the fever departs, and the pain and redness lessen, and the swelling of the abscess's head diminishes, and other signs appear; and it is necessary that you make the perforation depend on the location of the abscess, where it moves most; and the perforation should be long in the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in the joints and tendons and arteries, or anywhere without fluid.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fatty part of the body, it is better to let the incision heal completely before moving it, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before the abscess has formed, the body's defense will push the pus out, and it will be filled with much filth; and by chance, the lips might harden and sink into it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if an abscess is pierced according to the thick part of the body, as needed for the limb.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you should treat them with small incisions, small openings; and in large ones, large openings and many cuts according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to dig out the heart and cover it; when it has become as hard as a blanket and is numbed, then it should be treated like boils: and if they are cut in three angles, or such that one covers them like a sheet of mirth, like the abscesses of attackers; and if there are such where one makes a round-sized, or other-sized cuts, and similar openings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who do not have a head, like a painful superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it deeply; and if the abscess is large, and it has a great bowel attached, and you pierce it, then do not draw out all the bowel at once, but a part of it. Then stop the abscess until the next day, and afterwards do not touch it again; repeat this many times, gradually, until the bowel comes out entirely; especially if the patient is weak in constitution, or a woman carrying a child, or small children, or old, frail people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For often hope jumps with the outcome of the bow, that by chance it kills the patient, and you will not persist.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, if the wound is clean, and the abscess wound is small; and if it is a deep wound, apply either linen or cotton cloth; and if it is a large abscess with much opening, then attach a tent to each so that they come together; and if you have in the abscess a part of hard skin, and you have cured it around, then fill it with old cotton or linen raspings without moisture, and bind it for three days; then open it and apply the cure as long as it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your work, apply cold water and ice, and moisten the bandage, and place it over the bleeding wound repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bleeding persists, apply government and treatment, and the powders I mentioned in this book, and if it is a deep wound or an abscess, it is necessary to place these and damp cloths with wine and hot oil; and if it is in such a state, and the wound is fleshy, then place moistened cloths with cold water and fresh oil, or wine and hot oil, for up to three days, as we have said; and then remove the abscess and clean and treat it, as appropriate, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: for I have already told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is that chapter.
des soros	from sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or there often appear small abscesses, which are like threads, also like the stitches of a woman's dress, and they have many similar appearances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are thick and have moisture, as well as pulsating; and if there are such that are hard and difficult to cut, then there is no doubt that the arteries do not act contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the body if such that you should try all instrument called "instrument of insertion", from which comes the form below, something it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they make an opening from above down long.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, if it cuts off nothing, leaving the skin that contains the moisture, then it returns repeatedly once you leave it alone; then dip a cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, use water and string, and apply to the wound, and leave until the next day; and this will heal those who are delayed by night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then begin the bandage again, as before, on the second and third days, as long as you know that it does not stay in place at night; then treat the wound with suitable care until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	If the abscess is large, follow this form: cut deeply; drain the pus from all sides, and apply all your care to extract it from the cloth where it lies; and if the artery opposes you, do as I have told you.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Also do with an abscess that is deep, cutting and treating it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut the abscess and the moist flesh first, for it has less blood because they are small wounds.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if none of these abscesses or boils have any moisture, and among these hard abscesses that I found on the head of an old woman, I discovered one as hard as a stone, sharp and white, and unbreakable; and if anyone were to try to break it, they would do no less harm than with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses that occur on the head, especially those that come at the top of the head or at the roots of the ears, the opening should be kept completely open for as long as possible to allow the pus to drain; and treat them as they should be treated.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess appears in the neck, and it dissolves the adhesions, and inflames the surrounding parts, and never comes elsewhere on the body, and it is painful, and tightly twisted with one another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is strictly within its rib, as we have said of the nodule and abscess in the head, and there are many appearances of these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and others that are evil and will not obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those that you see with good disposition for touch, and it resembles the color of healthy flesh, and is quiet from every side, and has no openings as the nerve in the collar or the artery or the channel, and is not too deep; then you should cut through it from above, and peel from every part, and the two lips of the heart be where they are supposed to be, if needed, as we have said in chapters about the head; and proceed little by little, and be sure not to cut the nerve or the vein, and do not make them too sharp so that your hand does not slip, and do not look too far ahead, lest you cut something you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or the artery and it does not allow you to work, apply vitriole (a corrosive substance) or any powder that stops blood flow, and close the wound; leave it until the inflammation subsides, and the wound softens, and then begin to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is stained with blood, it returns to your work until you complete it; then pay attention to your expert indication if there remain no small bumps, if you dry and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the bump, it is not enough that you remove only the bump at its root, but tie it with a double strand of strong thread and leave it hanging without harm; then apply the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment and treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove the entire bump, it is necessary that you close both lips of the wound and sew them now, so that there is no excess due to the size of the bump.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If it is necessary that you understand how to deal with the root of it, and pull it out forcefully, then cut it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that have an excess, open them where they appear to be most infected; and treat them in the same way as those previously mentioned, depending on the condition, then apply these remedies with cleaning and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what is left from the corruption; and once the wound is well cleaned, continue the healing treatment until it is cured.
de squinance	squinance (Old French) = squint (Modern
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	They (the ancients) spoke and wrote about the anatomy of the throat; but I never saw in our land anyone who performed it, and it is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those with squint (strabismus), it is important to avoid the throat's fold, called the epiglottis; for this condition does not improve with help, as all the veins and the pores of the sick person are close to each other in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the urinary channel, it is important to cover the epiglottis to prevent the damage caused by strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it in three circles or four small cuts across, between the two circles or according to the size of the cut, without touching the cartilage; and these cuts are very suitable for the section of the epiglottis so that there is no charring, and the edges remain long.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is timid, it is necessary that he extends the throat skin completely around the circle, then cuts the heart until it reaches the trachea; and avoid blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the syphilis as we have said; and it is proven by the section of the river of the trachea that jumps out through the place that is broken, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed and there is doubt about strangulation, bring together the two edges of the wound near the heart, and cut through them entirely where the cartilage is; then administer medicines that induce heat until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albuscasim warns that this should not be done until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is deemed to be at death's door, with no hope of recovery.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then they should cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, thus preventing death; and for this reason, the ancients ordered the wound to remain open until the evil of the disease has passed, which takes three or four days. And then they commanded that the wound be sutured and treated, as long as it was healing; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a damsel was wounded by a knife, and she stabbed it into her throat, cutting part of the tongue from the jaw; and I was called to heal her, and I found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had come from it; I realized that she had no strength or control over her voice, and the wind came out through the wound in her throat.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened, sewed up the wound, and cured her until she was healthy; and after she had regained her voice, she returned to her senses; for this reason, I say that in the surgery of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	from the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Cystic abscesses are called "throat hernias", and they are large abscesses in the color of a jet, and they occur mostly in women; and there are two types: natural and accidental, or without any cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental is according to two manners: one is like fat, and the other manner is like an abscess that comes from the artery; it causes fear, and one should not attempt to make cuts except in the case of a small abscess, and test and examine all entries: if you find it similar to fat and cannot be moved in any way, treat it as you would treat a nosebleed, and remove all foreign bodies if present; then wrap it well and cure it as appropriate until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	From us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways in which we can approach this, of which I will describe all their similarities; and now it is necessary that I explain the entire distinction between us and our origin.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that origin is heat and fever holding, as long as the boiling is not complete, and then ends the putrefaction; after that, the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the new birth, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains satisfaction, which is its own sac and according to the state of the body, and begins like a seed, and becomes large; and are according to two appearances, either fat or moist, and much of color as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	You should, when you approach the treatment of a new case, first test and inquire about every instrument called "forceps", according to its shape, in this chapter or the next.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	The method of inquiring about abscesses is to press more or less moistfully on the abscess, and move your fingers in and out little by little, until you know that the instrument has reached the core; then do this according to the size of the abscess; then extract the forceps, and be careful not to let it slip.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture is running through the wound, what color it has, do as I said for other abscesses; and if the forceps does not become moist afterward, know that it is dry, so cross it with the pincers and gently scrape each side, and take care of the skin where it lies, pulling it out until it becomes healthy again with the new; and if you cannot pull it out healthy, then remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it does not stay, it returns to the mind many times; and if it delays a little, without disturbing you, it employs the wound with various corrosive powders and remedies, tightens the wound, applies hot poultices and treats it with other remedies until it is healed; and when it is grave, it costs both lips of the wound and treats those who cause it.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the veins are hardened against it or any other thing hurries you, use the vitriol powder and leave it for two or three days until the wound purifies itself and rests from the blood flow; then return to cover what has fallen away again.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of the instruments that enter, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters called 'albaret' and one called 'breb', and these are also of three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas; and they are similar to needles with which sorceries are cut, and are made of gold, tin, or iron, and those that are yellow are more effective for enclosing the black cores of fistulas; and these are also of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the extent of the opening.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the hooks are very similar, as you can see: large, medium, and small; and also there are hooks with two prongs in three ways; and hooks with three prongs, also in three ways; and hooks with two prongs, and sometimes a single-pronged hook, in three ways; all these are necessary for their use.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of these instruments is sharp, and there are some that do not cut well enough on one side, leaving the skin uncut, for they do not sever the vein or nerve; and from such insertions come the alemes, which are placed in parts, so that the patient does not suffer when opening the abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one should use them only on fleshy parts, like legs, arms, breasts, and angles, and similar places; and never make another small tool, resembling the cuts of fists, according to this form, with which one stops the blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it should never be placed in a place that heals the severing of veins, and arteries, and never according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never inflate the breasts of any man when they begin to be corrupted, as they seem like women's breasts; they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them should do so according to this form from this line b until g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat and apply medicinal poultices with hot char to the wound, then close the two lips of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healthy; if the breast sinks downwards and becomes soft due to its size, as it does in women, making two incisions above, through two similar openings; so that one holds onto the other at the end of each, ensuring that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from this line b until g. Then scrape off the leather between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment, until it is healed; and if it does not heal, or the incision is not entirely made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood discharge, then you should fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive dressing, and leave it until it removes the remaining fat and tissue, then treat it until it heals.
des apostemes des asselles	from the abscesses of armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that come from beneath the armpits are hard scrofulous nodules or they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, apply a wound dressing of clean cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and continue with appropriate treatment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, then treat it as we have said for cuts in scrofula, and if the wound gapes open, apply cautery as we have mentioned before.
de la routure de l’artere	from the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sealed, it often leads to abscesses, and similarly occurs in a vein that is inflated and abscessed; and if one knows this is due to an artery, then the abscess should be left to heal on its own; and when you feel it in your limbs, it feels strange; and for a vein, it appears red and swollen; and it is foolish to try to drain this abscess, especially when it is deep within joints or infected with angers (angrines) or in the collarbone or other parts, as it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	You should seek iron cautery, and the one at the head should also beware, and for that which is close to an artery's surface, make a cut from above the skin long; then carefully open the wound as often as necessary, and remove the artery with a single thread in two parts, just as I taught you regarding the extraction of both arteries found within temples. Then mark the space between the two threads with an instrument until no pus remains, and treat the abscess. Then apply the cure as appropriate while the wound is open; tend to any ensuing care as needed, so long as it is healthy. If the abscess lies along a vein's cut, you should hold in your hand what you can of the abscess, then insert the needle from below the space you hold, and pierce it, making two threads, so that you draw it from the other side; then secure the abscess as I instructed, or tie it to one of its parts with a thread. If you doubt that the thread has come loose, reinsert another needle throughout all of the abscess, below where the first was inserted, and draw out the threads in four parts. Then cut off the excess part of the abscess, and cut away any remaining surplus from the skin; leave what remains attached. Then place a moist cloth made of wine and oil upon it, and apply treatments and remedies as needed until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	from the abscesses of nails
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, abscesses also form in nails when they are injured or subjected to excessive strain, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this occurs more frequently in joints and fingers, which is the cause of abscesses, and their appearance resembles the color of the skin, and they are in various dispositions causing pain; and when they form, the patient feels great pain, and it is not fully integrated into the body, but deviates towards the heart; and it moves from all sides, neither advancing nor retreating, upwards or downwards, and the joint that is affected should not be bound with iron: perhaps it would cause contraction; and the one located at the head or forehead, makes the skin split.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, and it has a claw-like shape, cut it at its base; and if it's large, suspend it with a hook, then scrape off the skin, and later clean and stitch the wound until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	Des grosses boces pendans" translates from Old French to "hanging large
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	It happens in bellies alone, and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its appearance, it has subtle roots, and large droppings; there are both small and very large ones. I have seen people with two or more such growths in their bellies that looked more like fungi than anything else, with no discernible difference, they were white, had fine roots, were deeply split, and constantly discharged moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I collected and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 З., and the work of the incision is such that you look at the patient's moistness, and the color of the artery is white and moist and of subtle root; if it cuts with a wide spatula, then perform fire cautery in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For cutting often brings too much blood loss, and if it bleeds heavily without stopping, then hurry to cauterize; and if you see the patient anxious and fearful of the incision, take a well-made plunger and bind the artery as we have said, leaving it for two days; then restrain it and do not cease to tighten the plunger until it cuts through the artery without effort; and if the roots are thick, be afraid to cut, especially in the abdomen, but you can still cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not bleed again; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the thin part which is red, poor in substance, and milky-white.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess enlarged, and I will come to the treatment of the ulcer after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the wound is closed.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the wound comes from cauterization of a wound or a fissure in the flesh, and it is on the belly and not in any of the bowels, as it often happens with other ruptures, or from blood letting from veins or arteries according to what is above, or from flatulence; and if it is due to the rupture through the flesh and the discharge of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a slight thing without pain, and opens with various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressed at its two ends, it bends back and then returns, and perhaps it narrows or widens at the entrance of the bath or because of hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter and opens easily when pressed in the hand, without constraint; and if it is due to blood, it appears through these signs: large and hard abscesses, fixed in quantity; and if it is due to wind, it feels soft to the touch, and the work involves observing whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or a vein or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary, you must leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter about abscesses, both for the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if it appears to be an intestinal or bowel problem, you must instruct the patient to keep their bowels motionless and straight, then stitch around it; then command them to shift it gently between your hands, then stretch the part of the abscess above all the large sinew; then tie it with a strong thread or firm silk string, making it immobile; then open the other half of the abscess that is stretched over the string and use your finger to explore; if you find it caught in the string, release it and bring the intestine out from inside the belly; and if you find the bowels, take them at the sinew, cut off the surplusage; and if the artery or vein causes trouble, gently go around it; then return to your work and take two needles, push them through with force, and stitch as you did when making the incision; then stretch the abscess three times on the needles, and if you see it receding, remove the needles, leave the wound to heal on its own, and cure the patient as necessary; then remove the blood or moisture you find, cure the wound appropriately, and finish the abscess as we have said.
dou chancre	A cancerous ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed the symptoms of cancer and how to treat it with medicines, as well as how to avoid iron treatments; we say that cancer is insidious in the body, requiring great caution in its treatment, and advise the ancients that when a cancer can be cut out, like one on the breast, or the thigh, or similar places, it should all be removed as soon as possible. And when it is large and old, you should not even approach it, for I have never been able to heal any, nor has anyone else before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for tasks where the cancer is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, you should never purge the patient of black blood; instead, make them healthier if there is obvious congestion, then operate to remove the cancer from its good place; then pour on the cancer and all its parts, and cut it from all sides, leaving nothing behind; let the blood flow out completely, and check the wound with your hand or any other object, and if the bleeding continues after the cauterization of the artery or vein, you should continue to cauterize until the blood stops; then apply another cure as long as it is healed.
de ydropisie	Of hydropsis 
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already discussed the signs of hydrops, and in what way the collection of fluid is formed, and the symptoms of each condition, and the cure using medicines, and that which is cured with iron; these two conditions are the only ones to be considered. And one should not apply iron to these two conditions: namely, tympanitis and ypocrates, for they are deadly; so when you treat this hydrops-like condition, called "eclites" with medicine, and the cure does not benefit the patient, consider if the patient is weak or has another illness besides hydrops, such as a stomachache, or similar conditions. Do not apply iron in these cases, for there is doubt; but if you see that the patient is of strong constitution, and suffers only from hydrops, and is neither too young nor too old, then proceed thus: lay the patient gently on your hands, and the attendant should press the abdomen towards the bottom, squeezing out the fluid to the lowest point, then take the sharp spatula according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And make incisions from both sides.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Pierce with a point, but do not insert it so deeply that it reaches the intestines when pushed in, and do not let it pierce through; then observe if there is any droplet formation towards the intestines. You should make your incision three fingers' width directly beneath the armpit on the side where the droop occurs. If the drooping is due to liver disease, make your incision on the left side of the armpit; and if it's due to a weak muscle, make it on the right, so that the patient does not lie on the incision, allowing excess fluid to drain from the weak joint. Then, with the instrument, pierce through all the skin and flesh, and push it out, and apply pressure to any pus or debris between the skin and the affected area, as if you were peeling a wound open with your fingernail or similar; then continue piercing until the pus reaches the eighth 'leu', which is the color of water, then pull out the instrument, and shape it as shown:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a thin silver chain, and is made of fine gold or silver, with one small opening in the middle, and on one side three openings, and on the other two, and one on the other; and the part is cut as if it were a feather, which is the shape of the incision that scribes make to cut feathers.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top of it, there is a membrane, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it descends upon the instrument; then empty half or a third, for if you empty more than is necessary at this time, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit into the weapon, or he may lose his palm, or approach death; but empty according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient indicate, and his pulses. Then take the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the core that stops the opening which I mentioned, that you pierce in this manner; then repeat the instrument on the other side, if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw out a small quantity of water; do this for one day, and be careful not to let it remain too long but only a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much water, either by burial or hot sand, or by sweating or a bath, or in the sun, and he turns color; then cure him with drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize his stomach and liver and spleen after draining the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	From the obstruction of the penis.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without an opening in the penis, or if the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary at any time for him not to pierce all the very fine spatium according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then open the very subtle gap of the bladder, and hold it closed for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the closure, let him urinate, and then replace it; but perhaps it is not necessary, because the strong urine will not leave the gap closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the gap is small, it is a sign of a weak bladder, as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the perforation in their place are blighted, for none are born with a perforation at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they raise their penis; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the marrow, and it is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on their back, then the head of the penis and the shaft are stretched as if it were a feather, so that the perforation can be made in the correct place; and be careful to prevent bleeding which often occurs, and if it does happen, stop it with what stops blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	from the pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often, this foulness appears on the penis, and it is either malignant or benign; it is necessary that you prick them with a subtle needle, scrape them, and wash them thoroughly, then apply moist cotton in an Egyptian ointment, and continue the healing treatment with a fine ointment until it is cured.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the foulness is malignant, with putrid color and odor, it is necessary that you treat it with cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have it, and if the splint is in a sleep like a stick, with part inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the splint that is inside; and when it is healed, then treat the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, unless you are certain about the condition of the stick, it will turn black and corrupt in its core and roots; so it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupt, then cover it with a paste made from apple bark and eggs, and cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery is most effective in two ways: that is, for bleeding and corruption; and if the matter of the penis is corrupted and withdrawn, it is necessary that you insert or guide a plug into the urethra and let the patient urinate; and when the hair at the head of the penis is dry, on those who have not been circumcised, or there is an abscess or fistula, in such cases, then you must scrape it with a sharp instrument until the ligaments are loosened, and free the matter from the penis on all sides; and if it is a difficult task to plan this, then scrape it gently at the top of the penis and the scrotum with a spatula; then separate them slightly and cover it immediately with a thin cloth dipped in cold water so that it does not dry out.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a dislocation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will, especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best and lightest work for their healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children because they do not practice it in their laws, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have observed the greatest part of masters and elders who practiced circumcision near the anus, with force, and at every new moon; it was because there are two layers, and perhaps one might cut off this one and preserve that below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or she returns with the cover, and the pain is doubled, and at the cleaning which is from the deep wound, the point of the member is not assured; and at the cleaning of the nail, by chance, the iron escapes, and it damages the work, and often they heal in such a way that they do not need cleaning and I want it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleaning that is done with force on all the thread, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well from above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, if the thread is cut evenly all around, but it should be well twisted around the skin; and the manner of the first operation must make the child think that you are not tying the thread too tightly around the stick, but then let it relax in every way possible. Then twist it between your fingers straight, and hide the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the infant does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then press your hand against the stick and blow into its heart, and pull it up until the end of the stick is clean; then clean it well from all the dirt gathered on it, and tie it with a double thread, and bind it to another thread; and hold it by the second tie in the pouchet (a small pouch) and at the tip index (likely a finger); and cut between the two threads, then lift the heart gently and pull the stick's chief; then let the blood flow bit by bit, for that is how it heals; and sprinkle it with powder, and cover it with a gluey cloth made of half-boiled egg mixed with rose water, good oil, and fresh herbs, and leave it until the next day, and treat it with other remedies as long as it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of cleansing is this: both shoulders should be held still and cut, and the arm should also be long and equal.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in cleansing occurs when the veins burst during incision; then you must extend your finger so that the vein does not become infected; cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, use tweezers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it persists for three days, and the area under the wedge is swollen, leave it until the abscess has healed, and gently remove the skin; cut it as much as you can, and be careful to avoid the wedge part of the limb, which will not harm it at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the burn of a sudden wound from fire, which we have spoken about in treating burns, and if one pulls with too much force, it will go worse, so do not harm; treat it, as we said, as long as it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to the blockage caused by a stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or a newborn, or similar conditions, as we have said in that division; and if the urine cannot be released, and you see the retention is due to a stone in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be made to bend over on his knees; he should be placed on his back with pressure on his belly above his back, and the patient should be restrained as much as possible. This forces the neck of the bladder towards the expression of the stone above, allowing the urine to flow; if it does not come out, as we said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction to all instruments called "syringes," which have this shape: they should be made of fine, light silver, like a bird's feather, with a length of about 3.5 inches (8 cm).
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the method for urination is as follows: take a double thread and tie it to the top of a wool or cotton ball, then insert the thread into the urethra; cut off the excess wool and insert it all the way up to the top of the urethra, then lubricate the syringe with oil or butter and egg albumen, and have the patient sit down. Gently insert the syringe into the urethra until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis over the syringe; next, withdraw the syringe before the bladder is emptied, and have the patient feel for the point where the flow stops, and if it is not done in this order, because the direction in which the urine flows is twisted. Then cut the thread through all the wool bits, and the urine will follow the thread; remove it forcefully and let the patient urinate; repeat with the syringe until the bladder is completely emptied and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	Of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scabs or pus appear in the bladder, due to its putrefaction, you should view it and let water and medications distill, using the entire instrument called "clepsydre", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; the chevelure (hair or texture) of the medicine must be such that it stops the flow well without addition, if it can draw out the moisture and push as needed; and when you see your medicines settling in the bladder, place the head of the vessel into the moisture and draw out the liquid gently. Draw out the liquid completely, then press firmly; if the moisture enters back in, it will go directly to the bladder, which the patient will feel; this is the form of a delicate enema by which one enemas the bladder: thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or gold, and the place is higher; then open the chest from the side where the ribcage splits; take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you intend to use for enema; tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and warm the moisture over fire; then insert the tip of the enema bag into the anus, and squeeze your hand on the bladder until all the moisture enters the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle of it, and pierce it roundly; thread a strong string through these holes, then arrange the circle as one would arrange a dal, and put inside what you intend to use: oil, moisture, and water; tie it with the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture enters the bladder.
de la piere	from stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed the methods for dealing with stones and their extraction alongside medicinal practices; I have also explained the distinction between stones causing pain in the kidneys, and all the signs to look out for, and which type of stone requires surgical intervention; whether in the bladder or the urethra, and I will convey this to you clearly and concisely.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is in the bladder occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign of acute urine retention due to its thin quality; it opens up the urinary tract, greatly distressing the patient, often with pain, and then it hardens; it attacks the foundations many times; the healing process is light for children under four years old, but very difficult for the elderly, and affects those in their middle age most moderately. The treatment is less severe for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with a cleanse to draw out all foulness from the bowels.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often entangles itself with the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and upright them, moving them away from each other so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, never rising up again; then place the patient's hands between his legs, with his hands below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downwards; then tie him down and feel inside. If you sense the stone in a particular space, hurry now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come away by touching, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, and the patient will be relaxed, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and strong; then press it into its foundation, grasp the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, at the neck of the bladder; then press upon it with your finger, and the stone will come out from where you saw it cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin covering the stones in the area where the cutting is done; then he should use the spoon-shaped instrument, which is as follows:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And they make an incision between what is between the scrotum and the base, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh; and it should be straight on the stone, and your two legs should be together at the base, and the urethra should be cut wide enough to prevent obstruction, and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; so that the pressure from the stone at the base causes it to come out without effort; and know that there are stones with angles and edges: these are difficult to pass; and if they are below, resembling a spearhead or rounded, with an easy passage.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	If there are angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, it is necessary to use pincers that are also like a file at the top to pull the stone so that it does not escape; or you can bend a fine curved instrument at the top; and if you cannot do it thus, enlarge the opening slightly and if the skin is torn, pull with vitriole; and if there is more than one stone, first pull the largest one into the neck of the bladder, then cut, then pull it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, they must cut it out carefully, making a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For there are two things that can happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine returns immediately, as the muscles cannot be sewn together; but nevertheless, make every effort to pull it out, either with pincers or by removing pieces, until you have finished. When you have completed your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, tighten it, and place a moist cloth of oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, on the hot abscess to soothe it; then bind the patient tightly to his bed for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, if a lot of hot and cold blood rises from the joint, then apply healing ointment and basil ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses and corrosions appear in the wound and congelations of blood in the bladder, and urine retention occurs without any sudden discharge: then press your finger into the wound and extract the pus, because if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and cause illness; then clean the wound with water and oil and heat, and aid it in every way you know, until it is healed; and it is necessary that for all these treatments, you tie both legs together and apply medicines to the joint.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra, stuck, and urine cannot pass; then if you treat it as I say, cutting it many times, it is excusable for the cutting because of this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tested it this way.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take the iron at the forefront according to this form, and fix it at three angles in the wood:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the urethra beyond the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then gently twist the iron inside the urethra until it reaches the stone; and keep twisting the iron in the urethra little by little, as much as you can pierce the stone from another side; soon urine will come out, then press your hand on what is remaining of the stone inside the urethra.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken and jumps out with urine, and hurts the patient; and you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then take a needle and thread, and sew the stone from below and another from above, then pull it out forcefully, and loosen the string, and clean the frozen blood in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stones" (a reference to kidney stones)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It is rare for women to have stones, and when they do, the cure is difficult, and it is hindered by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; the second is that it is not easy to find a woman well-versed in medicine who understands these matters, especially if she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is such that by chance one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of healing; and the fourth way is that the stone in a woman's side is often more pressing than in a man's, so it needs to be cut deeper, and much fear attends it. If need be, you must summon a mistress well-knowing in this art, and if she cannot be found, then do not seek her out; instead, present a wise woman skilled in women's lives, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you have commanded regarding the examination of the stone. And take great care that this woman is chaste: then she should press her right thumb into the base of the stone, and seek it out; if she finds it, she should hold it there under her left hand on the swollen bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, she must move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder down to the root of the thigh; until it reaches the middle of the bone, where it is moved and feels the stone in that part; and do not move your hand above or below the stone, make the first cut small. Then turn the ratchet in the thigh, if you feel the stone deeply in the wound, as long as the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and with thorns.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know these similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the wound does not heal, take vitriole (a strong acid) and grind it into a powder, and hold it over the wound for an hour until the pain is alleviated; then return to your work, as long as the stone remains hard, and have tools that I have told you for removing stones from people to aid you in your task; and if the wound does not heal, and it is an artery that has been cut, sprinkle powder on the wound and apply bandages and splints, and do not repeat this, leaving the stone and never pulling it out unless the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat from the blood is calmed and the limbs are relaxed, return to your work as long as the stone remains hard.
de hernie carnouse	from herniated cartilage
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Rameous aquose is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white matter, which is detached from the heart of the tissues that contain the blood, and it is called 'syfac', and never properly part of the tissue of the blood, if one thinks it is another tissue; and this is the thin layer of tissue between the white matter we have mentioned. And this does not occur naturally.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this rameous is due to weakness that affects the tissues, and this material expands.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never does it come from a percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: sometimes it is pale yellow, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and so forth; and these are the signs to know this gathering, for if it is white as we have said, then the abscesses are bright, very long like the figure of a serpent, and do not open the joints, because they are covered in moisture all over.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the flesh itself, then the abscesses are bright with a part of the serpent's head, and for this reason one thinks it is another serpent; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white as we have said, then it smells very good. Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all the innermost parts, from which the shape will be known before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to his ability and the condition of his body; then place him on his back, on something slightly elevated, and cover him with many sheets; then have him sit on his left side, and command the healer to sit at his right, and extend the staff to one of the two ribs near the heart; then take the scalpel, and cut through the skin among the ribs from top to bottom towards the elbow, making a clean incision in considering the skin of the ribs until it is white, and carefully remove the flesh without damaging the rib; then make an opening in the flesh with water at a wide gap, and extract all the fluid, and then apply your bandages, and close the opening; and do not touch the heart of the rib, but only the flesh; cut around it carefully, that if you do not cut it well, the fluid may return. And if an error occurs in your work, bring it back to its original state when you have completed the work with the scalpel. Then sew together the two parts of the rib near the heart, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the heart corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you hold the vessels that are suspended, in doubt about the flow of blood; then cut off the clot from all the suspension, and extract the heart, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the arrow is divided into two parts, knowing that these are two branches, then cut off the other part as you have done with the first, and drain the blood, and apply to the wound a clean cloth moistened in rose oil; and put on another clean cloth moistened in wine and oil, and place the two coils above it, and cover them with doubled cloths, and bind it tightly according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and use the linen cloth according to this form, and join them together with stitches at the crotch of the breeches, and one of them pin over the base up to the back, and the other part at the palm; and the third above the two angles, and tie all the restrictions in the loop of the breeches. Never use this cautery ramage with a hot iron, but rather use a delicate surgical knife, cut through the skin of the coions, and heat it as we have said, so that the white satisfying substance that contains the water is exposed; if you take the cautery according to this form, pierce that satisfying substance at the same time, and scrape off with this hot cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the surgeon in all ways that you can, as long as you draw out everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the wound; and know that this work is safer; and move with caution from blood clotting, and consider the tasks of cutting; and if anything goes against you, whether it's an abscess or a blood clot or any other thing, cure what goes against you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this operation because of its horror, then perform an incision as I have told you, and be certain through the signs that we have mentioned that the dislocation is caused by moisture; so place the patient in a raised position. Then incise the abscess from below towards the whole area, making a wide opening, and insert the probe into the length of the body; let the pus flow out completely. Then apply cotton and bind it, allowing the remaining pus to drain, then treat the wound until it heals. If the white cloth does not allow the pus to drain from the wound's opening, then you should use a quill or an instrument used to draw off water from the dropsical patient, as has been mentioned before; widen the wound, and be aware that the pus will come back, and it will gather again after six months or so, and when it gathers as before, in this way the patient's condition will improve.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the abscess of the hairs
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	You know that in this branch there are many dire conditions, which is why I think it is better to leave it as it is; and I will tell you about the work and the similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I therefore say that many abscesses come where there are hairs, especially in the skin; and this is in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to know from the excessive sour and bitter fluid that extends to the hairs, or from percussion; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin; it does not cause pain, and it is a serious abscess; and sometimes there are numerous grayish, black, or foul-smelling abscesses, and they do not come from a new artery or vein inflammation.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, if it is blocked by the arrangement of hot inflammation in that part, when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	What is made of vein inflammation is blocked by its arrangement due to the touch of the fingers, and it can be cut well on this model and on other parts; and it is that you take the heart of the veins, then there is warmth at the top, and the white part becomes stronger, and liberates the suspension from all parts of the vein.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the vein is already hard with these cuts, then you must extract the vein and cut it; and if it is white, or in what is inside the vessels, then you must release all that tension and cut it properly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the base of the hair is behind, it is necessary that you cut it all off, and extract the root, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, immediately apply a moist woolen compress with rose oil and wine to the wound, and then use other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the hairs
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess enclosed in a similar wrapping like a boil, with the hair becoming thick and entangled, and it causes the patient great pain when it appears; and its treatment is just as careful, if not more so, than the one mentioned above, and we will tell you about the work of it, according to what the ancients have done.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You should place the patient in a comfortable, elevated position, then squeeze the suspended veins below your fingers to their full extent, encompassing all vessels close to the limb, and stretch them taut; then, using a sharp spatula, cut across the exposed vessels, as we have said for extracting arteries in temples, then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and bind it to the first joint where the vein entered, and likewise to the other end; then, cut them evenly, according to the length of the body, and remove any corrupted moisture. Treat the wound like others, so that no vessel leaks, for by doing so, all veins will receive their nourishment, and the organs will not dry out or be unable to aid themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	From the rupture of the sinew.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The outcome of this branch is from the rupture that occurs either at the site of the sinew (syfac) or in the extension on the belly in the region of the angles, causing the intestines to descend from this rupture to one of the coils; and this rupture can be either due to the syfac or the extension, and these two methods have similar causes: percussion, a jump, straining, lifting a heavy weight, and similar actions; and the signs when it is due to the extension of the syfac are that it happens little by little over a long period, and does not come suddenly; and the abscess remains evenly sized towards its complete formation, as the syfac pushes the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the incision that sudden pain arises, and various abscesses appear beneath the skin close to it, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and blood from the syphilis.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never remove the abscess with the intestine, it remains stuck, causing great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments with pain, for this reason one must be careful.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method of the procedure is that you command the patient to straighten the intestine in his hand within the wound if it can be done; then carefully hold it between your hands and loosen the joints; then extend the heart above, and cut all the skin from the length; then insert the fingers inside the folds of the skin, following the need to open the wound, so that they can come out; then peel off the healthy tissue that is underneath the skin, as long as the white tissue is hard and fully exposed on all sides; then with your index finger, follow the course of the fold of the skin, between the white tissue below the outer skin and the second tissue, and behind the first one, and in front of it; and afterward, with your right hand, inside the heart of the fold of the skin, place the white tissue above in your left hand, and loosen the organ towards the tailbone; and command the assistant to stretch the organ upward, and untie what is attached at the rear behind the ligament; and check both hands if there is no intestine wrapped up or hard white tissue, and if you find anything, insert it into the abdomen underneath; then take a needle with a thick thread made of X threads, and pass it through the posterior part of the white tissue, after the skin of the fold; then cut the parts that appear to have threads, as long as there are IIII threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the form of a cross, and bind the white tissue we mentioned, which is underneath the outer skin, with a strong thread from two sides; then wrap the parts around the threads, and tie them in such a way that none of their strands can enter inside, preventing an abscess; and put the binding according to the first long binding, two fingers' length away from it, and after these two bindings, leave the white tissue underneath the heart of the fold of the skin as one finger's length; and afterward, follow the contour of the organ with the remainder of the white tissue, as we previously mentioned; then moisten wool in oil and apply it to the wound, and bind it with the thread we mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the white part as we have said, after incision, out of fear of further bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens often, and leaves the wound open as long as it needs to heal; if it takes time to close, then apply hot water, and do as we have said, until it heals; then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	from meat hernias
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this condition, never have I seen anyone dare to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the elders say that it is made like a root that holds a joint together, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting them lightly on the inside, and then open the abscess of him who opens, until the vessels close; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No rupture should occur suddenly, as we have said, and open the vessels; nor should any part of the intestines protrude, and if it does, it is a sign of danger, and all efforts must be made to repair it; however, if it persists too long at this point, one believes it to be a wound or an abscess, until the intestines protrude; and this occurs due to the expansion of the syphac, which is attached to the vessel, as we have said before, because it becomes expanded then softened and swollen, opening the vessels; and its cure is by cauterization, as we have previously stated; and never should it be cured in this manner with iron. And let the patient lie on his back, then make an incision along the ruptured area, according to the quantity of three fingers' width; and then extract the syphac that is under the skin, take a stick and place it on top of the visible part of the syphac; press firmly in the abdomen, cut both visible parts of the syphac at the base of the stick, and remove them; then remove the stick, do not cover or extend the wound, nor anything else, as I have told you about the cure for the rupture of intestines; and treat it with the treatment for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you treat the wounds, if they become contaminated and the wound heals, as long as it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The treatment is difficult, and it has no appearance in the fracture, but the cauterization is moved in this place, and it is closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the hard skin of the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often, the skin of the joints becomes softened in no particular place because the muscles inside are relaxed, and it is visible; and it is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, to lay the patient on his back and cut off the soft skin that has become separated from the natural skin; then bring the two edges together with a stitch, and if there is too much soft skin, cut it away at three stitches or four firmly; then cure it like other wounds as long as it heals, and pull out the thread.
dou chastrement	This medical treatise offers remedies and procedures for various ailments and injuries
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You know that cauterization is prohibited by our laws, and for that reason, I would not speak of it in this book; however, it is necessary to mention it in two ways: one is to respond wisely when asked about it, and to provide the appropriate cure; and the other is because we often need cauterization on certain animals to help us, as with goats, sheep, cats, and other creatures.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say, therefore, that cauterization is performed in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one we perform by attraction, make the animal sit in hot water until the joints become soft and supple; then press them with your hand while they are restored and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	On castration of the penis: it is necessary to tie up the animal and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut each testicle one by one until they are well scraped; and leave no drop of blood, nor any subtle discharge that is on the vessels; and this method of castration is superior to that which is done by attraction, because at attraction, something from the joints may remain, leading the animal to desire lust; then treat the wound as long as it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	A hermaphrodite is in two manners like men: one is when between the two sexes the appearance opens up also as the figure of a woman, with hair and never cuts himself short.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, who have a penis on their hand as a phallus and two vulvas.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for both men and women is that you apply the appropriate compresses to all the affected parts, and treat them like other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine flows through the skin of the penis, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the hair
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tendons are a tight structure attached to the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and no woman has ever had such a strong hand, and it is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You should remove the excess of tendons in your hand or fingers, and cut them gently; do not cut too deeply, so that bleeding does not occur, and treat it with another cure until it is healed; and for another condition that appears at the opening of the wound, and its use, and perhaps jumps out, and resembles a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to deal with it, as we have said of the splinter, and treat it while it is clean.
de erratique	erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is when the nature of a woman is not properly understood, or if the opening is small; it is innate by birth, or accidental due to illness that comes upon her, or perhaps because of an unnatural fit, or a subtle or specific affliction, and it can affect her in any part—in the middle, on one side, underneath, or wherever; and it requires knowledge of conception, childbirth, and sometimes even the flowers (meaning possibly breast milk) to be considered. The understanding of these things is through observation of the body's movements.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the dislocation is recently apparent, whether it occurs in the hand or the foot.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If the dislocation is subtle and recent, act swiftly: place your two index fingers together, and have the patient lie on their back with their legs spread; then form both shoulders into arcs until the subtle dislocation is reduced and the joint is stable; then take wool, soak it in oil, and apply it to the joint, keeping the patient on their back each day so they cannot move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the dislocation is hard and persistent, it is necessary that you use a spatula-like instrument resembling a fir branch.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is from fire, suspend it at the oncine (a term for a specific point or area) and apply a poultice; have medicines that stop blood flow, such as mithridate, dragon's blood, incense, and a sufficient amount of egg; then administer a large piece of plont (a fabric or material used in bandaging) so the wound cannot close; and do this for a long time, and then apply a dry linen tent; and thus continue with other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when the swelling comes from moisture, it should be covered according to this manner; if it is not an abscessed swelling.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Because an abscess that is enlarged in the wound of the mare should not be touched with fire.
des emorroides	from hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that, without usual care, become inflamed; and as they age, they turn into these; and in the previous section, we discussed the appearances, symptoms, and signs, and I will now discuss those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and their inflammations, when they are at their worst in the mare (anus), and do not appear to be felt, can only be cured properly with fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the wound, one can feel, are those that one can heal.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore advisable that you place the woman in a cold house, then gently apply plasters to her breasts and roots, then sprinkle medicinal powders to stop the flow of blood, such as ginger and dragon's blood and incense, and similar substances; then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, and immerse her in cold water. And if bleeding persists, let it be treated with a decoction of sumac and bark from pomegranates and gall nuts and similar things, and then take flour from barley, mix it with honey and butter, and make an ointment to apply to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it becomes wet, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If that does not work, apply cupping glasses to the back and around the mammary area without causing injury; then take lint and dampen it in plantain or mulberry juice mixed with old wine, and apply to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has rested, continue the treatment with clean bandages as long as it remains healthy; and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles a rough head, so it should be covered as I have said before; then cure it as long as it remains healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	from the abscess of the breast
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses occur in the breast, such as a chancre, previous abscess, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscess, along with many other illnesses mentioned in the prior discussion.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I speak in this treatment about the hot abscess that occurs in the breast, which is not like other abscesses that discharge pus; and if you are knowledgeable about the work of fire, consider whether the abscesses are red in their onset, full of heat and fever, and turn red as you can see.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hasten to pierce, but make the patient suffer until the pain is eased; then have the ill-person sit, and take two small seats where he can recline, and rest on his back, spreading his legs in a way that lengthens the affected part of the leg. Then spread his thighs, put his arms beneath his knees, and tie them firmly with a good band; then open the anus towards the right side, and insert the instrument used to open the mouth of the wound, from which this form comes. And it is important that when you insert this instrument, you first push the right end inside to see the depth of the wound, so that whatever enters the wound with the instrument does not go any deeper than it should, and it does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is too large, it is necessary to cover the deep part of the wound with cloth so that the instrument does not cause discomfort.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens and they make an incision with a soft hand, if it is necessary to cover the wound, then use a spatula; and when the bowel is empty, it is necessary to put moist cloth in rose oil or dry green oil into the wound up to the margin of the wound, and place a clean wet cloth over the wound on top of the abscess and the forearm, and then wrap it with a cloth soaked in water and cooked malva; then cure after two days of treatment until it is healed; and never lift the abscess or the wound by enema with water and honey, and then with water or cooked roots of lis and aristologe; and then return to treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is healed in the abscess, it is necessary to be careful not to use fire, but treat it as we have said in the previous section.
de l’enfantement	From childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Skill is first in the dance, knowing the figure of natural childbirth, and its signs are when you see the woman straining down and desiring to smell the air: then hasten for the child to be born; then know that these children are according to their proper form, and come second with them; and when you see these signs, gently press her belly so that the child comes quickly; for as it descends upon its head, it second them with him, and the mother's body rids itself of its excesses through good purification; and this one who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never stops coming upon their feet, and affects the body or the joint, or the hands, or comes upon their belly, or back, and turns by chance onto their neck, and other evil positions; so it is necessary for a skilled helper to be wise and subtle in these matters, and to ward off error and disappointment, and I will show you all the positions as to how he should aid them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the evil comes upon his head from natural causes, and a woman gives birth heavily, and her virtue is weak, then she should sit on a saddle, or women should hold her; and take the nature of oil or fennel that has been cooked, and then apply the baile (probably a type of herbal compress or poultice) between her fingers in the shape of a small spatula.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And cut through the second joint, and saw it from its finger as much as the moisture that is stuck inside; and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with fennel seeds in musk with oil of sesame; then make her sneeze and blow her nose, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: now the child will come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands come out, it is necessary that you gently reset them little by little; and if they still cannot enter, place the woman on a seat, and raise her feet up high; then take the seat off the ground, turn the woman so she does not stand up, and if her hands cannot enter, and the child dies, cut through the hand at the joint closest to the body, extract the child, and reset it equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the exit of the child on his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes on his feet, he needs to be pushed up, and then he moves back and forth little by little until they are even; then press on the feet and extend them a little at a time.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	He can jump up to his ankles if he is commanded to press, and this makes him sneeze from the condition; if he jumps further, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not happen as we have said, he moves back and forth little by little according to the natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it becomes slightly easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not work as we have said, take some musk, and oil of clary, and gum resin, and grind them all in a mortar; apply this remedy to the woman's womb both inside and out, then let her lie in warm water reaching down to her ribs; when she is moistened, make a collar of mirra and place it around her, leaving it for an hour. Then have her sit, then make her sneeze, press her mouth and nose, and gently massage her stomach, for the child is now ready to be born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the emergence of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this manner, he moves his hands little by little; then he turns over on his collarbone, and his feet hang down, and he lies on his side; he bends his hands little by little, then takes hold of his hands on his belly, and removes the cushions from below, until he is completely relaxed downwards; if the child does not cry, take his feet and move them, then move his belly upwards, then turn your hands inside out; and bring the child little by little; and tell the woman to press herself as the child comes.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the birth of the child who comes with a large hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I know how to bring the hand back: if it cannot be brought back, then have the woman rise and walk; if she cannot walk, make her lie on her side with her legs bent; then administer the musk or salve I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, have her sit on a chair, and study how to bring back the hand; deliver the child according to its natural position, and have her sneeze, and command that she press as the baby is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the birth of the child on its mother's chest, with its hands spread and its face turned away from its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I want the patient to hold their hand, then twist it little by little and gently; and when it is even, apply a light, muscular and oiley compress, as we have said, then command that it moves slightly by slight movement; and once you have done this, leave it in that position, and tell them to breathe deeply; and make them sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for all the rest
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it acts in this way for all the rest, if the seconding (unclear term) is on your finger, drain the moisture; and if it sticks to its face and neck, cut it from the corner of the mouth so it is not held back, and the child will die; then pull the baby out, as you have placed it properly, and command the woman to breathe deeply. Then gently release.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the emergence of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	You know that twins are born many times, and never more than three or four at once; and this is not a strange thing, as it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Twins are a strange thing and do not live long, they have no name; I know that they are multiplied, and their destinies are determined by the one who divides them, who is connected to the mother's womb; and they never emerge as naturally as any other child, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they scream loudly, if the treatment is as we have said, and there are skilled healers, then make it happen quickly and gently; and do so as it deserves to be done for healing.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	They are never formed in stages I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than XV, and they take the form of a child according to the noble measure, and it is necessary that the skilled healer knows all this, for sometimes a similar thing happens; so do as is fitting.
de l’enfant mort	From the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat a woman who has lost her child in the womb, as I mentioned in the previous section, and there is no discharge, and you are forced to perform manual labor; it is important that you know if the woman is of healthy constitution and does not have any fear or concern about the death; she should be placed on her back, with her legs inclined downwards and raised, and the midwife should attend to her for as long as she is in bed, without allowing her to move down to deliver the child. Then, wet your fingers with moist olive oil mixed with althae and fennel powder and flaxseed, and apply this mixture to the woman's perineum with gentle rubbing. After that, gently press on the area where the stitches are, then carefully insert the finger in the orifices that are suitable for delivery, and ensure the child is descending onto her head. If the descent is on her feet, sides, or under the chin, carefully insert the fingers in these positions as well, and if the delivery is easy, gently press the fingers against the stitches, between the two middle fingers of your left hand, while holding the corbeille (a birthing tool) with your right hand, and deliver it all with a slight movement. Insert the finger into any of the mentioned positions until the matter becomes clear. This is the shape of the stitch:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then find another joint, where you need it most, so that the extraction is even; and then hold it equally in movement from one side to the other, to pull it out, and be the dislocation sharp so that it holds firm, as this shape demonstrates.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	If a piece remains, and none of its edges are oiled, press it into that part and draw the other part; if nothing remains, move this dislocation higher up the limb and do so until it comes out entirely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes forward over the other and cannot return due to tightness, it is necessary that you wrap it with a cloth until it comes out entirely; then cut at the joint of the finger or the thumb, and do the same for the other hand, and have both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's foot is large and twisted at birth, and has a sharp edge, it is necessary that you insert the spiny spatula between your fingers, and press and extract the edge; or you can use the instrument called 'almidach', with which the form is made with the tools of this chapter; and in the same way, make the foot move naturally; then carefully pull the bones with pincers, and if the foot jumps out and is constrained by force, it may be split; as long as the moisture at the worst exit is removed; and if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as much as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, pierce it until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the fever is on his feet, it is a light attraction, and the direction towards the mouth of the wound is slight.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is twisted in the belly or the bowels, it is necessary to pull it with the drape wrapped around the hand; and make an incision on the belly or the bowels as much as the moisture that is inside; and if the other members are broken and the feces remain, he should press his hand from the wound towards the mouth of the wound, and pull it forcefully; then he should incise or cut, and remove it; and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to the heat of the abscess that has formed, it is not necessary to work on it, but rather to apply moist and greasy things; and apply poultices, and soak with soft water that softens and moistens.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the dislocation is on his side and you can set it straight, you must do so as we have said for a live child; and if that cannot be done, cut it off in pieces, leaving nothing of the fragment.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, apply what we have said for abscesses that come from veins; and if bleeding occurs, use sharp restraints, and apply other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had been cut open and a child removed; then another was cut open above it, and the other child was saved.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, there comes one abscess in the cheek, it swells until it opens, and begins to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but I couldn't heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong plaster, and an bone came out, and after a few days, others followed.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly amazed, because that belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought this was a bone from a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound and found a bone in my hand, until the woman was in a better condition; and after a long time, she still had a little bowing of her arm; and I have never remembered this chapter being written for any other reason than that, when the masters encounter something strange, they know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the wife back to her place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	After this comes the form of the press, with which books are bound; and at its turn, to the two corners of the two limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle in their tightening, and made of ebony or box; and the mouth should have a diameter of two fists, with margins of one palm and a half; and between the two halves, there should be an adjustment of this same horn, firm on both sides, measuring half a palm or a little more; and this adjustment is inserted into the opening of the mare's mouth to open it when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling pliers; it should have two adjustments, each one palm-length wide with a width of two fingers; when opening the mare's mouth with the entire instrument, make the woman lie down on her side, with her legs spread apart. Then, press the two adjustments together inside the mare's mouth and hold the handle of the instrument between her thighs; subsequently, open your hand over the instrument as you did with the pliers, according to how far you need to open the mare's mouth, until it reaches its desired position.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	The surgical instruments are all diverse, and their appearances are many; and when you have arranged them in order, the work is done more swiftly, and they prove more useful for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument even if you have not arranged it, for the need for it is not an excuse for carelessness.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second stage of labor is reached, if it is necessary to hold back the patient from pushing, you must instruct her to retain her breath and then force her to exhale forcefully; grasp her hands and press them against her mouth and nose, and if she stops breathing through this, that is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If this is not done, I will take a needle or a plug, and make a perforation or an opening, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calament, dill, fennel, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or steeped in water over the fire; then place one end of a plug or needle into the opening, and the other end in the mouth of the wound, and hold it until the vapors enter the wound; then make the patient sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the patient's condition worsens,
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if after this treatment it remains immobile, and is not strong, instruct the patient to moisten his left hand with oil of sesame or musk, then return it to its natural position, and want the second one; and when she finds it, press and stretch it little by little straighteningly, so that the pain does not occur during extraction; but you must move it slightly to the right and to the left, and then treat it.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the opening of the wound is very tight, we have mentioned the cure of sneezing and herb fumigation; and if it does not improve from all that we have said, be careful not to drain it; but it is necessary that whoever has an opening in the wound, you tie it to the woman's ankle, then apply a four-part ointment; she will sneeze and expel it, and come out strong; however, if she sneezes, a bad odor comes from the stomach and head, and the patient becomes worse.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is necessary, then suitable fumigations should be used: no one among the ancients has tried fumigation with arugula and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman to retain the flowers and the seed is this one:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is made of glass resembling a bell, and the narrow part is inserted into nature, and the wider part is placed over the fire; and the fumigation should be on coals, and the steam until it is spent, and then another is started.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the base
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not had their base pierced, but it is covered by a subtle mark: therefore, one must teach the midwife to pierce that mark with a fine tool, and do not use an aggressive instrument, and protect the wound so that she does not touch it; then place a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, and apply the dressing until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not heal, pierce a string of silk or gut, and leave it for several days, and it will fall out when the child wants to move around in bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never comes this stoppage of a wound or abscess suddenly; it is necessary to cover this stoppage: if it is healed, as we have said about the pain of bleeding.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula deep within the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistules that originate from below the foundation are called nodations, and those that come from outside the foundation defying gravity, or in the space between two parts, if there is a fistula or more; and when this nodation is old, it opens, and still emits white or subtle smoke, and these fistules do not heal; they are known because of the discharge or flatulence when the patient evacuates, and sometimes they jump out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if they perforate the fistulas that reach the bladder, and half of the penis; and they reach the joint of the thigh, and the root of the scrotum.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus you recognize the persistent fistula in the fundament, and it is not passing: and it is that you insert your index finger into the fundament, and press an extremely thin needle of iron or steel into the fistula where there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has curvature, if you insert a thin point, or a horsehair, as long as you feel the point or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out with discharge or wind, as we have said: know that it will not pierce; be haste in curing.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula persists up to the bladder or up to a urethral channel, if it bleeds while urinating and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is cut just above the joint of the thigh, then the veins nearby become inflamed; if there is no curvature or unusual sensation of pain around it, and it continues to persist, then it is not cured by any medicine or treatment; and in these persistent fistulas, there is no cure other than hard work and the vain attempts of foolish people who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the case where it is neither persistent nor old and there is hope of healing by fire, as I have experienced, the patient lies on their back with their legs raised to their armpits, and their thighs inclined towards their stomach; then apply a tent-like bandage, or a tight wrap if there is curvature, until you know where the vein is located.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain deep inside, it is necessary to press your index finger there, and he will feel that the pain is coming from a specific point; if you uncover or feel between your thumb and forefinger the satisfaction or hardness, then know that it is persistent; unless it works itself out, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can in any case do nothing well enough, but this happens rarely; and the aid one provides consists of applying a gentle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as mentioned above; heating it thoroughly inside the fistula until it reaches the foundation, and repeating this process two or three times, until you know that these hardened spots are burned, which resemble a feather from an eye; then apply moist bandages, until the swelling subsides, and finally dress with something that soothes, binding it tightly.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is in such a state, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If he cannot be healed in any other way; and if a thread enters between the fingers, and does not pierce through to the flesh which is at the base of the finger, and there is a thick covering of skin or tissue, and you see a fistula following this covering towards the heart, then cut it from the beginning of the fistula, and pull out again before the thread, and then apply cautery afterwards, as long as it comes to the edge of the thread; and the thread will be delivered and cut. Then beware of those false threads that look like a bird's feather, and do not touch them in any way.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pain persists, and the fire or medical treatment does not help, then cauterize it with either fire or a sharp tool.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cautery combines two good things: that is to say, the burning of these prepared parts, and the drawing out of blood and the drying of moisture; then apply moist ointment or crushed material from a plant while the bones are bent, and push the burned parts into the socket; then treat the wound with hot coals from a hard wood, and these dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not relapse.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula appears right through to the bottom of the fundament, and it is distant from the body, if you press your finger into its origin, and feel it, then this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tentation, and between them is the web or the sticky or charred, and it is about to pierce, if there is no other way of escape and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods: either cauterize it as we have said, or cut it down to the bottom, or if you can insert something and cure it as before; but don't go too deep, that you do not remove the covering which holds the foundation, and complications arise from the contrary; then cure it as we have said; perhaps it will heal, or you remove that cover and clean it afterward, when it has been cut away from the base, either with a knife or another instrument pointed; then cleanse the infected wound, as much as you can; study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part beyond the foundation: if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And they never form fistulas in this manner: and it is when you press the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side near the foundation of the skin above, if a small tent-shaped piece is taken at the top according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And they insert the thread twisted in two, and press the tent along the entire thread into the fistula as far as the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is deeply embedded at the edge of the foundation within, then pull the thread out of that opening, thus pressing your other finger or foundation into it; and hold the top of the thread, bringing the two parts together, and fasten them to each other, and leave it for one or two days; and do not touch it again until the threads break apart, and the wound is healed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open, try to pierce it in every way you can, but if it is too tightly closed.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For if it is not done carefully due to the tightness of the closure, and then treated as we have said, while it is still healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form is a sharp, spiky point that is used to make the fistula; it is thick and pierced both ways; on one side too hard, and on the other too soft, so that it is neither cut nor should be cut, as you can see.
des emorroydes	Of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids exist in two ways: either they are inside the anus, resembling grains of resin, with small or large protrusions, and cause bleeding; or they extend from the anus and are located at the base, sometimes alone or in groups, and have a purplish color. For the treatment of hemorrhoids that are internal, instruct the patient to stay in bed until the anus heals completely and the pain subsides. If they cannot be held in place by their own moisture, use cloth, cotton, or a piece of camel's hair to tie them; cut them off at the base, then powder them with hot powders suitable for cauterization; or apply the cautery as described in the chapter on cautery, treating other conditions as needed until they heal. If the anus cannot be opened, administer a harsh enema to wash out what is inside so it can be expelled easily. The treatment is easier when the patient's pain and the protrusion of the hemorrhoids have subsided, and the incision should be made with caution using a blade.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary, you must administer the stitch in this manner: take a twisted thread, and wrap it around an needle, then pull the thread from above and pierce the needle from the other side, and pass both ends of the thread beneath the needle, and if it is too wide, tighten the forming thread, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do thus with all the others, leaving one for draining the excess blood; then place a moist cloth on the wound, either in rose oil or wax, and cover it, and instruct the patient to rest. And then leave it until the stitches heal, and when they have fallen off, apply treatment and other remedies until he is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Carefully and precisely from the roots or foundations
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is a drying up of roots in the intestine, due to restrictive nature or when the disease is old and no medicine helps.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary that you scrape off the skin with the point of a spatula or your finger, ensuring it does not retain moisture. Then treat it as it should be until it heals; if it cannot heal, repeat the scraping more forcefully than before, until it feels moist and is cut; then treat it until it is cured.
dou fremit	He trembles.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	The mouse is a small, hairy creature that moves stealthily before the body, and it goes in many places; it never causes pain, and one feels as if they were dead from trembling, affecting the whole body especially the hands.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a feather from a goose's wing or a strong eagle's feather, and place that feather on the trembling until it turns the whole trembling red; then turn your hand over the entire feather until you cover all around the trembling, and set it straight, and remove the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make this of a chain of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle and draw them from below and above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not cut, so as to keep both, and press gently. And if you see, cauterize the wound, just as it is in front of or at the beginning of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a douche
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never should one use a enema of silver or bronze, or melted iron or wire; and never should these small and large instruments be used according to those to whom they are entrusted.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who are thus poorly cared for in the treatment of children and those who are weak and in pain, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the bladder is small and wide at the top, or the abdomen is bound in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and if there is a distension, or the abdomen is bound in this way, and the feces are within, as you see, then have one side of the abdomen pierced, and the other sealed; and place into the abdomen medicinal herbs from an animal bladder or parchment, piercing it all around with small holes, leaving one space between each hole, and insert a strong thread twisted in an X shape or similarly around each hole, and gather up the abdomen like a bowstring; then apply the enema instrument to the mouth of the thread, and perform the enema; this is the shape of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and apply a warm compress with oil or goose fat or something similar to the head, then gently squeeze it; then the minister should grip it with both hands together until it is completely drained, then remove the compress and help the patient raise their legs against the wall, and let the medicine drain out as much as possible; if they sleep for a whole night, it is greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use the enema for a stomach disorder and the medicine drains quickly, then it should recur as long as it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoid is at the foundation or in an abscess, it should be treated with equally delicate enemas as for a child; and this is the shape of the delicate enema which tightens the skin.
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken of the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments of hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things that cause wounds are by the impact of stone, and sword and knife cuts, or spear, arrow, or axe, or similar objects; or they are made according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that breaks through the neck, or head, or side, or belly, or liver, and similar parts; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, beginning with simple head wounds, for the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head or neck, and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is caused by a stone or similar objects, and the skin is nevertheless deeply cut and the wound is large, and you doubt an abscess: treat it promptly, especially if little blood comes from the wound, and dress it in the opposite way from the affected part; and give the patient wine and lean meats to reduce swelling.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to be healed, let his flesh be reduced, and he should not drink wine or eat char; and apply a poultice of rose oil only, or aromatic wine; and if there is a hot abscess, apply it to the wound while it is still fresh with all its blood, and do not move it with air or powder, which I will speak of shortly; and if the fire has moved it, apply some ointment, as long as it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, such as the size of a sword or similar, and the edges cannot be brought together like tent flaps, then bring them together with stitches, as I will say about abdominal wounds, from the suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed through the bone, and it bleeds profusely, but only for a short while, then apply pressure; afterwards treat the wound with medicine and replace the skin with hard flesh instead of leather, and instruct the patient to eat substantial meats, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find putrefaction in a wound that does not reach the bone, and it bleeds continuously, then drain it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, from which no blood can stop, even with medicine, then cut the artery, and if you cannot do so, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize the wound.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: it is that you put this powder which hardens so that the fire can move it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The method for the powder is as follows: take one part incense, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts of fresh charcoal, mix the powder finely, apply it to the wound, and tighten it so that it spreads well and joins together with all its moisture; then bind it tightly and leave it unbroken unless it swells, for the medicine should not be removed as long as it remains healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never should charcoal be used only, unless one has incense and dragon's blood, but the fire should move the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has moved the wound, especially if there is no powder placed on it; but put some cooked herbs or a paste of barley flour made with water and honey, until it flows; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture occurs with the wound and it is small, extract it with fine pincers; and I will tell you below about the fractures of the skull.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound occurs on the neck and it is simple, with no distinction between this and that of the head, but if there is damage to the nerves or arteries in the neck.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, then there is no other remedy but to let them heal and put nothing restrictive on them, as that would harm the nerves and cause them to retract; do not apply any sharp objects to the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member. But apply medicine under these conditions: just as chalk is washed in sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and cloth is also washed in sweet water and other herbs are added according to this method, and moist compresses.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is great, cutting through the muscles and tendons, treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and infected, filled with pus, pierce them to the bottom; if the artery is cut, and pus flows, if you mislead it, and the law, and cauterize improperly, and if there is a thorn in the throat or the heart, and the flow of blood must be stopped, do not touch the throat but remove it according to its natural shape; then apply the strictest bandage and leave it for no days, applying remedies until it heals; and if the wound has pressed into the bone, if you wish, and there are pieces of bone that cannot be removed, let them stay until the wound festered and becomes disfigured and lightens its discharge; and if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones or a fistula in the wound, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and deep, then consider the position of the wound in relation to the patient's vital parts: if the wound is mortal, do not apply powder in the first hour, nor bind it tightly so as to prevent the blood from clotting, for it may return to the body and cause further harm to the patient; but apply a soothing dressing twice a day. If you have no dressing, place old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and keep the patient sleeping on the wound for three or four days (or more); if there is no spasm, nor any unusual tremor or weakness in the body, then know that the wound is healing.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the wound with various remedies and others, as long as it is healthy; and if it cannot heal, and opens up, know that there is a fistula; so treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is shallow or deep, in front or behind, treat it accordingly; if large, sew it up; if small, use powder; and if it penetrates into the bone with pieces of shattered bones, dig out the debris if they are clean; if not, let the wound fester, and make the extraction easier; for other wounds in other limbs, judge them as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	disruption of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The disruption of the belly is great and medium and small; from a large wound, none of the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude; and stitching is more difficult, and never worth less than a small wound than a large one, because one must be more careful not to pinch the intestines, unless they are placed on top of each other; for the intestines tend to swell quickly and cause pain if they are pinched again, which is why the smaller wound is easier to manage, as we have mentioned before. You should know that the rupture of the belly occurs in four ways: common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the sutures of other wounds on the body and other specific sutures are common to other wounds; nevertheless, they are more appropriate for the suture of the belly, and I will explain each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and nothing internal is affected, and it is a difficult thing to reset, it is by one of two methods: either because of the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to injury.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth with hot water only slightly, or cook in water with salt, ginger, and pepper, and remove the intestines as soon as the swelling is gone; and never use wines that cause constriction, but let it be moved until it is deflated.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, if the intestine is filled with either water or other bad fluids, then gently press it, for this lightens the entrance of a few things; and if it cannot enter, make a slight cut in the wound with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to move the stool, that we should not cut it without great need; and this is the instrument to divide: it cuts inside the pile and pushes it out, observe this form.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine bursts out, put it back gently into its natural position if you have the ability, for it is better to move it.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, place the head and heels higher than the lower parts, and also be sure that the torn part of the belly is in one of the two parts, so that you attend to what I say about large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what you have, then take in your hands a gentle medicinal oil that covers the entire tear, and gather the edges together; this is the common method of stitching. Press a needle or more through, according to the size of the wound, leaving two spaces at the top of the wound, and insert a needle where there is a good strong thread; pierce the two layers of skin with the two points of the scalpel, which are beneath the skin, until you have pierced that part, and gather together the two points of the scalpel all four together. Then tie the thread around the needle twice, then gather together the edges of the wound neatly, and insert another needle; tie it as you did with the first needle, and continue this work with needles according to your need until all the wound is secured. The needles should be medium-sized, neither too fine nor too thick, for the thin ones can pierce through all the flesh, and the very thick ones cannot go in well. Therefore, they should be medium. Do not push the needles too far outside the flesh and skin, or they will open up the wound before it is sewn; then trim off the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient while sleeping, and place tenting or a cloth at the ends of the needles to keep them still, and leave them until the wound is healed. This stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for there only needs one needle or two for stitching; this is how you sew up an injury that was caused by a knife on a man's belly, which was torn open, more than a palm-width wide, and it was away from the intestines by two palms, and the wound was in the middle of his belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought the intestine back after it had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed completely within fifteen days, and it was cured, and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they marveled that he did not die, which was a miracle; and I did not treat him with any remedies, for I was in a place where none could be found, neither any medicine; and I applied clean cotton to the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle, and thread it from the outer part to the inner part, right through the center; when it has pierced through completely, take hold of the thread with your thumb or stitch it where you first inserted the needle, and pierce it again from the inner part to the outer, until the stitching is complete. This method is such that you sew just as a tanner sews fur, leaving the thread once on one side and taking it up on the other, until the stitching is finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second way of stitching, which Gallens calls the proper way, is like no other, joining the two parts together naturally, and applying one end to the other with great skill: take a needle or thread close to the edge, pierce through only the outer layer, leaving the joints of the fabric untouched; then turn the needle and pierce from the opposite side towards the center, through both joints; and do the same on the other side, piercing through two other joints on either side. This is the most effective and common method of stitching.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen speaks these words, and many bear witness to the fact that when one has to sew up a stomach with two needles, each needle should have thread, and one needle should be inserted from one side, the other from the opposite side, just as those who sew up wounds do; and know this: when the opening is inside the stomach, the stitching will be more difficult than for other stomach wounds.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you pierce the fresh wound to all its blood, and the flesh has moved, then reapply the poultice with heating char, and if the flesh has moved, apply any present dressing, as long as the wound swells; and bind the thread, and make the bandage tight, and apply mirra; then treat the wound as others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, apply this immediately when it begins to swell, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you need no other medicine in addition to these remedies for simple wounds; and if you doubt that the wound is spreading to the principal members, it is necessary that you apply a light linen cloth soaked in hot temper oil, or rose oil, and place it around the angles and under the armpits; and if it feels pain or putrefaction in swelling, and this happens often, then give it enemas of black wine, especially if the putrefaction reaches the intestines. Then pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The inner organ called "young" cannot heal when it is weary, and this is due to the weakness of the veins, and the subtlety of all the body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	If the edge of the wound falls off, like the intestine, it should be pushed back as well; while it is fresh, so that the blood does not clot, for there are veins and arteries there; then cut away the tissue in between, and hang the two edges outside the wound from the opposite side until the extraction of the edge becomes easier.
de la routure dou boueil	From the rupture of the bowels
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, it cannot be cured in any man, as I have seen a nobleman wounded in his belly by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of his stomach, it became inflamed and fistulated, and there issued evacuation and flatulence; I applied remedies according to my ability, and did not cease to try subtle treatments until he was healed and the wound made whole.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him healed, I doubted that the patient would not have trouble in his stomach; but he felt no pain, and improved in condition, eating and drinking as before. And none of the experienced healers said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in that manner: take a large reed, then gather together the edges of the wound, and when the reed has opened its mouth, place it between the two lips, so that it holds its mouth closed; then cut off the head of the reed, and this will hold it fast, and then place another reed in the same way until the wound is completely healed; and dress the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	This chief is sharp inside the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient, and it can be bound with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in this way: take the chief of this intestinal thread, which is very clean, and bind it to the chief of the fine linen thread twisted, then thread it into the needle, and sew up the intestine, and arrange it in the wound; and this method of sewing is only valid according to reason and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the major intestines, no one can heal it with such subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula, whether it be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	You know that any wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called a "fistula", especially when it has hair and is deeply closed.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	A fistula is according to the true nature hard and white, without feeling pain, and is also hairy like the feathers of a bird; sometimes it is slightly open, and at other times thick; sometimes soft, and at other times firm; and I have spoken about this in the discussion of wounds; that every wound which is not healed, and there is no discharge, comes from one of the nine causes: namely, through the purity or hardness of blood or pus; because of its evil nature; or because there is hard matter inside, preventing it from healing; or because there is too much pus; or because the muscles are spoiled, and the material is of poor quality; or because the medicine used for treatment is not good; or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence; or because the properties in the region delay digestion, and delay health, and cause weakness by nature; or it has veins or bones, and I have already discussed all these causes, signs, and treatments with medicines in that section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I teach you the treatment of a fistula which is performed by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	You know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body, for there are fistulas that involve large veins, arteries, and nerves, or the intestines, bladder, or any rib, or the spine at the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if it affects a part belonging to the main member, and has similar characteristics.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all fistulas of this nature are difficult to heal, and there is no cure but labor and ignorance; and if there is a fistula that does not come up to the place I mentioned, and you have hope for its cure, and understand it, take a piece of steel or iron, if the fistula is straight; and if it is crooked, seek a subtle plug to fit it, for the pus will bend around the curvature; and if the fistula has an opening in the hand through which it cannot be properly probed with plugs, wash it with one of the openings, for the moisture flows from one opening to another and cleanses it; then treat it as best you can, that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and whether it is completely healed, and ask the patient in pain where he feels it most when you press your hand on it, and the place where he feels it. And when you truly know the place, and whether it is distant from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or any of the places I told you, then cut it according to what I said, and remove all the foreign matter and corrupt flesh inside; and then cure it as best as you can, cutting it completely through as much as possible, then apply moistened medicine plasters, pressing them against the fistula until the medicine dissolves the excess that has accumulated at the bottom; and then put clean bandages over it, as long as it is healing; and if it does not heal in this way, cauterize it as we said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve does not affect your principal members, as we have said, and if the bone is exposed, with corrosion and blackening, then treat the matter urgently until the corruption is completely removed, then apply curative means until it is healed; and if it remains unhealed and bent as before, know that you are not yet able to proceed: expose and clean as much as you can, removing all the corruption, then restore it; and if thus it becomes healthy, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this is not the case, know that the corruption is too deep for you to treat; if there is no other cause but to let nature take its course; and if there is a small corrupt bone that you can extract with tweezers using a suitable instrument, remove all of them, except none. And if moisture makes things worse, and there is no error or fear, cauterize and dry it up, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, apply something corrupting to the wound and let it rot until the bones are softened; then clean the wound. And if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, scrape off the corruption only until the blackness is completely gone, then treat the wound again; and if there is a great deal of corrupted tissue, extending almost to the bone; it should be carefully cut out and covered up until the wound heals. And I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you can learn from his example and use this aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man around 30 years old who had a pain in his leg due to something that arose inside the body, causing matter to accumulate in the leg and an abscess to form; he had no relief from it. But through their foolishness, they worked so much on the abscess that they corrupted many substances within, and it became a fistula, leading to numerous openings that leaked bowels and moisture from the body. For two years, many tried to cure him, but there was no skilled hand in the art of medicine; then I was called upon, and I examined his leg and the medicines used, as well as what was causing the abscesses to affect such large parts of his body. The young man's skin became red, with a citrine-like hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these gaps, and then I examined all the gaps, and found that some came into contact with each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then quickly seized one of the gaps and cut as deeply as I discovered a part of the bone, which was corrupted and broken, and the corruption extended inward up to the bone; I understood what appeared to be the corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except that which I had left; and I began to treat the wound with medicines for a long time, but they could not unite it. Then I re-examined it and discovered the bone as before, and found that the corruption continued in the bone, so I treated it and then set it, and I focused on uniting it; but I was unable to do so until I had cut around one palm of the bone, and brought it back together with all its strength. Then I treated it again with medicines, and it healed and united quickly, without wanting to start over with the procedure again, except for the weakness of the patient who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had from him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For in the case of complete blood evacuation, but it was entirely healed, and a hard scar formed in place of the bone, and it was of good disposition and caused no harm or contrary effect from then on, neither to going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it is necessary to proceed in this manner: take a tie, and stretch it over the opening of the bone, and command anyone not to extend it upwards; and bind another thicker woolen tie over the first one, and fasten it to the flesh that is detached from the bone, pulling it so that you remove the corrupt flesh from underneath, and expose the flesh on the bone where you see fit; place coal or a table under the bone to cover the corrupt flesh; and be as careful as possible, as you can see and feel the corruption, and do this again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if a bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then expose the whole flesh; then place hot coals from one side to the other of the corruption, and be careful to close it up for a long time after the corruption has been cut out; and if the corruption is in the joint, cut off the corrupted joint, and close up the bone or the other part that contains it; and if the corruption is along two joints, there is no other tool but to cut them both off; and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or in the ankle of the foot, this matter is very difficult, but you must nevertheless inquire about this corrosion how it opens, and cleanse it in every way that you can, as long as the vein or nerve do not oppose you; and know that there are many tools for cutting and closing these bones, according to their position and appearance, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to adapt each tool to the work of each defect; and know that the operation will show you the tool that you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of the illnesses; choose therefore the tool that suits you best.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The joint becomes dislocated either internally or externally; and when you have treated the corruption with remedies, but they do not help, it is necessary to cover that member up to where the corruption originates, so that the patient may be saved from death or evil, which is greater, due to the fault of the member; and the sign of this is that the limb turns black, appearing as if it were burned by fire, and then turns purple after the corruption spreads from limb to limb throughout the body. If you hurry to cover it, especially if it's caused by the bite of some poisonous creature, like a sea scorpion or snake, and if the corruption is at the head of the affected area, treat it immediately and do not give it time to spread to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes up to the hand, it should cut off at the joint, so that corrosion doesn't reach the arm; and if it comes up to the arm, it should cut through the shoulder; and if it passes through the shoulder, it's death, and no remedy is effective outside of its quantity of virtue; and thus it does with every corrosion on a bone: if it comes at the first joint, it cuts off after the other joint; and if it comes on the foot, it cuts through the entire foot; and if it rises in the leg, it cuts at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other device to save the patient from death; and the manner of cutting or binding the member is that you tie it tightly above and below, and extend one minister from each ligament downwards and upwards, and separate the flesh between the two ligaments with a wide spatula, until the bone is exposed, then cut through or bind it, and place a strip of linen on each side, so that the linen doesn't touch the healthy part, and cause further injury and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if blood flow occurs when you operate, and you cauterize the wound too harshly or apply any restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the affected member with a suitable ligature, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to this man in great detail: he had a blackening that seemed like a burn from fire, and that blight first appeared on his right lower leg, until it discolored the entire leg. And when he saw the blight, he covered his leg, and it healed. But a long time later, the blight returned on his left hand, and he came to me, and I applied counterirritants after purifying the flesh, but he could not stop the blight. He begged me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to do so, as I had hope of mitigating the condition; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, because the man's strength was feeble. He became completely despairing, returned to his land, covered his hand, and it healed. And I have never heard of this happening again unless it is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No abscess should form in fat tissue, and it remains there for so long that it causes a great gathering of pus; then it bursts and perforates, causing the bowels to move, and staying within the flesh as if a vessel; and the skin covering is as delicate as fine cloth, and does not go down to the bone or nerve, and this disease is called 'sain' (abscess), and not 'fistule'; but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone completely, it is called 'fistule'; and the skin should be cut all around, especially when it is delicate, as with fine cloth; and its corruption should not be ignored.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	If you believe the skin is ready to heal and the corruption is not completely removed, and the skin is dry and stiff, then treat it with a warm cloth: check if the swelling is large, and the odor unpleasant; if so, use Egyptian medicine made as follows: take equal parts of salt, oil, litargyrum (a type of mercury sulfide), and place them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and thick like honey. Then, according to your need, mix it with water and honey, and apply it to the affected area, relaxing the opening; leave it for two hours, then remove it by straining; repeat this several times until the swelling is reduced and the impurity eliminated. If the patient cannot tolerate either Egyptian medicine or water from ashes (when the medicine is not available), gather ashes from vine shoots, mix them with water, strain, and use the liquid to clean the wound, until you are certain that it is thoroughly cleansed; however, if the opening is very small and the cloth used for cleansing does not fit inside, widen it a little using a hot iron, and apply some of the Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment (as described in the treatment of wounds) as long as there's enough space. If the wound is too large, and the edge cannot be moved by the cloth or water from below, then the opening is either at the top or bottom of the wound.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowel is in perfect condition, it does not allow gas to form; and if you cannot cover the anus as you see fit, prepare in such a way that the bowel moves to the lowest point it can, for when the bowel is perfect, it does not allow gas to form, and if you cannot cover the anus as you see fit, position it gently downwards, leaving no part of the bowel behind; and use consolatory medicines on the wound, covering it with a linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then, as strongly as possible, close the gap in the side of the bowel slightly larger than the first, applying soft dressing to the other cloth according to the amount of the gap, and place it over the gap in the healthy part of the bowel to ease the bowel, and do not remove the large cloth outside for many days; and whoever is on top of the gap in the side of the bowel, often removes it to release the bowel, and knows what flows from the bowel, whether poison or pus or enough or digested or undigested; and be careful if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when you see that the medicine has spread in this way over the gap in the healthy part of the bowel, then know that the wound is already healing, and brings health to it; and then release it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you open the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast becomes bowed and distended after many days, knowing that it will not open.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons manifest after a long time, do not despair of health, for health draws near.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are those whose wounds do not heal until they have received treatment, and others who do the opposite; and if the breast becomes bowed and distended after many days, knowing that it will not open; and if the breast is slow to heal and remains so, then prepare medicines with moist substances in substance and dry in virtue, as a final remedy, for there is much vitriol in them, which is the last medicine; take this final ointment and mix it with rose oil and pour in old wine of equal substance; then preserve and use it; and do the same with cooked honey thickened; when the final ointment is not available, take mirra, aloe and incense, crush them and make a powder over the honey once it has been taken off the fire; then spread it on a cloth and apply it to the breast, and never administer alopecian or celestial lily roots, which are like flour and cornmeal; use simple or composite medicines: grind them and make a powder, and place it on the honey I have mentioned, and use it; and if the cure is prolonged, and this cure does not heal, then know that corruption has taken hold, and made an impression in the bones, or hard members, or ligaments; as we said before regarding the cure for fistulas.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	A pustule is an abscess that forms under a nail from the moisture in the hand, or foot, or perhaps in other parts; and when it becomes old and no attention is paid to it, it can lead to a serious abscess, causing pain and discharge until the root of the nail is destroyed, or even the entire nail. It causes corrosion down to the bone, resulting in strong, putrid odor, and the skin around the toe widens, turning a dark color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	If, as we have explained in the previous section, you treat it and the treatment does not help, then you must remove all the excess nail material, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is very great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is clean; and if the nail catches a string and begins to prick, and the wound bleeds, it is necessary that you place the right under the nail that pricks the string, and pull it up, and gently and carefully cut off the string, and apply burning and corroding medications to remove everything; then treat the wound with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and pull it out, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see both corrupt, treat them as mentioned above, then cure until healed; and if it is frozen and swollen, and causes great pain, it must be treated first; then cut the nail with a sharp spatula across the top, and be careful that the cut does not reach the string beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, apply something to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain causes a deep ache in the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The adjustment that is born in the hands of no one, by chance, is entirely flesh, and by chance, it has part where there are bones, and never a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or birth is in no way our fault.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	That which is born in no joint does not move, and that which is born in the joint of a joint may be stiff; the size of what is fleshy is very light, in this way: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born in the root of the joint is difficult to cure: so hold him still.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born with or develops a dislocation, it is necessary that you first hold the joint firmly until the bone heals, then gently manipulate the bone to a suitable position, and finally treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The dislocations that come from pain in the joints come either from birth, or from a wound's healing, or from a burn, or similar conditions.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it is necessary to close this wound, so that it must be repaired according to their natural forms, then place between two moistened cloths or drapes, oiled with rose oil, so that they do not adhere; or between two pieces of delicate cloth, as long as the wound is closed, as appropriate.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If dislocation occurs in any of its fingers with the palm, then close the wound as appropriate.
des vils	Des vils" is not a complete or
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	These veins are thickly wrapped, full of melancholic excesses, which come to many parts of the body; and there is more in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary for you to administer purgative medicines at times, and then care for the health of the basilic (vein).
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment of fire is according to two methods: one is with cups, and the black blood is drawn out; and the other method is that you open the vein and draw all the blood out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The incision is made according to this method: first, raise the leg with hot water very strongly until the flesh becomes tender, then pull the sick leg from above the ankle to the knee joint; then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a large knife, then squeeze and draw out the black blood in your hand from one end to the other, as much as the patient can endure, and then tie it, and order him to let the flesh turn blue-black; and repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	One should raise the leg of the patient with the affected joint, if it has hair, then immerse it in hot water and raise it until it turns red and swells; and if you do not have a bath, heat it over fire, and then compress it on the vein at the base of the joint for a long time until it appears open. Then, cut the skin at the site of the vein, and scrape the vein from both sides until it is exposed, and it appears red and black, like a white thread; then pull the leg away from the wound, as much as possible, and compress it against the joint; then gently bend the leg towards another joint, and then compress again over three joints. Scrape the skin over the vein until it is exposed, and then raise the leg, as you have done before, and bend it to another joint, following the same method; then cut with a smaller size if necessary, and scrape, raising and bending until all the blood is drained, then finish by cutting. If you cannot drain it in this way, insert a needle through the entire thread, tie it, and pull while rotating your hand back and forth until the vein breaks; take care not to cut, because if you do, it will be impossible to drain or remove it, and harm the patient; once all blood is drained, place soft, moist wool over the wound, mixed with wine and rose oil, and dress it until it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if you see that it is contracted and twisted and wrapped up together, and it is not at all straight, as we have said, then it must be cut with a twist, but never tied; and treated as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The way to do it is to twist the vision tightly, but not cut, until the vein breaks; and it is of great severity, because if it were delicate, it would break the vein, but since it is thick, as we have said, this is its form:
de la voinne civile	of the vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in warm regions where no plants or trees grow, and on land with no moisture; and sometimes it appears elsewhere, from putrefaction that comes from beneath the skin, as if it were a serpent or worm winding itself among the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein appear, it is characterized by a severe inflammation in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to protrude forcefully, as if emerging like a root from a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein is opened, it is necessary to wrap a piece of cloth around it, from one and a half fingers' width up to two finger-widths thick, and leave the cloth on the leg. Whenever the opening widens, wrap the cloth around it again and the new opening; but if it gets too long, cut off a portion and wrap the remaining part, not cutting it at its base, until it is entirely drained; for if you cut it, it will retract into the flesh, causing abscesses and putrefaction. Therefore, it should be treated little by little, removing nothing from the body; and this vein, when opened, is as long as five or ten fingers, and I have seen it emerge in a man as long as one finger's width. When you cut it, if you make a deep cut or stab it, all the contents will come out. So it should be drained thoroughly, filling the wound with medicated herbs to prevent putrefaction for as long as necessary, then treat the abscesses accordingly.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never touch this vein again, especially when it opens in the joint of the foot or hand, and a great wound occurs from it; treat it then as we have said above.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers that are born between leather and flesh.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "beef disease" in our land because it often affects cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between leather and flesh. It spreads throughout the body, moving from one member to another, causing great pain as it breaks through the skin where it resides. It is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms, snakes, leeches, and parasites in the belly. One doubts the severity of its ill effects, for when it moves through the body, it ascends to the head, reaches the eye, and sometimes retreats, destroying the eye. This happens frequently.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it healing and draining, it cannot be done otherwise than when the pus has gone: therefore, you must lay the limb above and below with a strong, tight bandage, then cut and drain it deeply, so that the pus flows out completely into the char (wound dressing), and you do not drain it again until it has healed; and the greatest harm it does is when it causes the oil to seep, as we have said; and if you see a swelling coming near the wound, first tighten the bandage around the eye's form (eyebrow), then cut and drain it forcefully; and it is necessary for the patient to use purification of the body with solvent medicines to eliminate harmful humors, and bathe in meats that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	from the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in no particular member, but can move from one member to another; and I have seen this as I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the breast; and after that, I noticed a little thing rising up on her shoulder, as quickly as anything could move, like a live silver coin when it cuts through flesh; the pain left that spot and moved to the shoulder, and then shortly afterward spread throughout the body, reaching the other breast; then she told me that she felt it moving around inside her body.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marvelled much at how she moved from one limb to another, for I had never seen this disease in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I had seen many times that the pain moved from one place to another, but I had never understood it as I did in this woman; and I thought that was because she had a dry body, her veins were exposed, and there was a certain constraint that showed itself; and I could not find any reason according to this perspective for those who are afflicted, having moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see this disease cured and the patient feels that pain, as we have said, press it above and below gently, then squeeze until that constrained vent (or pressure point) on the body is released; and cauterize the wound; and if you do not have these at hand, cure it with what dispels the wind, such as foul pills, serpentum pills, and others like them.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows vary according to their appearance and the parts of the body from which they originate.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Their diversity lies in that there are those with sharp, and small, and serrated tips, and some are smooth; and those with angles, and others with long ones, and those with pieces; and some that pierce any member do so in two ways: either in a principal member, like the head, body, liver, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it emerges in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterward, appears: it is necessary that you struggle with the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in various dispositions; and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not entirely extracted, pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow emerges and pierces the bone, and there is a sudden satisfaction felt on top of the brain, it appears as darkness and blinding and twitching and redness alone, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion in understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it comes out from the nostrils or ears; and sometimes it loses speech and voice; and there is also a discharge of white pus-like matter from the wound, resembling wool, and also like foam from a horse. And if these signs appear to you, if you are skilled in treatment, pull out the arrow even if it is not fully embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of an arrow when it breaks or withdraws, is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were fixed in something hard, neither empty nor hollow; and by chance the arrow may also become silent like a pulse, and there appears black blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: therefore know without doubt that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that never draws the pon (or perhaps: "and the sign that the arrow never draws back") is that there is no scum-free discharge from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns color, and he breathes heavily and stops the pain.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow pierces through the cover of the shoulder, it breaks small bones; and it inflicts great pain and causes sighing; and it moves all the muscles of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow pierces through the stomach, perhaps something from the undigested meat comes out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow pierces through the belly, and there is no healthy tissue left through which to pass it, then there is little hope for healing or for removing the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow pierces the bladder, the urine gushes out in spurts, and the patient feels intense pain; know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, as they feel and the pain in them, the neck and shoulder and elbow and hip and aid (support) and sharp pains in the back and stiff joints and the foot and legs, and any dislocated limbs or misaligned parts, are safe according to various arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow struck his eye at the root of the nose: I tried it, and removed it from the other side through the fat of the ear, and it was cured without injury.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And at another time, an arrow struck in the fat of the eye below the paper, and the arrow was removed, leaving only the tip towards the wood, and it was a large arrow with a blue arc, very light without ears; the man was cured, and no bad accidents came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And he removed an arrow from the throat of a Christian, which was an Arabic arrow with ears: I shaved the beard, and slowly pulled it out until it came out, and the Christian was cured.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And take an arrow from the body, that was lodged in the stomach, and thought he would die; but after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change; I cut through the arrow, extracted it, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow lodged in his back or side, and the wound is deep; and the arrow remains stuck inside him, and he does not change his natural disposition, nor does he experience any harm from his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And you will see another man, to whom an arrow has struck his face, and the wound is deep; he endures without suffering great pain; and many others similar to him.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And he removed an arrow from the eye of the king, which had been shot into his nose, and it was slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrow was completely extracted after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very deep.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I probed it with great care, and felt nothing; but he experienced sharp pain and discomfort beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the point of the arrow; I applied a soothing poultice to relax the muscles because they were cramped; and I could see the shaft of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the splint on tightly, and secured the wound from there, and thus the patient endured a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his nose; and it was removed.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied corrosive medicine to the wound with firm hands until it healed and I tested it, feeling the tip of the arrow still stuck in the flesh; then I adjusted the opening of the wound using that medicine, until the point of the arrow became visible; it took over three months for the wound to heal completely, and then I used pincers to pull it from both sides, but it wouldn't come out; so I continued to try subtle and clever methods, until I found a set of well-made pincers, as described at the end of this chapter, and I pulled on it, opening up the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the greatest judges believe that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: so I restored it, and the wound healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have also told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows; so place your care on what I am saying, because books cannot fully convey it. But the wisest masters compare well very small things and new instruments, for the descent of strange things that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come out of the members where they are stuck, but according to two ways: either through the vein where they enter or from another place; and that which comes out by the side where it enters is an arrow that has entered into their flesh, and never comes out again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not jump now, leave it until the swelling around it subsides and becomes light; also, if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days, and each day move it a little; and then it will jump, and if it doesn't, pierce through all the flesh with a very fine needle, until the swelling around it is enlarged, and then pull it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone at the top and goes all the way to one of the belly cavities near the brain, and none of the aforementioned accidents occur with the patient: do not pull it, but leave it until it becomes even after several days, for if the arrow stays there, it can be fatal.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the bone and does not come out satisfactorily, and remains in the patient without further harm for some time, provided the skill of pulling it out is good.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot come out, then apply heat as I have told you; afterward, treat the bone while it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is withdrawn into the bone and one cannot see it, but feels it in every way; and if you feel it, use any suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the tightness of the wound or because the arrow goes deep into the flesh where there are no bones, muscles, or nerves, then leave it until the wound is large enough; and pull the arrow as much as possible, and if it has roots on either side where you can, remove them so that you can pull it out more easily.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, let the limb rest around the joint until it is healed, then treat it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If the symptoms of blood poisoning contradict what we have said about treatment in that chapter, then apply as we have instructed regarding the incision on the nerve and vein; and be wary of cutting into the arrow without danger, either immediately or later, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the position it was in when the arrow entered, for this is the greatest help, and if you cannot do so, then follow the signs that show you what to do.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another place, where it opens something within, causing the skin to swell in that area, both visually and through sensation: cut there, as much as the pincers can grasp, and then extract it: if it still feels sharp.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters the bone, widening it, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be extracted, leave it for now and then try again until it comes out; and if the arrow is deeply embedded, let the entire shaft remain, and then apply pressure gently; if the tip of the arrow enters the groove of the instrument, push it out forcefully, and if the arrow is removed smoothly, insert the instrument with its tip entering simultaneously to ease extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you clean all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow has pierced the skin, or the belly, or the bladder, or along the ribcage, and it is close to a vein or nerve, and you can cover it, do so; but beware of covering the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and afterwards dress the wound, as required; and cure it until it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The instrument used to treat arrows resembles a bird's beak; here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape that points towards the tail is similar to a bird's feather, to push the tip of the arrow, as this is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of pliers for pushing and gripping, if this is the case:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are 31 veins from which one can draw blood, of which there are 16 main ones: 2 are the jugulars located behind the ears, called "herbech"; and the 2 arteries visible in the temples, and 2 veins in each arm, called "aspires"; the vein across the forehead; the vein at the crown of the head near the eyes; the 2 glands located on the collarbone; the 2 veins above the lips inside the mouth, called "augeherich"; and 2 veins beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The common veins from which one draws blood are 5 in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, located on the left side of the body and commonly called "vein of the head"; the median is called "close" (fast) and is composed of both the cephalic and basilic veins; the basilic is on the right side and is called "vein of the belly", and it lies beneath the femoral artery, being the one that appears most clearly when opening the vein.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the cure is the vein that lies between the little finger and the ring finger, and if it rains; and in the leg, there are three veins: one below the knee from the left side, and the second at the ankle from the right side; and the third vein called 'nasse' which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg, there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The treatment of veins behind the ears aids in the cure of old catarrh and migraines. The quality of this treatment is that you raise the patient's head and rub the affected area with a rough cloth; then, you tie the patient's collar tightly until the two veins behind the ears become visible, hanging down from the head in two distinct parts. You should then apply pressure where you feel the pulse beneath your hand, which indicates the presence of blood flow. Take the lancet and make an incision just below the vein, up to the bone, then gently pull upwards on the entire vein against the flow of blood, making a cut through the skin and flesh and severing the vein properly. Let the blood flow out until you see it stop; then tie and bind it until it heals. I have already described incisions and cauterization in the previous book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	He heals the two arteries that are in the temples, as they were old and dry, and the eyes accustomed to tears at their roots; and the quality of the healer is as I say: and it is that the patient holds his neck, as long as the two veins remain open; and he feels the pulse under his thumb on his right index, and then signs with a needle below, and gently presses the vein above, and cuts it, as you have done in the other veins, and let the blood flow according to need; then release the patient, and place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton; then form the wound and leave it until it is healed; and we have already spoken of their excretion and extraction, at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The health of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the health of the brain, as well as old facial diseases, and migraine, and redness; and its quality is such that the patient tightens his neck by twisting, until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called 'denter', whose form is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another instrument, allowing the blood to flow according to its quantity; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein as long as it remains healthy and free from any broad cut.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, one should not let the flames be too intense; and the healthy hair should be cut at an angle, because the bone is close, and it might break the flame when it's thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The healthy hair from the two veins located in the arm is useful for healing wounds, pimples, redness, and eye inflammation, and facial diseases; its quality is such that the patient pulls their head tightly without any strain, as before. Then, cut it at an angle, neither too thin nor too thick, because there is no specific shape.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, it may break; then apply pressure to the wound, as much as needed, and then bandage it, securing it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The health of the vein near the nose is worth much in treating a cold, sudden pain, and facial diseases such as migraines and redness that appear on the face, both new and old. The quality of the health is such that the patient tightens their jaw, strains their nose with their left hand, and inserts the subtle flame longwise between the two nostrils, since the vein does not open fully, and the blood will now begin to flow. Do not push too hard, and apply pressure with the sanc (presumably a type of medicine or treatment) according to your need, then bandage it for a night, as it is quickly restored; this is the shape of the flame.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The holy water from two wells helps in the tightening of the eyelid, and at the beginning of sickness, and for many ailments, and for impetigo, and for corrosion, and for herpes, and for boils; and the quality of the water is such that the patient pulls his lid away from both eyes, as we have said; and let the skilled one be on top of the sick person's head, and the sick person sits in a certain place, then clean the vein with long and wide strokes, then treat the wound with warm blood, as much as is needed; then do the same to the other vein, then unbind the bandage, and tighten the veins gently so that the patient does not choke; and leave it until morning, so that the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	from the health of the veins
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins in the lips helps to keep the mouth moist, and it aids in the healing of gum disease, lip cracks, and pain and swelling around them.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the veins is such that you make the patient sit before you, tighten their collar as I have said, then turn the lip, and examine both veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; they are recognized because they are black, and also because they have small black veins around them: so cut each one, and if you do not know them or doubt, cut the thicker one from each side, and do the same with the two veins above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	from the cleansing of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The cleansing of the veins that are beneath the tongue is a valuable procedure after the cleansing of the head, and it helps with throat tightenings, eye diseases, and mouth illnesses; the quality of the cleansing is such that the patient should feel the tongue move, gently pressing it down, and looking for any dark veins on each side. Then cleanse both, but do not press too hard as there are arteries beneath.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the throat that are commonly cleansed are done in two ways: either by pressing with a hot flame at regular intervals, or with a fine, sharp tool (called an "anesil") as if cutting trenches, and they are wide and narrow according to the size and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the inflammation is very hot if it is much renowned, and it is broad as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the veins with a flat, smooth instrument in places where there is much obvious blood clot, and which contain great blood clot and pus; and this is the shape of the olive-colored inflammation.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for healing the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrus-colored blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The healing of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, is very helpful for diseases that are under the throat, and the collarbone, and the chest, and the belly; and it is necessary for the healer to heal gently, and to wash the artery that is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it touches the artery, and blood flows, if it is necessary to stop it, as I have said; and the flame should not be pressing, but cutting like iron.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the vein does not open clearly, it is necessary that you extract it and change it for another one; or if you want any part of it, heal it in place with a vein from another part of the body: it opens clearly; and cut it with iron flame, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you learn the vein of healing, it is necessary that you extract the arm, touch the vein until you know the pulse; then mark the spot with a sign, and bind the arm, and cut the vein with iron flame; and be careful not to injure the artery when you see the vein swell, for that is the artery: flee from it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it bubbling up from above like a child's urine, and the veins are red and tender, know that this is a sign of an artery: then quickly, place your finger over it for a long time, then remove your finger so that the vein does not burst, which often happens; let the arm be still and do not move the patient; and be afraid, and do not move until it heals.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the veins are not healed and they continue to bleed, and there is no medicine at hand, then press on the vein from its origin; stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of fig bark, and cut it, and take one half of it and bind it tightly to the other side; if it is not tired, that is good. If not, cure it as we have said, with powders that stop blood; and the binding is not too tight for the small size of the wound, nor does it cause any weakness in the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The treatment of the vein in the middle is helpful if it stops blood from the top and from inside, because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; and the healer should wash himself by the nerve that is below, and if he does not clean it thoroughly, and touches the nerve, it swells and the wound becomes infected, and perhaps it cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person because of its subtlety, then you must treat it with an antiseptic instrument; and avoid touching the nerve.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if a vein is between the two bones, make it open long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The treatment for cephalica helps to draw blood from the head, and it aids the joints; and it is good to apply olive or myrrh flame, as it is the safest of all veins, for it does not contain any nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is better to seek the lightest place, and do not be discouraged if it hurts the first time, and keep trying; and sometimes the veins may swell up in some men when they are punctured for the first time, but it does not hurt much.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it should only be used to preserve health and prevent future ailments; and blood should be let in one of the three veins: namely, the cervical, femoral, or basilic vein. One should bloodlet at the beginning of prayer, after eating in summer and autumn, or in winter after two or three o'clock.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Bloodletting used to treat illnesses does not have a specific time limit, but should be done as needed during the day or night; however, it is not advisable to bloodlet children under 12 years old, nor pregnant women for four months after childbirth until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	One should not consider the old who have passed sixty years as ill.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone wishes to heal themselves in any way, it is necessary for them to clean out the intestines with a light enema, if they have much feces retained, so that the veins do not draw away from the excess of bad substances from the principal members; nor can one truly heal him who is too salt with meats or too greedy, as long as he remains thus; neither those who are sick from colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, frequent sexual intercourse, hard labor, wakefulness, or drinking and eating excessively; then, by subtlety, remove the humors, if they are excessive, either from foods, drinks, or medicines; if you have means to do so. Then enter into a bath, if nothing prevents it, in order to purify the blood, and heal the vein, as we have said, after the third day; and guard yourself that day against work, exhaustion, luxury, and similar things; and be calm and joyful, and consider yourself healthier than those whom you are healing; then rub your arm twice or three times; subsequently tighten the bandage in the middle, because if it is too loose, it cannot correct the problem; and then rub it with your hands until the veins swell and become warm. Then moisten the wound with a little old oil, and place your left hand's finger on the vein, below where you wish to heal it, so that the vein does not break or be injured.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Because there are veins that flow as if they were strings in the body, and if they are of a type that are troubled by vapors, when fire is applied to them, the vein withdraws from the flame and cannot open, thus one suffers; and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, so it is necessary that the healers be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; but if not, they must repeat this process a little further down on the same limb or elsewhere, for the veins are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the veins are inflamed and the patient is afraid, leave it for one or two days and do not tie up the arm; perhaps abscesses will form later; do not enter the bath again, but resume treatment if it seems appropriate; and if the opening is small, carefully cut away the surrounding tissue subtly, without doubt, because this same opening can cause a great deal of blood to flow as you see in these cases. Do this a little bit more gently so that the vein becomes inflamed; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the vein swollen, do not immediately reopen the wound, but apply a little oil, for it lightens the body of blood, and the oil becomes attached to this vein; thus administer the oil in each wound that you close the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and the same is done with triacs and bowels when applied to the vein; it soothes the pain and eases it when it is too hard.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess forms, which happens frequently, especially when the vein is not closed properly at first, hurry and apply a moist sponge with hot wool and hold it for an hour; after the blood flow from the vein stops, and if no black or green color remains in the wound after a few days, do not harm it; and if you see fit, apply aloe or myrrh mixed with calament juice, or similar substances.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often an abscess and swelling appears at the wound of the basil (or holy) temple: so place your hand there, and if you feel the soft flesh under the pressure of your hand, then this is a bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So be careful not to apply anything that we have mentioned here, because it may dry out without reaching the artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the flesh, then use another remedy until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the quantity of its pain and the color of the wound.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	Because if the pain is intense, let it flow as long as it remains red; and if you see it swelling, leave it to subside until it becomes smaller; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is strong and robust, and has the skill to extract blood, to make a wider wound and have larger flaps; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, making the incision smaller and more frequent, and one should clean the wound by cutting across, not by pricking. This method of cleansing prevents the spread of infection and nerve damage, and it is better than long or wide incisions.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to him whose body is afflicted with sickness, it is necessary to give a moist drink of pomegranate juice; if he is heated, he should take bloodletting three times or four. And if he has a cold complexion, he should eat before the sickness a moist drink of muzzled syrup, or syrup of aromatic honey with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and fennel, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints from sickness, after the release of much blood, it is necessary that he inhale a steam of bread soup and subtle fragrant syrup, and use other things as we have mentioned in the section or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to remove his arm, or heal it another time, as needed, when it is weakened by much blood letting, he should heal it little by little, according to the amount of its continuous strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to remove his arm after the first blood letting, and he has strong stiffness, he should heal it after seven hours from the first blood letting, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to heal from another place, he should heal on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body, which has been heated, and causes fever; it needs to be drawn out in large quantities, and the opening widened as much as possible until it closes of its own accord; then you must consider all conditions of health, and place your hand upon the pulse when it strengthens, so that death does not come in its place, and this often happens when healing is neglected; and it is wrong to, when you see the arm loosen, and cause blood to flow again, and the opening close, press firmly on it; nor if it is curved, should you force it straight, for that would be harmful; but leave it until it heals again on its own; or you can gently apply a pointed flame to the tip of the fire, until the coldness in the vein opens, and put some thread soaked in water on it, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, leave it alone and do not press on it until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw off the blood again because of the abscess, either in the same place or in another vein or arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthier in place of the vein in the head because it is composed differently.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of the vein is that the patient should bend his hand in hot water until the veins become red, then tie it slightly so that the vein appears well, and now draw the blood through it, not too wide or too narrow; and make the opening wide at the joint of the hand, and do not let any pus escape, and put the hand back into hot water and let the blood flow in the hot water until you have enough; and if this is the case, do not stop bending the hand in hot water, because it is put into greater heat than necessary; and the vein from which the blood is drawn is safer than all other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The salve for the salvation of the hand on the right side is good for all ailments of the flesh, and this is the manner: stretch the hand, and immerse it in hot water until the vein is engorged, if you see it; and if the wound is across, and if you touch every part with it, nothing should grieve; but do not press too hard, for the nerves are entirely exposed, and then return the hand to hot water, if it feels numb in the wound, and it cannot issue forth.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as best you can, then apply oil and silk to seal the wound tightly, and so do with every person.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The healthy person grasps the mouse with the left hand to treat the disease of the eye, and does everything as I have told you towards the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sage of the soul grasps all diseases emanating from the body, such as illnesses of the marriage (possibly referring to reproductive issues), retention of flowers (perhaps a metaphor for urinary problems), diseases of the rain (a possible reference to hydrocele or swelling), old joints and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of his health is such that the patient immerses himself in hot water and rubs the vein until it bursts, binding it over the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot, it flows with much blood; healthy then, or a larger flow of blood, or at the ankle, where it most moves.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you apply it on the foot, be careful not to touch the bones, and clean it just as when you cut; and let the flame be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	If the wound will not heal, immerse the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the dressing is needed for the first time, repeat it slightly higher the next time, because the bones are salt; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same thing with the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein's lion is at the foot's ankle, and its health corresponds to the pain in the back when it's filled with hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its health is such that the patient feels pain in the bath, and three turns above the ankle are required to extract it, as otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, the health flows freely in all ways, passing through; and it moves like you would cup it, for the lion is safe, and it is greatly aided by hand.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not draw it, no rain of health flows from the vein that opens on the back near the small toe, and be careful not to tighten the bandages; and make sure the blood does not escape, and then untie the knot, and put cotton and tighten; now it is healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	From the suction of the cupping glass
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping glasses are made of horn, or iron, or glass; and the suction is created in two ways: either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	This suction, performed without striking, is done in two ways: either it is hot or cold; and the suction created by drawing blood and extracting it from veins is carried out in twelve parts of the body: first, all over the head; then, between the collarbone; next, on both sides of the neck; under the jaw; on both shoulders; on both legs; on both ankles; and finally, on both feet. The suction should not draw blood from any major veins, only from small ones scattered throughout the body, so as not to weaken anyone excessively, just like with a vein-sucking treatment; it is not appropriate to perform such suction in cases of overfullness, while the entire body remains empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of illness or custom it is required to purge, each hour in the beginning and end of the month, and at every time; for there are such who, when they need to purge, have a heavy head; and some who experience bloating and redness in their face, and on their head, and down their neck, and darkness as well; and such who feel a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and vomit blood; and there are even those who dream and see blackness, nausea, pain, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we order purging after three hours during the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The surgeon of the muscle finds aid in the heat of the chief ...  which comes from itself, and it is not right that this be after the evacuation of all the body; and this application is to the health of the head, and it is not appropriate for those with a cold complexion or scabs, as it does them much harm; and for this reason, the elderly should not use it, nor those who have cold headaches.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who use this treatment often, it can become obstructed, and for this reason, a suction cup should be placed slightly lower out of doubt of obstruction.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation of the chest is beneficial for the health of the heart and lungs, and due to its constriction, it causes pain in the throat, and tightness in the channel of the windpipe, and sometimes, and bloating; and it should be relieved, because if it clings too tightly, it obstructs the nose and stomach and body.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilation of the chest as it affects the ribs in the neck can cause headaches, eye pain, and migraines, as well as choking and pain in the roots of the teeth, and is opposed to the health of the veins in the basilic; and you should instruct the patient to gently press his hand against the area, without pressing on the artery, to avoid complications with blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The inflammation of the gums is beneficial for mouth diseases, and for the corruption of the gums, and similar ailments in the mouth; it is located in the area of the health of both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The inflammation of the shoulders is beneficial for diseases that arise from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The inflammation of the cuts is as beneficial as three veins in the arm, as it draws blood from these large veins; and instructs the patient not to squeeze too hard, for the flesh is devoid of strength, and knows how to close and open arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The vacuum that is on the thigh is as useful for draining pus from the depths, and for treating internal illnesses, and it should be large and made of iron, so that it can effectively draw out; and if it is too delicate, it might break and cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg vacuums should be applied firmly because they draw blood from throughout the body, and they are as effective as ancient remedies for rheumatism, kidney pain, and bladder problems, and they remove fluids; and they are used on the second ribs and the two ankle joints, but after prolonged use, they weaken the body and cause greater discomfort.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the cupping glass is as follows: first, place it on the skin while empty and suck gently, then apply it firmly and move it evenly without ceasing until you see the red and swollen veins appear, opening the channels of blood; then release, and apply cups again, taking care in their arrangement, for some have very tough skin and clear pores. It is only necessary to strike once, and make wide incisions, and quite deep; suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: first, to open the thick channel of the large vein.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the pain is very intense, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to drain blood little by little, we are satisfied with doing so once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, we must do this often; and if the pain is intense, striking with precision until the vessels are suddenly pierced, it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have porous pores, to apply oil from suction cups that is both opening and dissolving: in this case, violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is cold, chard oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or other similar herbs.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take amaranth oil, or balsam, or donkey oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if anyone has a skin that is tender and has large pores, it is not necessary to put oil on it, but instead, they should wash it after the application of rosewater, cold water, water from morelle (a type of cherry), water from a cucumber, water from porcelain, or any other similar substance.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have excessive moisture, should rise from it using myrrh water, sumac water, and similar substances.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have excess weight should rise from old wine, or holy water, or a decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not advisable to use a cupping glass before or during a bath, but rather after the bath, an hour or two; and one should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that they wash themselves, when and where they need to be cupped and after being cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And be careful that those who are sick with colic do not eat things that are too hot and spicy; it is advisable for them to consume cold foods such as pomegranates, endive, lettuce, and similar things; also eat little, avoid chili, and opt for moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And he who has a cold complexion should imbibe syrup of honey and fragrant wine, somewhere between old and new, and eat small portions, and eat little birds and pigeons; and on the day that he takes cold, he must drink more than he eats; and it is appropriate to give any man at any time triacle or musk before or after the chills, in order to strengthen the principal limbs; but it is not advisable for those who are hot to consume it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are applied without causing harm are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the stomach and intestines and joints, because these members do not tolerate injury from heat, and they are only used to draw blood from one member to another, as we apply them to the mammary glands when nursing; to remove the viscosity from a member, as we use suction cups on the stomach and bowels to reduce the member; and it removes pain, in cases of congestion or stones, perhaps by drawing away the congestion or expelling the stone from its place; and thus it acts when applied to the liver and spleen with retained wind, and these suction cups are left empty to suck only; and they should never be heated together, nor filled with cold water as in cases of tears, but rather they are filled with hot water infused with suitable herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup administered by fire is this:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	It should have two parts as wide as a palm and a half, and on its edge around the middle, it should have a small hole, no bigger than to fit an needle, and it must be made of steel or iron, so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb; and it should have a crossbar of the same material, either steel or iron, to hold a cloth, and their sizes vary according to the illnesses and age of those who use them; for the suction cups for infants are different from those for adults, and for thin people than for fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should place this suction cup over the limb: take the wax or linen cloth, and put it through the hole in the suction cup, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the cup, preventing it from burning the patient; then place it on the member, and your fingers should be on the opening we have mentioned, so that when you look, the steam goes out, and remove the suction cup; and take the linen cloth as before, and repeat often if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup that is administered for pleurisy, or any acute condition, it has no hole or opening, and can only be applied when it is filled with water, and placed on the limb only briefly; its shape is as follows:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without any wounds that can be treated with cups because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and in the naked parts of the body, like the anus or nipples, or other similar places; and if the quality of the wound is such that when you find a cup that is in clear, sweet water without putrefaction, take it; and place it in sweet water until they become relaxed, and have nothing in their stomachs; then clean the wound and cup, and rub the member until it turns red, and apply the cups; and when they are painful and screaming, if it is a part where cups can be applied, then apply them, for this is much better afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If the lion does not rise from its sleep, and then water is drawn out well and the wound is bandaged; and if the wound heals too soon after the removal of the bandage, moisten a linen cloth with cold water, place it on top, until the wound is completely healed; and if the wound multiplies, apply vitriol or gall, or similar substances, until it is healed; or you can put half-peeled fèves on the lion, leaving them there until they adhere to the wound, which will heal it. If more are needed, take other wounds.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the wounds do not want to be taken, rub fresh blood on the lion, or insert an needle into the wound until it bleeds, and then place them back; and soon as they smell the blood, they will adhere; and when you see that they are detaching, sprinkle a little aloes and silk powder, or ash, and they will stick.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	We begin the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear pupil, that the wise eyes of this chapter flow from a source unseen in any ancient book; nor did anyone ever read or write about it. For this reason, knowledge is strange in our land, for I never found any good thereof; and I know nothing of it except by the learning of ancient books, whereon I have so diligently studied that I have acquired knowledge through experiment and the custom of my life. And here I have described to you what is contained in this chapter, abridged at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we should begin this prologue of this book by explaining the words and chapters where the wise apply their minds to truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	When a fracture, dislocation, or twist occurs, it is necessary to quickly tend to the patient on both sides. If nothing helps, such as weakness of the body, illness, or old age; or if the affected part is too close or too cold, and you avoid cold things like ice, and meat from birds and squirrels, and do not drink wine, nor consume fatty foods, and do not overfill the veins with meats that fill the vessels with blood, until you have no doubt of an abscess forming, hot or spreading of material to the member; then return the patient to his former state as he had used to be.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one alleviate the patient from foods that cause excessive flatulence, or have a viscous quality, such as cooked flour in water, and laughter, and talking, and pressure, and the distension of the belly, and gases, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For excessive flatulence, if it recurs and the fracture persists,
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones of the very old and decrepit cannot be well healed or fused according to their nature for the preservation of the limbs, nor can those that are too tender, such as the bones of young children; but take no heed, reset the broken bone with strong grips that join the member together, as it was before, without moving it entirely, and for this reason, satiate it with substantial foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or leg, and in this chapter I will tell you all the ways of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another when sharpening, such as the edge of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and the fracture is a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each type of dislocation has its own mechanism and specific instrument for restoration, according to the nature of the injury; the fracture of the bone is known because the joint is twisted and opens widely when pulled away, and it feels solid under pressure from the hand. But there is no fracture if there is no twisting or crack or slight dislocation; it can only be a twist, or a split, or a minor dislocation.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You should not move it with the hand, but apply medications that will be described later; then gently pull it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture that occurs in the joint, where the two parts are separated, you must now bring them together evenly so that the abscess can form properly; and if the abscess appears hot, leave it for some time until it cools down; then position it even, gently and carefully, and know that the restoration of a dislocation without broken bones is easier than restoring a fracture with pieces; then pull it as appropriate.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if a bone is broken into pieces, and it extends from two parts, whether it's the hand or foot, or one of the small members, or at two joints, or at a joint and your hand; place the member according to its natural form, so that when the severed parts of the member are aligned, rearrange them using all available means until they return to their proper positions, and take care not to cause the patient further injury or pain through your actions; adjust both halves of the bone according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If it feels well in the hand, but you think it is not properly aligned: dress it nicely, do not tighten it too much, and do not press as those who, through their actions, cause abscesses, heat, and contractions in the member, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is completely still, gently apply warmth to the patient so that he does not move it, neither awake nor asleep, nor in any other way; and take care that the limb remains completely at rest so that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, it means that the limb is completely still, and you should then put it into a position where it does not feel any pain; and be careful that there is no curvature when restoring it, and the quality of the damaged member will depend on what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the damaged member can be various in smallness and greatness and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Because it has small members, as arms and legs and similar: it is necessary to wrap them with soft and thin linen; and those that are larger, like the thigh and leg: they should be wrapped in a wide and firm bandage, for the wide bandage embraces the entire large member, and tightens it equally from all sides, so that there is no gap; then add lighter bandages, three or four turns according to the member, and tighten your hand slightly on the whole bandage, then go above the break and tighten less, as the break gradually moves away; and soften the bandage little by little, until you press a great part of the healthy flesh, then take another bandage and turn it again over the broken place; then return to the part below the break, and tighten it moderately, neither too hard nor too soft, as we said in the first chapter above; then insert between the thick bandages made of linen or cloth, until they are all even, then tie everything on top with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an inflammation or abscess, apply a hot, soothing compress to it, which reduces the swelling, and leave it for several days; then stretch your arms and legs, and use a narrow cane cut sharply from a sturdy branch or palm frond, shaped as follows.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But the stick that is placed on the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the others; it should also be as long as necessary for the member, whether small or large. Then tighten the sticks as you did in the first layer, and tie them together with a thread, as was done in the first layer on the fracture; the threads should be tighter at one end than the other, but not too tight or too loose; and the thread should be made of fine flax, for if it is too thick, like twisted flax cords, it is a great error, because the bandage will not be even if it is too thin, and it is not appropriate for there to be less space between each stick.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is angry because of the pain from the stars after dislocating them in their healthy joints, he should place soft compresses or other rags over them so that they do not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the blood vessels are broken, I will describe the treatment after this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not appropriate to dislocate all the stars of the fractured members on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not appropriate to put stars inside until after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your judgment of the hot swelling; and see here the ancient method of applying plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that clings to the walls of the mill, mix it with plenty of egg, and make this preparation, not too liquid or too thick, and use it; this is the common way of using a plaster to restore fractures in many positions, especially for women and small children, as it is neither too hard nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster for repairing fracture and dislocation and torsion: take hare's feet and lamb's flesh and onion and asafoetida and gum arabic and myrrh, each 3 parts; mirra and aloe, each 5 parts; ales (alums) 7 parts; make it into a powder and mix with egg white; if the man's body temperature is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it restores broken bones severely, and is beneficial to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another plaster for torsion: take myrrh and wormwood, each 3 parts; mirra and aloe, each 5 parts; hawthorn 6 parts; Armenian powder 10 parts; grind well and mix with water or egg white, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to splint joints and straighten bones out of their sockets, easing the pain that comes with it, is by using a new cloth, moistened in hot oil or wine, and placing it over the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Cyst splints do not restore, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses and neatly extracting the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to splint broken bones: take dry fig leaves and fresh poppy leaves, grind them together, and make a splint.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plastering for the restoration of a broken bone and to ease the return of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of chamomile, camomile flowers, violet flowers, and wheat flour, each in equal parts; grind them and mix with wine, and apply to the affected member, heating it. Alternatively, mix with fresh coriander water or water. Use as needed.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another stronger method of plastering for the restoration of a member when a hard abscess forms.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of alder, flax, balm, melilot, and chamomile, and flowers from violets, all in equal parts; grind them and macerate with sharp salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the member and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates writes in his book that one should not apply heat or cold directly to a broken member, but rather a certain mixture made of wax and oil, nothing else, and it should be neither too hot nor too cold.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	Galen seems to suggest that one should apply warm, dry substances to a broken member to aid in healing, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plastering that is effective against injury and pain: take moss and sheep's hair or feathers from an owl, or the down of a bird, and mix them equally, grind them into a paste, and use it as a plaster and secure it with a bandage.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, after a little while, release the plaster carefully and take care that the patient does not feel any pain or that the bones do not move from their place; if pain comes back or itching, or swelling appears, act quickly, remove the plaster, and take away the bandage now; take a light cloth and a sponge with moist sea water, dip it in water or rose oil, and apply it to the affected area for as long as the itching stops and the pain is calmed; then let the limb rest for an hour, and then cover it with dry linen moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it tightly until you are certain of the heat of the abscess. And thus, continue the treatment gently, using a little more plaster, and do not tighten it as strongly as before; apply it subtly until it heals completely.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is closed, red, painful, and swollen, and it recurs, then you need to apply a plaster and bind it, just as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if the limb does not heal after what we have said for three, four, five, or seven days, and it does not leave the dislocation for twenty days until the fracture heals and the adjustment of the bone to the flesh is close, then you hold it more tightly than before and fatten the flesh as I have said above; and if you see that the limb dries out more than necessary, know that healing will not come. Therefore, apply warm water each time you loosen it, every third day, and open a little the wound; by this work, thus cuts off the source of the malady to the limb, and it is shameful that foolish people prolong the dislocation in such a way: it is harmful and very dangerous, and I see nothing else but to let it heal and do it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many ways of fracture, with various shapes and distinct causes; for there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, where the bone breaks completely through to the other side, as with a hatchet or axe; and this type of fracture is called "hatchet-like.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or, the sword may cut through the bone without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and these two types of fractures can be either large or small wounds.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a shock or compression, or a crack from stone or from a blow on stone, or from other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a recent fracture that approaches the skin just beneath or on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound that is healed in the bone is as subtle as a hair, and the fracture is small, it is called a "capillary" fracture; and if the wound is caused by a stone or a blow or any similar thing, and a piece of bone enters inward, and the bone ends are aligned like a blacksmith's anvil when he was forging on the anvil; if the piece of bone gets stuck inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this occurs more often in those who have moist heads, such as an infant's head; and it happens in all these ways of dislocation that smaller parts are broken off, as if they were; and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all the ways of dislocations due to traction on them, and the inquiry at each joint, and by the corrupt flesh above it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the hair is known because when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed it thoroughly, the dislocation becomes apparent from the open black mark.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, be wary of accidents with the patient, and if you notice any harmful incidents, such as vomiting, loss of consciousness, extension, paleness, ague fever, or other symptoms appearing in various combinations, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming accidents and hope for healing, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the injury.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it happens that you hastily remove the bone on the seventh day, so that the wound beneath the bone is corrupted, then come the complications that we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone breaks down to the tissue covering the brain, it is necessary that you cut the broken part in this way: and you must press the patient's head gently, and expose the bone in every way possible, and clean the wound more softly than you can, and if a discharge of pus comes from exposing the bone, or abscess at the base, you should use the aid that is appropriate, and fill the cavity with moistened rose oil cloth, and let the wound rest until the abscesses are calmed, and be assured of no further discharge. Then begin to remove the bone, and this is done according to two methods: one way is that you cut a narrow channel in front, and this is its form...
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I use another method even greater than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have many different sizes of threads, some twisted and others broad, and they are sharp and made of indurated iron; and you work gently so as not to damage the surface.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and dense, you need to drill around it, using threads with intervals, so that they do not go through the bone too deeply, and there should be a margin or a circle on top of the point, preventing it from going beyond the bone; and you will need many of them, so that each one comes in its proper place according to the thickness of the bone, allowing for threads throughout; and this is the form of the three types of threads:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to know if an bone is broken is that you place pressure on it and return your hand to its normal position until you are sure the bone is dislocated; then put pressure somewhere else a little later, and so on around, then cut away the space between the cracks in the bone with incisions, and do this as delicately as possible, while still holding the bone firmly in your hand or using any tools like pliers or tweezers. Be careful not to touch the brain or the soft tissue.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have dislocated and treated the bone, it is necessary that you feel the tension remaining in the bone compared to all other tools resembling an incision tool, but it must be more delicate and subtler than any other incision tool; and if it holds onto small bones or scales, gently remove them with the appropriate instruments. Then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is that which Galen says, which is safer; it is very strong, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you expose a portion of the bone, either by opening the fracture widely, so that when you have exposed this part, you will place the tip of this curved scalpel beneath it, which has this shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, but expose the acute part on the second side, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike gently with a small mallet, carefully copping the bone all around, and be very mindful of the skin that lies beneath; if it is away from the bone, lift it slightly, for if you remove it too closely, it will cause great pain and harm.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the flesh, and the bone is only cut from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to file off the roughness again, and remove the scales with a delicate rasper in which you must have various quantities, so that each part can be made as convenient as possible according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you encounter great difficulty with raspers, and then with more subtle ones, do not cease from this task until it is done well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other haircuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary to make adjustments according to their location; and this is something that cannot be fully answered by anyone who has devoted their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the patient is satisfied with the exposure, it is necessary that you cover the wound with a cloth, according to its size, and moisten it with rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; do this as gently as possible so as not to harm the patient, then apply another bandage, and do not tighten it too much until the abscess has healed completely; leave it like that for a day or two, until the abscess is calm, then untie it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, flour of vetch, incense powder, aristol, and similar things; make a powder from these things, and place it on the wound, and administer universal remedies without burning; be sure that the wound remains clean, and do not leave any dressing or pressure on it, for when bowing gathers on the skin of the head, it erodes and damages, and causes great harm to the patient, because when a biting substance is placed on the syph (abscess), it hardens by itself.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if no ill accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if darkness comes only because of the medicine placed upon it, to see if it has any virtue, it is necessary that you mix a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and a drape of glue, and place it over the wound; then cure it in the manner of cures as it should be, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that the two parts of the bones above are never broken, either together or separately, for they are two bones; and the middle part is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it bends or twists, then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your small finger or a narrow tool between the joints, and place the break back into its natural position, and hold it there until the joint returns to its original form; do this gently, and ensure the patient feels no pain from your actions.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the joint and the fingers cannot reach it, you must place a slightly thicker rod at the top of the joint to hold it in place until the pain subsides.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in both parts, do as I said before, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, wait until the seventh or tenth day after the swelling has subsided, then place thin linen strips over the joint, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or turn to another part, if it is broken, and make it whole; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the gaps in the wound.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say that no restoration is required to moisten the bandages with butter, and to change them each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think that is good enough, but it is advisable to moisten them with egg yolk and mill powder, then leave the bandage until the bone is hard and the cartilage stiffens.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never should one apply goose fat in place of other remedies, and if the wound is covered with pus, hold the break still, and let the patient breathe; or do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses form at the site of treatment while you are working on them, apply a mixture of wax and oil or a poultice of duck fat.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess does not drain from the site of treatment, apply a poultice made of flour and incense powder, confited with egg yolk, then place light bandages on top and do not tie the neis; and if the break in the neis is small and broken into tiny pieces, extract them using suitable instruments, then clean the wound with hot charcoal and ointments, and cover it with clean bandages and splints until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	from the dislocation of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only slightly out of place, and not broken in two, but a support from within holds it together, if one knows it gently.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is in the right side, you should insert your index finger of your left hand into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left mandible, insert your index finger of your right hand, gently pushing the fracture inward, then pull it out with your other hand, making it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the mandible is severe in two parts, you must administer an extension to both parts, as long as they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the teeth causes a fracture, or if it is held in place by a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then apply cerate to the broken mandible and place a double cloth over it; and on top of the cloth, put a large, well-made star or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, and secure it with ties as best you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, on the third day, then reset it so that it is changed; and apply a poultice of powdered flour with plenty of egg or sesame flour after removing the bandage; and place a thin covering poultice, if the poultice hardens, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be until he is healed; often he is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses occur, then apply as we have often said.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, do not remove any piece of the bone that is broken; carefully remove the instruments suitable for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and it does not delay, immediately close the wound if it is wide, and place suitable plaster on it to draw out the poison, as long as it remains healthy.
de la forcele	of the force
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force often breaks in several places, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is of three kinds: it may be completely broken, with fragments, and is the easiest to restore; or it may involve a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is as follows when there is a fracture without a wound, that you have two helpers, so that one holds the part that is strongly broken, and the other stretches the collar towards the affected area; then put the fracture back in place with equal measure, so that its form is as it should be, and there is no deformity or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend it further, place a round, thick cloth or woolen spike under the patient's shoulder, according to your need; stretch and gently apply force, hold the spike in your hand, and put the fracture back in place as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder out, because it comes out completely, then it is necessary that the patient lies on his side with his arm below, and the healers raise the shoulder upwards, until the bone of the shoulder is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then address the fracture with your hands, and if you feel any debris, it is necessary that you cut through it; gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join together in any way, use the forceps as a support to hold it in place.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it should resemble a spoon, and is not too sharp, but as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the force required for the operation; it has two edges, as you can see, one wider and the other narrower, corresponding to the rupture of the wound that you made when you worked on the bones; and when you are certain of the hot aposteme, if the wound is deep, use bandages and gauze, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses appear, take a cloth moistened with rose oil, and silk, and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The straining of the bone, when it has wounds and cuts, is that you place on the bone the plaster of very fine powder and egg albumen, and put light bandages on top, and insert a spear under the bandage, if needed; then take a very wide strip of cloth, about a palm in width, and place the drape over the bandages and plaster; then take a thin, long ribbon three times as wide as it is long, and wrap it around the cloth, so that the edge of the cloth hangs down; put the ribbon on the fracture, and turn the bandage back over the healthy shoulder, and under the injured shoulder; and rearrange each part, and when you see that the bandages hold firmly on the fractured bone, and you clearly see that the ribbon does not move from it, rewarding each day, and when the stitches loosen, so adjust; and make the patient lie on his back, and put a small cushion under the injured shoulder while he sleeps; this lightens the fracture by aligning the shoulder, or binding the arm to the chest, and do not loosen it if no bad accidents come for twenty days; then repeat the plastering, if needed, and tighten and leave it thus until it is healed; and it is healed in no more than twenty-eight days, and less for most men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	From the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	If the shoulder is dislocated, it does not immediately return to its normal position and can only be corrected by touch; if you arrange it according to the form of the dislocation, and restore it to its natural state in every way possible, then sprinkle a little fine powder on it, apply light bandages, and cover with a double cloth. Then place a broad and thin board, slightly wider than the shoulder, and adjust the board so that it covers all parts of the shoulder; use strips of linen for this, ensuring the board is even. Tighten a strong bandage around it, so that the board does not move from its place, and inspect it every day. Whenever it loosens, tighten it again, and if the board shifts, return it to its correct position, having the patient lie on his side. The shoulder can be restored in 20 or 25 days, and when this time is up, carefully remove the bandage, as it is not a bone that returns easily to its place.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone sticks out and is not removed from the inside, it pushes up and the bone, and does what we have said about calming the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	from the breaking of the worst abscess
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The fracture is never broken in the middle, but that happens rarely; but it often breaks at the extreme.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken at the extreme, it declines inward and the patient feels great pain, and there is no improvement, and sometimes it bleeds, and opens up the joints in the broken bone, and it feels better.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and places a cushion between their shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and aligns the ribs with both hands, and gently adjusts it in all ways as necessary so that the bone figure is correct; then apply plaster and compresses over the delicate salt or other light cloth, wrap it in a cloth, and bind it to the broken bone so it does not move; and tighten the bandage regularly on the back, and adjust it closely, and check the freedom every hour, and if it softens, tighten it; and if it needs to be released due to corrosion or itching that occurs at the site, or pain or abscess, act quickly, loosen it, remove the plaster, and address the cause of the issue; then reapply the plaster and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	from the fracture of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	You know that the fracture of ribs only occurs in the upper back and at the top, and they do not bend unless they are broken; and this causes great pain to the patient during examination.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is such that you place the fracture back in its proper position, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the splint, securing it with a stick, if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is inclining inward, the patient feels great pain and piercing, as if from crying out, because the bone pierces the flesh; and it causes numbness in the fingers, and sometimes vomiting, great weakness from blood, and it is a serious illness, and the old ones have put much effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And for those who say it is necessary to administer foods that cause bloating in the belly to drive out the fracture from within.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not pretend that incisions without heat will not come if they have not previously been caused.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes, as long as it is healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that none of you should apply cupping glasses to the skin, as it forms a vacuum, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the cup might draw away excess fluids from the body due to weakness in its position.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that none of you should cover the wound with moist wool in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to equalize the space around it, then treat the cure for pleurisy, flesh, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the broken bone, then doubt is in the patient, and it is necessary to cut into the ribcage, and place an instrument to stop the bleeding; and then one must cut the bone, pull gently, and stitch the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and dress it with bandages, until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses form, place moist, oil-soaked cloths on the affected area and lay down; and treat while the abscess is present, keeping the patient lying on their side where it hurts, until they heal.
de la brisure dou col	from the breakage of the collarbone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No break occurs in the collarbone bone, and seldom does it happen without rain; also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover, be wary if you see their hands becoming soft, swollen, and numb, and unable to move or stretch them; if you pierce them with a needle, they should not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Knowing that it is deadly in many ways, if they remain silent and feel well when pressed and not moved, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and the patient will be cured if proper treatment is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar symptoms occur in the back and you want to know if it is a sign of healing or not, be careful if the pain is relieved, and if there are movements that cause discomfort, especially when coughing or sneezing; and when it is remembered on the belly, there is frequent egestion without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is remembered on the back and it wants to move, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Knowing that it is fatal: therefore, do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not occur, then the thing is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is as follows: if there is a hot abscess, apply warm rose oil or egg-white oil to it until it is soothed; then place a comforting and drying plaster on it, secure it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where the pain is felt until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is separated, it should be covered with a bandage; then the bone is removed, and the two edges of the wound, if large, are sutured with stitches, and treated with healing ointment diligently until it heals; and if the fragment of the bone, known as the "fragment of the break," is stuck in your hand, you should hold it with your left hand and place it level with the other hand, then apply the plaster and splint if necessary; then tighten it, and if there are any separated bones, reduce them and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	from the fracture of the bone of the spine
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the bone of the spine is fractured, and if there is no slight reduction at the site, it causes prolonged, declining pain to the patient, along with stiffness, swelling, and aching where the fracture is.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it as long as you are above the fracture site; and know what the fracture is and its shape; and if the fracture is only at the top, then apply equal pressure until it regains its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, it bends inward, so place the patient on his belly until the healing of this fracture becomes visible.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, place a splint on it, then put a piece of wood or hard material over it and tighten the fracture so that it does not move; and hold the limb away from the body until the bone is aligned.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess appears and is not touched, it should be calmed down until the abscess has healed, and apply what we have said above; then return to restoration, tighten it as needed, if there is no adverse event, and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	dislocation of the joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The joint (ajutoire) is that which connects the collarbone to the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, then it should be restored using one of two methods: one involves taking a wooden stick, roughly medium-sized, shaped in this manner:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And bind the two feet together, and turn them upwards, and place the patient on his back; then stretch out one broken arm onto the leg, until it becomes relaxed, and fasten a piece of wood across it, then press down on some heavy object or have the assistant pull it downwards; then take both hands and make the break even, until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another method is that we place the patient on his side, and bind one hand to his neck, then command the assistants to each take hold of a part of the broken bone in his hands, and stretch them out to their respective sides.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that extraction is too forceful, then tighten the ligature around the rupture, and on the rupture, extend each of the assistants to their respective sides.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the rupture is close to the top of the shoulder, it is necessary to place a moderate ligature below the joint, and another towards the throat, below the rupture; and if the rupture is towards the throat, a light ligature should be placed without strain, as long as the rupture remains balanced on its place, then set the rupture correctly and tighten it, if there are no complications.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess forms again after it has been extracted and doesn't subside for seven days or more, apply a moist cloth dipped in rose oil to the wound until the abscess is calmed; then extract it, and the manner of extraction is such that you place a splint on the dislocation, then reassemble the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or breast; then cover with a bandage, and extract the splint from the dislocated joint and the arm, so that the arm is held in place by the bandages, provided nothing prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt whether the bone has moved and use splints, place a wider and stronger splint on the dislocation than the others, and ensure there is two fingers' width space between each splint, and make sure each splint is so large that it covers three-quarters of the dislocation, as we have said at the beginning of this chapter about the dislocation. Then extract the splints, stronger and closer together.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the stars and the constriction, as we have said, when you restore the broken member, and you doubt the heat of the abscess, leave it bound for up to seven days, as we have said; then every three days check the binding, ensuring no inflammation arises or comes to the place, so that healing can come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the condition improves, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such incident occurs, and it is not until after three days or more that the binding is removed, then have the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach; place under the dislocated member a flat cushion of equal thickness wool, and every hour watch during the day or night to ensure the dislocated limb does not move or become loosened. If it recovers through the power of medicine and follows the diet we previously described, then gradually make the food more substantial when it begins to improve.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the joint and leg should be taken up again after forty days from all movement; and then one must dislocate and apply baths and medicinal oils to direct the place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the contraction is severe and tight, it may take up to days or two months to dislocate.
de la brisure du bras	of the dislocation of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fosse," of which one is small and follows the wrist; and the other is large, and is below the small bone towards the hand. Perhaps only the large bone is broken, or perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, their restoration is light and swift, but when the large ones break, recovery is poor and more difficult than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bones that are broken, they should be gently extended and aligned evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bones, they should be pulled stronger; stretch them on a cushion, and place the palm of the hand higher than the others, and the small bones lower, and let the patient cross their arms over themselves, with the cushion in front of them higher than their pain will allow; then have another minister stretch the other arm towards the joint of the hand or further up, and another at the other side above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then arrange them evenly, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture, each one is placed in its proper position, and if there is none that catches the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, making a cut above and the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a specific chapter; then take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of restoration there are abscesses, I apply a bandage made of oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft, and I wrap it gently until the abscess is calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the plaster, and apply the pouder made of very fine flour with plenty of egg, then place the needles, making the needle from the rupture stronger and slightly wider than the others; know that there should be six needles or more in various positions: if the rupture is in one bone or in two; tighten more over the rupture than elsewhere, and always less distant, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and make the cloth lying on the rupture soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, from which it is drawn, be made of flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after no days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if no adverse event occurs in the limb, such as itching that arises in the member, then you should immerse the limb in hot water until the itching is soothed; and allow the member to rest without compression.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then repeat the process, and if the ligaments loosen and the bones move out of place, or any similar thing, address it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if inflammation cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then you should loosen it slightly and leave it for a few days until the swelling goes down, and then tighten it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said help the patient, then let him rest for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If uncertain, bind his hands to his chest, making sure the collarbones are even, and guard against movement and gesture, and have him sleep on his back. Know that this fracture will be healed in thirty days or forty-five, or perhaps in twenty days, depending on the combination and disposition of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and between the fingers, there are many small fractures, which come about through frequent pain.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the hand's bone is broken or bent, it is necessary for the patient to cut across it and make it straight in front of him equally; then he places his hand on a flat surface and extends the broken bones' ministers, and adjusts them level, as much as they are well joined; and applies a poultice and blisters if an abscess does not come, and then he wraps it with a piece of linen cloth according to its size.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is around the side of the hand near the stomach, make a ball of cloth and instruct the patient to press it against his broken hand; then pull it with a long piece of cloth, and wrap it tightly with a heart-shaped soft cloth as large as the hand itself.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is at the end of a bone, you should place one stick above and another below on the base, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it firmly around the hand, and stop the blood flow between the two sticks.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the fracture occurs in neither of the joints, and it is a break, place it evenly, as it should be, and tighten it with the base, and if you see that it needs a small, straight stick to stabilize the break, do so, and do not move it; and if the fracture is in other joints, like the index or any of the others, place it evenly and tie it with the healthy joint that follows; you can either hold them all at once, which is better, or put a stick on top, as needed; and be careful during the restoration and alignment of the bone, supporting what comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The hipbone is often broken, and one can clearly see it when it returns to its place in front and behind; its restoration is achieved by binding it tightly over the break, and another piece below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then each limb extends its muscle equally; this is when the break is between the bones.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the hipbone, one of the muscles should be bound towards the knee, and the others bound below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is close to the knee, then loosen the ligament of the knee and extend it downward; then place the splint so that the bone is level in both hands, according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and bind it, so that the lump does not appear.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside and then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is made in the same way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should wrap the fracture with a hard bandage, twice in two or three layers, and remove any excess; then turn the leg until the heel reaches the root of the toe, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg below the knee, and tie it tightly above; then return to the leg and thigh, wrapping the bandage again; then apply a splint with stars, and place a star over the leg bone; then use eight layers of soft cloth between the leg and thigh to ensure even compression, and begin binding in three or four turns around the splint; the tighter you go above the splint, the less it restricts movement; then take the two threads you passed between the leg and thigh, and tie three stars on top; then return below the knee with the thread, until you reach the sole of the foot; tighten it so that it does not move from its place, leave it like that, and in no case should there be any abscess or swelling or other issues.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, and he dislocates it, and addresses what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that stick, if one can, then do so; and if one cannot, it is necessary to break the joint and pull it out forcefully; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never should the foot be broken in this way as it is done for the hand or arm; however, the patient does not recover from the pain after such restoration.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the foot is restored in 7 to 10 days, or even less or more, according to the variety of complexes.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the street of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	You know that in the street of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, even if it is only a crack or a gap, it becomes an opening to all wounds, and feels pain, and this feels very well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to put things back in their proper place as much as possible, then apply a poultice, and place a round bandage if needed, and tighten it appropriately, then follow all the arrangements we have mentioned for other breaks, like an abscess high up or any similar thing; apply what is suitable for each case, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	from the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, which are called "right" and "frosty"; and every fracture occurs as it does in the arm, and the treatment is similar, with all the same difficulties. And if both bones are broken together, the leg can move in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, they turn forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain, and one can see it well, and it turns outward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then administer an extension, and set it evenly, and tie the stars equally; but nevertheless, it is necessary that the fracture be ugly, and there are several pieces where the extension should be less and lighter; and straighten according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your task, take two strips of cloth that are dyed red and wrap them around the leg from one side to the other, extending from the knee to the ankle; then wrap two more bands above and below, and tie them in the middle, so the leg cannot move to the right or left, and thus it is well. And no one should administer any treatment along the length of the leg, but if it is made of cloth, they put the leg in a position to prevent movement, and they properly treat the fracture where there is an abscess or any other accident; they move the leg each day to see if there is any pus or other complications, and they cure it as long as it remains healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	From the fracture of bones in the foot.
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones in the foot can be fractured and the joints dislocated in various ways, without force in most cases.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones in the foot are fractured and you see them stacked on top of each other, the patient will cry out with great pain on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then place your foot on his, raising the bones; then press it so that they return to their proper places; then apply a splint and bandages above, and under the belly of the foot, a small, flat table with two holes, then tighten it well around the foot, wrapped in cloth and other things as needed.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three days or four have passed, if you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones even, either broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if none of the bones are broken, but they are dislocated, as we have said about the hand's joints, then take a stick according to the length of the bone and make it slightly wider, then place this under the foot, firmly securing it; and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, put on each one a stick according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen bandage, and secure the table under the foot; and let it be firmly attached at the top of the table towards the stomach of the foot, so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, when we have spoken; and treat each case as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	fracture of the bone in the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If a woman's bone in her hand is fractured and the swelling subsides, then she should tilt her body to one side with the injured arm behind her. Next, fill the palm with cotton and place a heavy object on top; then have her stand up and gently rock her back and forth, allowing the cotton to enter the fracture site until the bone returns to its original position. After this, replace the cotton and repeat the process for seven days or so. If successful, the fracture will be healed and she can use her hand again. If necessary, take a bladder of goat's hair, tie one end to the opening, and squeeze all the air out into the injured area; then let it deflate naturally. The nature of the fracture will heal; fill it with cotton and leave it like that for several days until it is cured.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the hand or the woman's bone is broken, restore it as we have said regarding the hipbone; and these fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and skill into it, and understands my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture indicates various dispositions for restoration; understand this therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When the staff is broken, take a goose throat and insert it into the staff; then wrap rags around it, and leave it for three days or until it heals completely.
de brisure avec plaie	from fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For those with a fracture and a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bones of the shin or shoulder or similar, it is important to seek immediate medical attention, so that the healing process can begin, as we have discussed.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, but there is still vitriol present, and you have no other options, then begin to reset the fracture in the same hour or day, before abscesses form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscess appears again, leave the healing until it is completely healed, and do not touch it for at least a day or two, otherwise you might cause further harm.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible upon uncovering the heart, it is necessary that you gently place your hands on it with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not appear even when placing your hands, take this instrument made of iron, with seven or eight fingers in length (or according to the width required for the wound), and adjust it precisely; it should be round and slightly thicker so that it does not bend under pressure upon the limb during your treatment, and wider at the front, thicker in the middle, like so:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche," so it is necessary that the broken bone be placed on top of the visible joint; and hold it in place once, until it returns to its original position, and becomes even on both sides.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle and the instruments cannot securely grasp the bone, it is necessary that you hold the head of the bone until the instrument has a firm grip.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, with a suitable instrument like a forceps or a saw, then use what is at your disposal; remove the pieces that are stuck in the bone from their roughness and small fragments.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterward, knowing that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do your best to put it back in its place, then moisten the bandage with astringent black wine, and wrap it properly; do not put any wax or other substance on the wound that could cause decay; then administer stars (possibly herbs or medications) after you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and clean the area around it according to the size of the wound, and take good care so that the wound is not constricted by the bandage; and often, through ignorance, people have caused patients great harm, or even death, or severe decay, and these binding should be softer and more gentle than others.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is severe or deep, and you doubt that a bad accident may occur, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, if it is not suitable to put on bandages; but wrap around, instead of bandages, hard cloth, and bind it tightly.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is bowing or sinking, then remove what you have put on top of it and apply a healing dressing to the wound, such as a four-part ointment or similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is swollen and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be dislocated in such a way that the bow of the bone moves slightly downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it persists for a long time and cannot heal but keeps returning to the bowed state, knowing that there may be small pieces of bone, you must then clean the wound thoroughly, and remove all these loose pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula forms in its place, or any other kind of corruption, you must treat it according to what is said in this chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when a bone is broken and open in the member, such as the bone of the calf or the shoulder, or other similar bones of great members, do not pull it, for often death comes from it, but leave it until it putrefies; perhaps after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can; if not, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	burns that come from the heat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the healing of the burn, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a painful sight to see the shape of the member; and perhaps it cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then, if we must treat it: if we administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, ace, and similar ones, make sure to press any of these things, or all of them together, and preserve them with astringent wine or with an abundance of heat or with cold; place them on the affected area firmly, and do not loosen them for several days; then dislocate it and begin again with another, until the swelling is gone; or tie it tightly to a well-made pad; for the property of a pad is that it draws out all swelling from the limbs; and if the dislocation has already become hardened like stone, it must be removed, cutting off the excess above, and treating the remaining part until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The weak member after treatment.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed and the weak and delicate member remains, it occurs for many reasons: one is because it was bound too tightly and not bound as it should be; or because there are too many bands and it cannot assume the normal movement of the limb; or due to excessive swelling; or from too great movements, not in their proper time; or because he has little blood in his body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body firm, until the blood multiplies within him; then administer baths, and give pleasure and comfort; then apply lead to the member, so that the lead attracts great movement, and often wash it with cold water, until the movement reaches the limb; and it returns to its natural state.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	Both members twisted after the dislocation.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the members are twisted after reduction, and the bones are broken open, and the form of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish ones who say one must break the member all over again; many fools have done this in our land. Such practices are blameworthy and cause great harm, perhaps even death. However, if the contusions and torture are fresh, then they should be treated with hot water or soft herbs such as chamomile leaves, roots, melilot, and similar things; and apply a mollifying poultice, well-prepared like a good plaster, and take the mucilage of chamomile and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a poultice from it. Or you can use fig extracts, crushed with colon powder, and other medicines that lessen inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the node broken by rubbing it continually and for a long time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And allow the limb to move every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	If the distortion is inflamed and hardened, like stone, and it needs to be broken with iron, then it must be covered with a light, precise incision up to the bone; apply compression and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations are caused by a joint moving out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs at any time, it is necessary to bring the limb back into its proper position as soon as possible.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if the dislocation is delayed, the limb swells, and by chance it is reset at pain, it is not advisable to move it at that hour when it is swollen; in this way, many times pain and other ailments are caused; however, as soon as it happens, make the patient better, then leave it until the swelling subsides; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, and reset it gently, caring for each member as best suits its condition.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the upper body from the foot up.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It first happens that the jaws become dislocated and this dislocation occurs in two ways: either they are slightly out of place, somewhat bent, or completely dislocated, hanging down towards the chin, and spilling saliva from the mouth so that it cannot be closed, nor can the person speak, as their tongue is also affected.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns on its own due to the body's natural movements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it hastily, and do not delay; in such a way that the minister places the head with the sick person, and pulls the mirrors towards one of his hands to the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, so the dislocation is from two parts; and let the other two hands be drawn away, to make it even; and command the patient to soften his mandibles, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And let the mirrors be made even, until they return to their place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it returns to its place, especially when both mandibles are together, then apply hot water and oil, gently resetting it; do not delay in returning it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well, without pain, he should place moistened bandages on it, made from rose oil and wax; then gently bind them with soft cords; and let the patient sleep on his back, with his feet between two cushions, so that he does not move them to the right or left, nor exert himself more, but eat light food until the pain is gone and the jaw is healed; and then he can drink and eat as desired.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be brought back to their proper position within an hour and are not aligned correctly, then fever and sore habits may occur, along with intestinal complications, and perhaps vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know it is a disaster; and many die from it, in the ninth day.
de la forcelle	De la forcelle" translates directly to "of the
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forcelle cannot be realigned from any side within the continuity of itself and the worse, it is never relieved towards the outside, and feels very painful.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And its restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then he presses the joint with the palm of his hand, and it returns; then he applies the plaster and the bandage, and tightens it; and the limb that is towards the neck cannot be realigned; if not, and if it does not realign even once, then you must reset it to its place, as we have said; then apply the plaster and the bandage, and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; and thus same is done with the shoulder joint when it is out of place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	You know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one is when it dislocates at the acromion end; and the second is at the part of the scapula; and sometimes it dislocates at the top, and this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside near the nerves; and it most often dislocates towards the acromion, especially in those with little muscle mass, for them it happens sharply; to those with sufficient muscle, it occurs barely, and retreats barely.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to no one that there is a blow or fracture, and swells the shoulder with a hot abscess, and thinks it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary for you to test it, until you are certain; and then begin treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And the dislocation is known when it deviates towards the joint, and it makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their diversity manifest; and you will find in the top of the shoulder a hollow, and by touching the base of the shoulder, as if it were one, the patient cannot bring his hand to his side or move in any way; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, and not hidden, as you can see clearly by touching; and this type of dislocation is not only for immediate correction, when it is new, or if the entrapped part is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the healer places his hand on top of the patient's shoulder, then positions his thumbs underneath the joint, and pulls the joint upward with force; and he lifts his hand and extends it upwards, then puts his thumbs underneath; this will bring relief.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	If, however, it does not come as described above, after a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and apply gently softening and soothing remedies such as an infusion of althae, fenugreek, and melilote in water, and let him rest. Then, have the patient lie on his back and place a piece of equal thickness of wool underneath the affected shoulder, not too soft nor too hard, then position the heel of the healthy foot on top of it, and gently pull the head of the injured shoulder upward, while also pulling the hand of the patient with a firm but gentle motion; another assistant should hold the head of the shoulder to prevent any movement. The shoulder will return to its proper place, as you will see if you follow this method: and make sure that you have a stronger man present who is larger than the patient; he should be positioned directly opposite the affected side, pull the shoulder blade away from the joint of the injured shoulder, and pull it upward, while another assistant pulls the hand of the patient downward towards his stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, and any heavy thing is laid upon him, the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it is also adjusted in another way: take a long stick and place it in the ground so that its tip is as sharp as a pistol, but not too thick or too thin; then place it from under the patient, but with soft cloth above, and the patient's arm fully extended towards the opposite side, and the joint will return to its place; and if it does not want to come back for all the reasons we have mentioned, make this treatment: take a stick of two arms' length and four fingers' width that has a pointed end to completely enter the joint from below, according to this shape.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lay the patient flat on his back, so that the affected area is not pressed, then place a firm support under the affected limb; extend one arm above the afflicted area, and bind the aid to the affected part, placing the arm across the wrist of the hand, then put the arm over a wide scale, and let the hands hang down below, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will now be realigned.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is aligned in any way, it is necessary that you place under the joint a thread of equal wool, then apply the plaster made of powder from the mill, with incense and egg yolk, over all the shoulder and around, then stretch the joint gently, and tie the bandage again on the plaster, and embrace the hand to the collarbone, and let the hands remain in that position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he move little, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal more quickly; then after a few days or seven, he moves it; and if it is stiff and not softened, it will be healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is stuck due to moisture or any other reason, it is necessary that you administer fire cautery in three places, as described in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and after seven days the joint comes loose and he cannot raise his arm high, then know that the nerve in the shoulder is damaged or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place again.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the worst part, and the joints, or behind, is often caused by a sudden jerk, stretching of the hands, and it should be treated immediately as long as it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after healing, the joint becomes stiff in the limb and its movement is delayed; if the patient uses it repeatedly, as long as the stiffness persists, it will eventually return to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation thus:
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the dislocated joint is weakened at the ends, and the ends return; if it is weakened from all sides, especially front and back, and the dislocation is not corrected, for it can be clearly seen and felt; it should be treated according to its form.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased part with the healthy, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is stiff, and cannot bend the arm, nor reach to its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it in such a way that the abscess closes and does not reappear, for if it reappears, it will be difficult to reset it, especially when it is at the back; then it is worse than other dislocations, causing greater pain, and perhaps even leading to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it can be brought back as it was before, that you stretch his hand with both of yours; and his arms are extended, and the palms facing each other according to the cost around, from top to bottom, and bring the joint together at his fingers, either at the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to its original position, and bring the base of the palm towards the affected joint.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, apply a strong extension; and have the second minister extend the arm, and stretch it tightly so that it does not move during the extension. Then turn the arm in each direction after wrapping a double long and wide cloth around it. When you observe the joint where it is connected to his hand, rub it with some oil to soften the joint, then bring the joint together until it returns to its place. Once it is in place, apply dry plaster with egg white, tighten the bandage, and keep it on the patient's neck for several days before removing it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, it loosens the ligament and leaves it; and if you see that the joint is not well aligned, repeat the binding and the ligament, and leave it thus for several days, until it is firmly set; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if the patient feels pain after resetting the joint, and it becomes stiff, bathe and massage it gently, pressing until it is relieved; or apply a grease-soaked woolen compress to the joint, leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and immerse the limb in a bath; and when it is warm, rub the joint temperately, reapply the compress, and then take another bath; do this two or three times until healed; and if you see that it still feels cold, wrap fine moistened hot wool around it and press; it will return to its normal state.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand joint, once reduced, is less stable than others. Nevertheless, it must be held in place gently, immediately after reduction, so that the swelling does not increase or an abscess does not form.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the reduction is such that you place the afflicted hand on a table, extend the patient's fingers, and ensure they are straightened, so that the palm rests on the joint, holding it until it returns to its proper position. However, you must check if it is in its original place; then, place the patient with the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, let the patient lay his back on his hand on a table, and look closely at the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is good. Otherwise, if the strain of soothing plasters on abscesses ceases, and it does not start again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if the patient cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place for any number of days, then the joint remains twisted; and neither the pain nor any part can be healed: then know that a nerve or an artery is cut; and there is no other mechanism to draw out the case except by delicate cautery, and perhaps there is nothing else worth trying.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, if you put on the plaster as we have said, then pull it and leave it for a day, then loosen it and leave it so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cannot move it properly and there is no fracture, then apply hot water moisture to it and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	On the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	The fingers of the hand should never be dislocated at each joint, neither at the back of the palm or on the palm itself; then, they are dislocated and brought together gently until they return to their original position, then hold the top of the finger, and pull it towards the part where it is disjoined; leave it for a day, and then repeat this process each day; and do not tie it, as we have said, but loosen it each day and move it, and reconnect it; and do so repeatedly until it is tight, and also do the same if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, and follow the same steps until it heals; and do the same for any other part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	dislocation of the spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine or the collarbone is dislocated and there is no cure, the patient often dies quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs of this are that the patient's limbs jump uncontrollably, unable to hold them still; often, one or both arms or legs become weak, and sometimes the spine is bent in four parts; the bend at the back is called "gypsiness". The cure for this is to reward the gypsiness if it has been present from childhood; there is no cure or treatment for this condition.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things, the ancient ways of healing speak of in great words, but they offer no real benefit; however, I have abridged it according to my understanding and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the stiffness that comes to the foot first, no one has any health; and also that which comes directly in two sides, and it is only the cure properly coming from behind that can heal it, as I say; and it is that the patient should be stretched on his face equally in the first position, and have a pull underneath him so he does not twist; then I insert a stick in the middle of the head in the earth-formed shape, and another at the knee, and tie a loose band around the affected parts of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the thighs, and at the ankles; and these ministers know the bands, one on the head and the others on the feet, among the two sticks; and they should be well secured, the stick as we have said, and the observer places his palms on the formed spine until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a table three feet long, cut the wall from behind, place the patient on their side, and turn the head of the table away from the wall; then place the middle of the table over the spine, and put both feet on the other end of the table, pressing firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see it moving, do this with a stick that turns in your hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And take two long splints, one for the patient's head and one for each foot, and between each splint make an incision from above and below, leaving a space of about a palm length; and in each splint make a hole through which the stick turns, and ensure the splints are firmly fastened so they do not move; and between the two splints there should be one turning stick, with two small splints a palm length long, to turn the stick; then tie the stick that is among the splints to the head end, and the other end to the feet at the other turning stick, and each helper turns their stick along the whole length, and the master ensures the spine is straight as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, apply a drying plaster with plenty of heat, then the compresses, and then the end of a tablet three fingers long, which should adhere to the skin of the joint and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle relief until they are healed; and if any thing happens at the end of their healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, using the method that we have mentioned before; and never apply a piece of plaster, nor let there be any appearance on the rear spine, thinking it dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, for which one must not have presumptuousness: perhaps death might come as a result.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You know that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder only cause dislocations, unlike the other joints; and the joint of the thigh is misaligned according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside, it's less misaligned in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation is such that when you join the injured leg with the healthy one, if it's longer, and opens the knee of the patient more than the healthy one, and they cannot bend their knee; this is due to the inflammation around the abscess above, because the bone in the thigh comes closer.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who is destined to die, it is that this accident goes against what has been said before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who experiences it beforehand, if he has a strong leg according to its fulfillment; nevertheless, do not bend the knee too much without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot do so before, and he retains his urine, and the ankle swells, and when he tries to walk, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who experiences it afterwards, if he cannot spread or bend his knee, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the movement of the thigh is towards the inside, opposite the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	They should reset this appearance of dislocation if it is that the dislocation is old and persists according to its nature, as there is no cure; and one must not let him be presumptuous.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for those whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four types of dislocation, you must act quickly, returning the joint to its proper position both internally and externally, and then aligning it to the right and left; perhaps it will return on its own, and there is no need for other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you must then use a strong strap, extending the leg strongly at the knee or binding it to the loins; another minister should place his hand from above in such a way that he bends the patient's hands downwards towards their heels, then pull tightly with a soft strap on the calf; others should hold the head with a strap; and all stretch upwards and downwards simultaneously, until the patient is lifted from the ground once, remaining in that position.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to all three conditions, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, that is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If the dislocation is in the hip joint, it is necessary to treat this condition. The patient should be placed on their healthy side, then tie a ligature on the root of the thigh, and the joint that is above the wound; then stretch the ligament towards the wound and towards the strength; then ask another helper to support the patient's arms, embrace the large joint of the affected thigh, and extend it in a different direction. It will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in the manner we have said, then you should bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong, soft ligature on both heels and both knees; then let the sick leg be extended two fingers more than the others; then hang it over a pole, and let it be suspended two arms' length above the ground; then command the assistant to embrace the head of the thigh, and have other assistants hanging with the patient, who embrace the thigh, for the joint now moves harmoniously.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is external, if the patient lies down as we have said in the case of the luxation, then tighten the ligature properly on the sick leg and also on the foot; then place two hot coals, one at the head and another at the foot; then insert a hot coal between the thighs of the patient in the form of the dislocation. And wrap moist cloths around him so he does not feel the pain, then have each assistant stretch towards him and check to ensure that the dislocation is equal in both hands.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it does not return, place it on a table and press it as we have said in the previous section, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the affected leg forcefully, as I have said; and alleviate the patient's pain from being on the affected side, then press with the other hand, and stretch it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to stretch the affected leg downwards, nor to raise it up onto the ground, but rather it must remain as it was when the hip was dislocated, as we have said before, gently on both sides; and place it on its face, with the joint extended as we have said earlier, and press upon it at the table. And this will be achieved once the patient extends their legs and they are even; then tighten the stockings, apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then loosen it and apply the plaster again; and gently encourage the patient to move, until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From the dislocation of the knee.
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The limb is dislocated in three ways: internally, externally, and posteriorly; but not anteriorly.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not return to its place at the knee, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and place his foot on yours. Then take the knee in your palms and draw between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee joint; and another minister extends the foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it gently returns the leg to its knee; and apply a poultice, and raise the leg at the knee, and bind them together firmly for three or four days, then release it; and let not the patient move about, until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at all extended, apply a strong stretch, as we have said in the treatment of the spine, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	On the dislocation of the heel.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is neither entirely dislocated nor fully located, and it is both internally and externally displaced.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and there is tenderness in the area where it is dislocated; the reduction is gentle, and one should gently extend their hand towards the affected side when it is slightly dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated from all sides, you should make the patient lie straight and hold the leg outside their foot with the minister; then take the foot in your right hand and pull twice, then stretch it upwards nicely, and push the foot back up; do this twice as we have said, by stretching and pulling the foot; if it comes back, that's good; if not, continue the work, for it will come back; and if it cannot return like that, make the patient lie on their stomach on the ground, and insert a firm stick between their thighs, and wrap the drapes around them so they do not hurt the patient; then have the ministers hold the thigh, and others stretch the foot to its fingers or joint where it is held by the foot; then each minister stretches equally, and the stick should be between the patient's thighs to keep them still when stretched; then put both hands on the dislocation for the patient, and another minister holds the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return more easily.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when the fracture is healed to a certain point, apply an ointment and bandage, stretch the limb, secure the foot to the leg, and hold fast the ligaments behind the ankle so they are not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments loosen, release them; then dislodge it on the third day or a quarter of that time, and the patient should walk within four days; and if he continues beyond this point, it is not lucky for him to recover further.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses occur, it is necessary to soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, while they are healthy.
des dois	Of the two (parts)
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the eyes are dislocated, if they need to be nicely extended without effort, it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the dislocation is in any other part of the body, it is necessary that you place the patient on a flat or straight table and put your foot on what opens up from these joints, then press with your foot form until it returns; and when it is even and nothing opens, place a two-legged table under the sole of the foot, then pull with the form and leave it for three days, then release it; and let it rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	From wound and dislocation together.
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and you wish to restore it, often the patient dies if you are not careful in treatment: so be neither presumptuous nor hasty, unless you are skilled in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and be neither cruel nor quick to judge; begin with gentle remedies for the abscess, and leave the patient in God's care, if you see no hope of recovery. And when there is hope, immediately realign the limb as best you can, so that the abscess does not grow worse. And once the limb is back in place, apply gentle remedies to the abscess, and treat the wound accordingly; if there are broken bones or small bones displaced, treat it as we have said for simple ailments; and beware of falling into despair, as I have advised, for this will be to your benefit according to your Creator's will, and for the knowledge of your arms and body.
Amen	Here is the translation of the
