O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, dear children, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine, its fulfillment, and have concluded it with explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I completed this with a treatise, which is the part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And since the work of hands is closely guarded in our region and unknown throughout, the science has degenerated and become depleted, and there remains no trace of its power other than small descriptions in ancient books about what the hands have done.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes error and vanity, and intentions are closed, and knowledge is estranged.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	I believe I want to revive it by following the order of this treatise, according to its method of exposition and explanation and its abbreviations;
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will bring together the forms of cautery instruments and other tools for this work with the addition of explanations and preparations as needed.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are to be found in our time, the art of medicine has become neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who wishes to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, must know the judgment of the members, their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of their openings, and understand the movement and rest of veins, and from where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And Hippocrates says that the name without work is meaningless, and with work, it is powerful;
et meismement en l’art de main.	and particularly in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, will surely fall into error and harm others.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	for I have often seen many of those who engage in this science and abandon themselves without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	Because I have seen a foolish thing that affects the abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and affects the arteries of the neck.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	for this causes so much blood that the woman dies in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And see another miracle where a stone is removed from a man's chest, and the stone was large.
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	it also removes a piece of the bladder, and he bled from his wound for three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; I knew well that if it was not cut out, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And see another miracle where he treated the duke of our land who had a broken leg and a wound from the fracture.
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the ignorant doctor tightened the fracture over the wound with strong force and left no space for the wound to heal, and he left it in that state until the end.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and instruct him not to dislocate it again.
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and wait until the leg is completely swollen and bruised and comes to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I am called to come to him, and I hastened to go free the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I freed it, the pain disappeared entirely.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But any attempt at corruption was already confirmed within the limb, and it could not be healed.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and it does not cease the corruption of sending through the member as long as the member is completely dead.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I also saw another wonder: the abscess became worse, and then it was inflamed due to the malignancy of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For the ulcer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not suit that one should touch it with iron if it is not in a part that can be entirely removed what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this reason, dear child, it is necessary for you to know that the art of healing is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, work where there is danger in many arrangements;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show, in each part of this book, where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For this reason, it is important for you to guard yourself, so that the foolish eyes cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take up your weapons in courage, and confront your enemies lightly but firmly, and use the best method, by the grace of God, you will achieve salvation and be happy.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and abandon the gloomy diseases of sorrow, healthily.
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and remove your weapons of doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the other in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen does not mention any of his warnings:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take any dangerous illness too seriously, unless you are called a fool for it.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters deal with fire cautery and medicinal agues, and the chapters are ordered from the head down to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and the shapes of instruments, and the tools for cautery, and everything necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second sentence translates to: The following chapters are about cutting and piercing, and the use of suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar procedures.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and it describes the chapters arranged and the shapes of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar conditions.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is ordered from the greatest pain down to the least, and describes the shapes of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So, remembering the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of aid and the harm or benefit of each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of aid, and its harmful effects, are the longest to explain and the most subtle sciences, containing secret answers.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and about this, many of the wise ones spoke, and agreed upon it.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and I will be content with few of my words, for I dread the lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cautery helps universally for every complexion where it has matter, regardless of the complexities.
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	This is to know: a hot complexion with regard to matter, and a dry complexion without regard to matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a hot and dry complexion, they combined matter, devised something, and said that cautery is great help.
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the other ones said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that cautery is not worth for illness that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated for hot illness with heat or dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and he who does the opposite of cauterization provides great aid for hot, dry disease that comes upon the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the heat of fire, you feel the body is warm.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in every case, no one should intervene unless they have tried it themselves, and who knows by long experience the chapter of cauterization, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of illness, and the outcomes and the passage of time.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	we have only fear from other complexions, especially for cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all agreed and came together for the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, son, that cautery combines fire in a way that is a secret of healing, and indeed it is a greater kindness than the fiery medicine cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not come from outside except to the member that is hot, and it does not harm any other member.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Burning medicines come from one part to another by removing, and bring to the limb diseases of great healing.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and perhaps the patient suffers.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	He does not hesitate because of his nobility and the goodness of his nature, unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this is what I have found by experience and through the length of my service and study in the art, and it was about the truth of things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and therefore I excuse the length of my speech, for I do not like to deprive you of the secret that is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives diseases from the body, as the philosopher demonstrates.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	or consider it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know this, my son, that there is agreement among them as to when cauterization should be performed and the prayers recited.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harmful pain is removed with the help of gentle cauterization.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and especially when cauterization is for necessary and urgent pain, so that no greater evil comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think, dear child, as they do wrongfully;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the illness that is healed by cautery does not relapse;
et il le dient ensi;	and thus it should be done;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not always as they should care for it, because cautery is only a medicine that changes the complexion and dries up the humors that cause pain; it is a powerful remedy for quick healing, and its virtue lies in its effect and mastery.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible for the illness to come according to the constitution of the patient and the nature of the disease and its virtue.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and they are assembled within him as excesses through the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless cautery is administered to him where there is little excess and moisture, just as cautery for stones due to pain and similar conditions, and this pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	but this rarely happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand at all why cautery is called the last resort of medicine, and it is indeed true.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cautery is worth anything after medicine; their intentions are false, and cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer remedies in any disease and they do not work, then let us use cautery, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it becomes clear that cautery is indeed the last resort of medicine, not at all according to the understanding of learned fools.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that gold cautery instruments are more effective than iron ones, and they only spoke of fire for the quality of gold and for the high value of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the gold in cautery instruments does not rust, but this is not true because I have tried it, and I have found that it does indeed rust in no men.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and fire cautery is more valuable than metal, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	But even when you heat gold instruments, you are not sure if they are hot enough by the color of the gold, and they may cool down before you know it.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if it is heated too much;
si font au feu;	it turns black from the fire.
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus it is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use fire cautery as we have equipped it with our tools for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now we have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, so that the way may be lighter to follow.
dou cautere olivaire	olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Fire cautery is useful for moisture and cold on the head, and it helps with conditions caused by a disease called "soda," and by many humors that flow from the head to the ears, and due to numerous dreams and toothaches and throat pain, and especially with all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is such that the patient is purged by a solvent medicine cleansing the third or fourth harmful substance, according to the virtue and age and habituation of the patient's illness.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make the patient's head clean.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	and then make the patient lie down with their head between your hands, and place their hands on some weight.
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	after, place the root of your palm on the root of their nose between their two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and when your two hands come together, if blood drips from the wound, heat the cautery called "olive" with which this form is made:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	and place the sign of ink on the joint, and then slowly and gently lower and pull your hand, disrupting it.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then gently release your hand, and stabilize the joint when you see the bone begin to move slightly.
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you can see the bone, as I told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	After taking a little silk thread, wrap it around and make it soft cotton, and place it on the dislocation, and leave it for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	After that, place the moistened cotton on it.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave it until the inflammation subsides.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, dress the wound with "tetrafarmace" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And they said to each other, as long as the wound remains open, more pus is discharged.
et por ce si aide mues.	and for this reason, aid is sought.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one must not leave the cautery for so long that the bone itself is burned; then remove the burned part from the bone, and it will be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And he tells the other that one must let the cautery remain in place for as long as it takes, and push so hard that they make a gap in the bone just as wide as the turn of a woman's wrist to allow the humors to escape.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and the wound must remain open for a long time.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	After the wound, one must cure and dress it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cautery do not seem to be good in all cases, except for those who have no other choice.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I should leave this.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	because the tissues are weakened by continuous washing with liquid of a certain nature, as we testify in other members.
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and also when the joint of the patient is weak by nature, and the initial appearance of cautery is safer and more mobile for me, from this I proceed to perform with safety.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When chronic pain persists for a prolonged period, the patient should use herbs and pills known as "coughing" remedies, as well as enemas and applications of oil and plasters.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one performs the cautery as we have previously mentioned, it will not be effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care if the patient's shoulder is of a strong nature and not too frozen.
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then cauterize deeply, as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After that, cauterize each corner of the shoulder bone, as we have said before, and also cauterize the part called "vasselz".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and hold the eyes, which are used for applying suction.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and take your hand so that you do not see anything just to the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patients suffer much greater pain from this cautery than from others, and I will speak of that later;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is necessary that the cauterization of the horns be more subtle than that of the middle part of the head, and this is its form:
dou cautere dou chief	For fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When there is sudden severe pain in a part of the head, and the disease spreads to the oil, and the symptoms are purged with purgative medicines, and other treatments have been tried as described in the classification of diseases, and none of these help:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Then he performs cauterization according to two manners, that is to say, with hot medicines and by fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	If he cauterizes with hot medicines, it is when you press a sore on the skin and remove the crust and flesh in small pieces, then makes an incision where the pain resides in such a way that you can push back the sore from under the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it is pushed back, if he holds the limb still and tightens it well, and leaves it thus for twelve hours.
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	and then dislodge and treat it further with garlic, and leave the wound thus for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then place cotton soaked in butter over it until the pus ceases.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the dressing, as long as it is healthy;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see that it is not suitable for any of the burning remedies I have written about or the dosage for treating them,
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the fire cautery with this tool:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a shell or hat with a slight curvature, and it has a small appearance.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it on the painful joint, hold your hand and gently twist it a little, until half of the intensity of the pain is gone.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and relax your hand so that the artery does not feel pain, which is numb, and allows blood to flow abundantly.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After applying cotton in the form of thread, place it on the joint for three days.
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then I apply moist cotton soaked in butter, and then cure the wound with a bandage until it is healed;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare" (a kind of instrument), be sure to not block the artery in this migraine which is not very old.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a migraine as we have previously explained in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cautery mentioned in medicine is not enough, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and thus he should mark the affected area with a line half as long as a finger, and once his hand is steady, pull it away so as not to injure the artery or reach down to the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and guard the jaw that moves when chewing, so that the nerves pay no heed to the movement or spasm does not come upon the patient, and beware of the blood flow from the artery when it is cut, for cutting it causes great fear, especially to those who do not know or are untrained and inexperienced.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and leave the wound half-healed;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to retain blood when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it hardens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cautery is not enough to heal the disease, and the patient suffers, cauterize the opposite side as well as we have said, and treat the wound until it is clean.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see, apply the cautery that we have said in this chapter for the extraction of an artery, with the cautery having two blades.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this fire cautery is one of the best remedies for him and most helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	about the pain of the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold, and various solutions and treatments as we have mentioned in the previous section have been applied, but the pain persists, use this cautery called "point," which has the following shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After marking the entire painful area around the ear or both ears where the pain persists, move a little away from the top of the ear and mark the place where you have identified the joint.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and make X marks around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treating the joint, make it healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	regarding the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	The torture that must be cured by cautery is limited to those affecting fluid movement, as we have explained in the sections on illness.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not perform cautery on conditions that arise from dryness and nerve pain.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you cure this condition of fluid movement from dryness and purging from the head and gargling, it is not effective. Therefore, you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, another slightly above the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and place the cautery on the part that opens to the healthy space, and make it cauterize at the top of the ear, a little below the curve at the top, and another one in the temple just as far;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the cautery on until half of the heart is burned;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	and it resembles the scalpel we have described before, but it is a little more subtle, and it is necessary that the knife be slightly thicker.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, reset it as I have said before, as long as it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, but the patient does not benefit, and has no fever, then make four cauterizations.
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	On the two horns of the head, take the head itself, and emit (or release) the limb called "vessel" as we have said before, and do no cauterization on the mouth of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and so it is cured as we have said above.
de litargie	The term "de litargie" seems to be a
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large doses of medicine to purify his mind.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	after warming the head of the patient thoroughly, place the mustard plaster on the occiput as described in the treatise on plasters.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the method of cauterization:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if you do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is healthy in this way, it is good.
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if he is not, apply three cauterizations with hot iron to the entire head down to the collarbone, and leave a significant space between each cauterization, two of which should be as large as possible.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and treat it as you would other wounds, and if you notice any infection, and the patient is suffering, apply a cauterization in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if necessary, apply two others on the two horns, and treat it until it is healthy.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cautery be called "olive", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from cold at the top
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be purified with earth and water as we have said before.
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after cleansing the head of the patient, then apply the cautery to the head and each horn, behind, and thirdly on the spine of the neck.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you need more skill, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly and the illness is severe, then apply four cauterizations on the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and let it grow until the most tender point is healed, and gently apply your hand.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the cure while it is healed, and perform the cauterization known as "olive" which we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	From epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to purify the brain with years and other remedies that we have discussed in the section on great suffering from long-term medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot bear it, give them gargles and chewing, often cleansing the brain with good meats;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	after the king has made his head steady in the middle, and he performs the cauterization according to what we have said before, and cauterizes the vein, and on each horn.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is far and suffers, he should have cautery as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the skin, on the spine of the back and neck, and have cautery with olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is sick, make them undergo cautery gently according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When, due to melancholy, there are excessive or corrupt moisture and thick flux, then use cautery on parts as we have said for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if, due to melancholy, the excesses are declining towards melancholy and the body of the patient is moist with sorrow, then give them something to drink that cleanses the mind as it has been previously discussed in the section on division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After removing the head of the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after making the tortile (or bandage) well-placed, both circular and put it on the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the patient should be crossed and held well from all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	After applying this remedy, take some butter from an old goat;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and heat it gently over fire so that the patient can bear it;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after evacuating the circle inside the joint, and leaving it to cool down;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this to the patient once each week with another good remedy, as long as they are healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you must cauterize it, make many points at the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cautery moistens the flesh increasingly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then place a moist cloth soaked in butter and gelatine on it.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes come first through the signs I mentioned in the previous section, then begin and give to the patient something to drink, a purifying medicine for the head, and guard against all moisture, and make him sweat or take a bath while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After that, he commands the patient to rest their head, and applies heat cautery to the head, and makes two cauterizations on both temples if the downward movement of the eye is in two parts, or in one if it's in one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and cut across all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, making the cautery long according to the width of the temple.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and guard against the discharge of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it by applying pressure as you have been taught.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you, during the extraction of arteries and cauterization of incisions, how to stop it.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and under no circumstances should one cauterize or burn the skin between the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	two parts of the eye
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and habitual and are on the veins, cut the arteries that appear most prominently outward.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and we see that it is cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then do the cautery that I have said at the beginning of this chapter, descending the ones:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cauterize the head, and I cauterize on both temples, and I cauterize where the collarbone joins the two bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if it requires more, cauterize gently over the eyebrow with all the small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Let the body weep through the eyes.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you medicate according to what we have said in the previous discussion, but it does not benefit the patient, then give the sick person three bitter drugs.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After the king, take the chief (of the shoulder) and apply the fire cautery with olive oil as a medium.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make the cautery called "clavilis" on the joints, slightly pulling the hairs.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and guard the artery so that you do not block it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	This is the form of cautery called 'clavilis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil becomes softened by disease and moisture, then apply this cautery which is called "olive.
de coi ci est li forme:	Due to which the form is:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see that making cauteries on the joints makes them as long as the bones,
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not let go of the instrument until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hairs that prevent the oil from entering
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Never does it happen that the hairs of the skin are turned to a different color, and they prick the patient, and cauterization is performed in two ways.
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	that is to say, with fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	The fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even.
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in your care;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	after signing on the paper with a symbol as powerful as the flame, and it is like the beginning of the sign among the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then put moist cotton soaked in egg white and musk from the pistachio on the oil, then heat the cautery with which this shape is formed:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing on the affected area several times, burn the surrounding skin;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of the success of the treatment are that you see the skin retreating, and the hairs standing on end at the tip of the oil.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then hold your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then put moistened cotton in butter until the burning is gone.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of healing as long as it is clean.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And after that come the hairs, and the paper is moistened, then begin the cauterization on the same place again, just as you did first.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs are singed, cauterize while the paper is raised to its natural state and even, and do not let the oils from the hair prick the skin.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The medicinal burning cauterization is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and fresh charcoal, each one ounce, and grind them together well;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and apply it gently if it does not cool down, then spread over the shape you have made as if from a mold, and place some paper on top of it.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the disease persists only in one place, then surgery should be performed there, and also both places.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and place some moist cotton wool underneath.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and the joint of the patient should be in your healthy hand, and place your finger over the joint, pressing it gently every time the patient feels a stinging from the medicine, for it also stings like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your body.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And once the stinging has passed, if the limb is raised above the heart, and you see the paper lifting as if it were lifted by constriction of fire or by incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If no, then apply more medicine to the limb or the medicine has not opened up completely, as long as your work is even and your joints are well-set.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place a damp cotton cloth over the wounded area until the heat has subsided, after which treat the joint with the dressing known as 'dyafenis' and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have to take care of yourself, be very careful with your work so that it does not seek out the medicine by itself.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft after and the hairs prick in the oil, repeat the treatment on that joint which has been softened with the paper, just as you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment, until it is healed;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the form of the wound with much pain;
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that the bones of men are diverse in size, both large and small, according to your constraints.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and do not deviate from the right path for he who has the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have discussed regarding diseases, and your treatments do not benefit the patient, then it is necessary to perform cautery on them in this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to place his head on your healthy side.
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and place the patient's head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, and do not let go of his head.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	after moistening a cloth with vinegar or juice of parsley on oil;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	after heating the cautery instrument that is suitable:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it should be shaped like the head of a quill, assembling the edge to be the cautery.
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see that it is pointed from one end to the other, and if you see that it is also like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	But nevertheless, this that is dry deserves to be moved for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the fistula, it should be opened, and then drain the pus, and dry it.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it closes again after opening, pull strongly on the bow.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	after applying hot cautery, place your hand on the heated part with the oil, ensuring your hand does not move erratically.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and apply the cautery to the fat of the oil, and the corruption.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you begin the cautery near the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If this does not work, apply the cautery again, and if you need to, do it a third time, and leave it for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	after applying a moist cloth dipped in butter, and treating the dry dressing until it is healed, and if forty days pass without healing, then apply an ague-corrosive medicine while the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and the treatment according to what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a kind of cautery for a fistula that no one of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Grasp the fistula firmly, and fix the place;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	after that, place a subtle pressure on it so that this is the shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and it forms the quantity of a drop.
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand firm, so that the patient does not move, and let the drop fall into its place.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to place on the patient a moist cotton ball in order to help them rest.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	He plunges deeply into the wound from which the abscess flows, and the health returns through the marvelous strength of medicine.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the ulcer is clean through the cautery we have mentioned, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If this is not the case, then it is necessary to administer ice or cold water, and return the ulcer to the body within the cold, according to what is appropriate for its place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks appear in the lips, which are called "poil," especially on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds as we have discussed in detail, and the treatment does not benefit, then use a small cauterizing instrument according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	and places the medicine in those wounds until it reaches the root.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing, reset the joint until it is whole.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the mouth
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess forms at the root of the tongue or jaw, or in the uvula, or in the palate, or at the roots of teeth, after putrefaction and rot, it becomes inflamed and turns into a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said before, but it does not improve.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then it is necessary that you apply cautery according to the quantity of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the opening or perforation of the fistula, hold your hand until the heat reaches the bottom and there is no more bleeding.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do so once or twice after the treatment that we have mentioned in treatments, as long as it is healed;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is treated thus, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if that does not help, you must then discover the place and remove the corrupt bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	no movement of the joints
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and treatment with medicine is ineffective, then place the sick person's head in a healthy place.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after applying the heat for the cautery, watch for the formation of blisters, in this way that you place a bandage over the tooth.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and place the hot cautery over the patient's wound, holding your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	after releasing your hand, and recommencing the cautery according to your will;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	after filling the patient's mouth with salt water, leave it for an hour and rinse with hot water.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this same manner, the tooth that was moving becomes confirmed, the gums are softened and restrained, and the moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	about the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is frost or chill, and the remedies of medicine are ineffective, then it needs cautery according to these two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and with butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	The butter cautery is such that you press the butter into a hot steel or copper spoon.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	after taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a stick, soak it in melted butter, and apply it gently to the painful tooth until it cools.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and thus do this often until the virtue of the butter reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see that the moist cloth and cotton are too hard to work with, apply the hot iron to the painful tooth until the heat eases the toothache.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	He should perform the fire cautery by applying it so that he pricks with an iron or bronze needle, making it thick enough for the flame not to reach the patient's mouth.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, from which the shape will form, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, as the pain will be just as intense on the following day or even more so.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is important that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the rush of that cautery and then sucks on a hot brick.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	and perform cautery on the part of the body that you wish, according to your ability;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the form of the cautery instrument:
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrofula (a type of swelling) is filled with cold moisture and unresponsive to medication, then apply heat to the cautery instrument afterwards, creating an opening for the steam to escape from the cautery onto the other part.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and then apply hot cautery to the abscess once, as is necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small due to applying cautery according to its quantity, leave it thus for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and apply a moist cloth with butter until the burn is healed.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing, remove the bandages and tents as soon as it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture conquers the channels of the body, especially when it arises from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first relieved by solvent medications.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After the fire cautery at the root of the throat, be careful not to go near the throat, and do not drink anything hot but a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After that, perform another cautery at the joint of the collarbone and spine, and be it the cauterization known as 'clavicle' from which we have the form before.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal the joint as we have said before, as long as it is healthy.
de la toust	from the heat
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and every illness of the promon (possibly referring to the pronate or palm of the hand) is due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or stiffness, and it is an old illness, then make .II cauteries (two types of treatments) on their will;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cautery, cut between the two mammals (possibly referring to the breast or chest area);
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and this cautery, which is called "clavile" according to the shape as said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, perform cautery by pricking all the cautery points called "points" from which the form of the ear disease is as it is before;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and the points should be up to 30, or as deep as necessary.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment, reset it according to what is said above, and make the cauterization in three parts according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the cautery is lighter, because you do it three times in turn.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	On the dislocation of the shoulder.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterwards, remember the patients on their backs and sides;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	after that, open the passageway inside the swelling with your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated within, then apply the heat of the fire gently so that it takes on the right shape:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the wound gently until it feels firm to the touch, and let the shape of the cautery guide you in making four cauterizations.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this reason, the cautery is made with a tool having three prongs, so that the shape of the cauterization consists of six cauterizations.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerves vary according to the sensitivity of each person, and this is the shape of the cautery with three prongs:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never should it be adjusted on this nerve, for there are eight burns.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After placing the fire cautery, apply crushed herbs with a cloth;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After resting the patient, do not move the limbs for a long time until they are completely healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated from above, such a thing happens poorly, then make a fire cautery on the thick skin with a cautery claw or many cauteries with sharp points.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed, and health returns to the patient.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach while it is being stretched from its natural state, catarrh multiplies within it, and conventional treatment methods do not help, then the patient should be careful on his back, extending his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	Then, make three cauterizations removing the skin with a knife, each about as thick as a finger, claving the cautery entirely through, and two more cauterizations on either side so that the appearance of the cauteries forms three angles, with enough space between them so they are not joined together when they become gangrenous.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and instruct them to perform the cautery so that they mark both parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauter be according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	and if you undergo cauterization with a great cautery on the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and whoever has fear of this cautery, perform the cauterization by pricking and signing on the stomach in a dot according to the quantity that you see fit;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize it completely at the cautery called "dot".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment we have previously discussed, as long as it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	As for the liver, it experiences pain from fresh and moist heat, and a great accumulation of phlegm, as long as it is severely deprived of its natural condition due to excesses.
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is treated with what we have mentioned in parts, but it does not help, and it is necessary that the patient be mindful of their head.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and the sign of three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, removing the hypochondria, where the pains of the human body originate.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and say there should be enough space between each cautery, the thickness of a finger.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and the cautery should be long throughout the body, and do not press too much with your hand on any part of the cautery.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and burn only the middle part of the heart, and the patient should be upright on their feet.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, lying down, extend his legs, and ease his breathing.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish to cauterize these wounds with a knife, being skilled and wise in the art, be careful not to burn all the heart, for you would cause severe damage throughout the body.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and that it does not come to a boil, for the heart is very delicate at this place, and the wise ones know it.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you need to know if it is within the flesh of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If he is on the bed, he feels the patient pain not too severe.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if he is in the bandage, he feels severe pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment requires the patient to look around, it is necessary that the patient keeps their head still.
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then seal the wound where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a ring, from which comes this form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize with fire until the colors are burned, and come just to the point of syphilis, while the putrefaction is entirely gone.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment, according to the treatment of effusions until it is healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is not advisable to use this cauterization unless by one who has studied deeply the art of medicine and whose hands have never failed in treating these illnesses.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can safely operate, but I still think it is better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Fire cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should make cauterizations with tears from roots of aristologe, and in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a long root of aristologe (a type of plant), the largest you can find, and ensure it is dry, as well as equally thick and long as your arm.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and moisten it in oil, and hold it over the fire, and cauterize (the area) between the shoulder blade and the collarbone, and make smaller cauterizations slightly descending in the part that is under the beard.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and also cauterize between the fifth rib and the sixth, slightly declining behind.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and I use cautery on the worst part, and another on the stomach, and between the shoulders, and along both sides of the pain, remove the cautery that is between the shoulders.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press my hand, but open it firmly as if smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And they say that no ancient person should use the fire cautery like a razor, burning it and placing it between the ribs, as it reaches this abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and suddenly the pain arises, as we have said about the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this case, there is great fear among the patients, and many die now, or a fistula appears that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said about the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit, then they attach three ways of cautery that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Dislocate it in such a way that you make three cauterizations, or four, along the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the cautery of the fire that we have mentioned above.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand firmly on the entire cauterization, and let the patient be careful on their back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another method of cauterization is to heat the cautery tool with two nails, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and hold the heart which is located in the mouse, or the pains come from the left side, and make the elevation according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After that, burn the two edges until the heart is pierced on the other side, and then treat the cautery fiercely, and so there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see that the cautery is completely burned at three edges.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After treatment when the pus has drained for a long time, this is more effective than any of the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	Of hydropsis
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not effective against hydrops, except in the manner known as "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat it according to the methods we have described in detail, and your treatment does not benefit the patient, then you must perform four cauterizations around the wound, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the heart, two behind the back over the spine, and one on the anus.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and the cauterizations should be close to the area of pain.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After leaving the cauterization open for a long time to allow pus to drain, do not leave the patient's treatment after cauterization.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing would be hastened, and the two parts would be joined together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the cautery for the belly should be the needle that we have shown before.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is placed before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the stones
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in the hydroptic patient and are filled with yellowish pus, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and hold your hand with the cautery without pain returning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not press too deeply, so as to close the natural opening; thus the heat from the fire will penetrate the flesh according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After that, make two cauterizations on each leg with the tip of the cutting knife;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cauterization be long, one on the inside of the knee joint and the other on the outside of the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauterizations healing for a long time without touching them, so they heal well;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After the treatment of the other treatments we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the wound
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When abdominal pain arises from cold and moisture, and the retaining and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, it cannot be cured by any means.
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient in great distress with strong pain, so make a severe cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken about before, or cautery of the stomach, at the cautery of the circuit.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and I cauterize around the anus gently at every cautery, and carefully tie off the threads, and II cauterize on the thighs.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a burn on the finger, and a burn on every part, and small burns on the gentle stomach, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	**On the Treatment of Hemorrhoids**
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When hemorrhoids are either internal or external, and they have been present for a long time, consisting of corrupt cold and moist humors, their treatment is as we have said in detail, but cauterization does not help.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	On the spine of the back, that which is entirely soaked with blood, gradually and in a triangular manner, and one should cauterize from below the wound, two fingers deep.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swelling on the face, then one should great cauterize the stomach as it has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on every part with a hot iron.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the fire cautery grow long.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, reset the shoulder as long as it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	from the fleshiness called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you have finished all else, if the cautery seems too sharp, then take a hot iron and apply it thoroughly to that part.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and hold it there until the cautery reaches the vein, from which the blood flows.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there is much heat, cauterize each as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the treatment of wounds until they are healed;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the scalp, it will bring greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	From the poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or incising, which we will describe in its place, such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When no vein becomes fistulated, and there is swelling, putrefaction, and corrupt moisture, you must try all sorts of subtle remedies, and be sure to know at every stage how effective they are.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the cautery to a sharp point, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that has entered, and repeat the cauterization once or twice, or even three times, depending on the quantity required;
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and beware of burning the sensitive nerves and great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	It goes to the core of the bladder and intestines, so be careful with these joints, and do not make fire wounds except on fleshy parts, and know that it is not always permanent.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After treatment, keep the joint as healthy as possible, and if the joints are successfully healed and the materials removed for a long time, then know that the joint is completely healthy.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the materials are not removed, know that the joint is weak and the bone is corrupted at its base.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus, as one of these things we will tell in its place.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When the pain of a fracture comes with heavy bleeding and does not allow a woman to bear it, then you should perform cauterization on the wound from both sides, using the cautery claw that we have previously mentioned.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and we should cauterize it in the middle, if there are three cauterizations in a row, and this will bring greater help.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak due to pain and moisture, preventing the patient from urinating, then perform cauterization on the outside part of the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow, both on the right and left side, making each cauterization about as long as a finger.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and he makes a fire cautery on the back, where it is needed;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and he applies the cautery as described above.
de la marris	Of the pain
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the weather is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are ruined and their ends are delayed.
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, they cause great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the anus, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two fire cauterizations on the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and so the cautery should be done, as we have said.
de la hainche	de la hainche" translates to "of the spine
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When viscous moisture descends into the chest cavity and for this reason it becomes silent in its place, and the signs are that the affected leg appears longer than the other when measured together.
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and it is found that the vulnerable parts are in the lower region, so it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the chest cavity with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark around the lung with a sign as it returns, so that the chest remains within the circle.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if they are cauterized like those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	If this cauterization is not present, perform three cauterizations with hot olive oil, and make sure the cauterization is just as effective as all the others.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal it as long as it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the back (or "hainche" as written)
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain arises in the chest due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured using methods we have described in detail, but the treatment is ineffective, and the illness persists, it is ancient.
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	So it is necessary for you to cleanse the patient of bad humours from foul or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	Afterwards, he performs cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the method of cautery is according to two manners:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	that is to say, the use of burning medicines and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery is according to many manners, some of which are as follows:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	That you cauterize the wound of the spine with three triangular cauterizations according to this form, making them deep and wide, and there should be between each cauterization a distance as thick as two fingers, and they shall be olive-shaped.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Cauterization should never be done in the middle of the spine's top, for that reason there are three according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see that the cauterization affects the circle we have mentioned in the dislocation of the spine,
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but make it in such a way that the circle contains all the hair, and every part of the heart is burnt.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the method used in sciatica when the pain is confined to the spine and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it extends to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations on the side where the patient feels the most pain, and one cauterization above the ankle on the left side slightly.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and it should be a cutting cauterization, burning the thickness of the heart.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels that the pain extends to both feet or near the anus, cauterize there where he feels the pain three times or four, with a cautery called "point.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if it happens again, do more;
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is intense in the knee down to the thigh, perform a cauterization with a sharp or circular instrument, and be very careful in all your cauterizations that you do not leave them too long so as not to burn the skin and large arteries, and do not cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have applied cauterization to the ankle of the foot, and left it until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it became pierced and corrupted throughout the entire foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal solution, he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, apply cautery to one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise ones say about the cauterization of the spine: this is how it should be done, take a piece of iron that is as thick as a small dagger or slightly thinner, and make incisions through it, either interlaced or alternating from one side to the other, with an interval equal to the size of a thumb.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and intertwine them over the two parts, and they should also be like new, and have a good iron made of it.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	and heat it until it is entirely red and emits steam, then place it on the sore hip of the patient, and turn to the healthy side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and apply the cautery once the heat is gone, and leave it for three days.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then apply an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of the ointment as long as it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albuscasim says that we use this cautery little because of the fear of its reputation, and we see few who use it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and nevertheless, these are good cauterizations, which the patient can endure, and the place where it is appropriate.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	He uses the cautery of burning medicine if you make a tool to interweave with which you lower the edge of the door, and it is made of iron or steel on a long wall, and at the top it has two parts, and between each part there is the quantity of thickness of a finger.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and they should be open above and below, and join together according to this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After that, place the board of the harness on the sick person lying on their side, and quickly put your hand over the board of the harness.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After pouring between the two circles of hot awes (ash or charred material) heated over fire, leave it for an hour while the patient endures the heat and burn.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	Because it has the same effect as fire.
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the blisters have passed, take a clean hand with the instrument and raise the bandage of soft ash, leaving it for three days, and apply butter until the blackening from the burn is removed.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and leave it for three days as the purification takes effect.
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this is the rear support after the treatment of wounds until they are healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, use the instrument that heals according to what you have done in increasing the hip.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the method of hot water, which I have written about in treating rectal medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and live chalk, in equal amounts from each, and grind them together, and put them into a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	or if it has a small opening, slightly larger than the tip of a razor, so that it can be entered.
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and place this over the affected area, well-packed, and put it on an alkali and hot compress, gently pressing until there are two layers of powder above it in your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and leave it thus until the heat and moisture have completely dissipated, or as much as it can be packed, then take all that heat and pour it into hot water on an alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And thus, it will be very beneficial and useful in many medical emergencies and other cauterization of different members.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it performs the same action as fire, and if combined with other medications such as heat, poultices, honey, anacardium, and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Gallien tells us of a cure for a noble who suffered from the pain of sciatica and stiffness in the back, and he said that no other remedy was used, and that the patient was completely healed just once when this treatment was applied, and he recommended bathing as follows...
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And prepare it in this manner: you press and grind the fresh and dry galen (a medicinal substance) with a little fat, and apply it to the pained area on the shoulder, thigh, or leg, and bind it.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and leave it for three hours, or until the patient no longer feels the burn.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him take a bath or a drink as long as the body is slightly warm, and make him lie down, and the pain will entirely disappear and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery with such remedies, unless after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's fur, it helps greatly.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and the cautery must be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lint and grease it with old oil, and apply it to the fossa between the big toe and the one called the hallux.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking dry goat's fur, ignite it with fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the wool, leaving it until it is stained.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and do this again, and do not cease doing so until you think by sense that it reaches the hamstring and the pain ceases.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and these kinds of cauterization are called "fire cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	Of the great pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When great pain comes to the back, whether from striking or pressure, or from excessive evacuation, or from some similar cold, expanding substance, none of these signs warrants cautery, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary that after the patient is relieved of putrid pills or other similar substances, that one makes three signs on their back, neck, or wherever the pain persists, with five cauterizations or more, according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and the cauterizations should be made according to the cautery called "point".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, make three or four cauterizations at the middle of the bone according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This illness often comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight and painful almond-shaped eye when they open it, and sorrow.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you feel in the last, lower back spine and in its appearance that comes upon the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and observe it healing, cauterize it with the cautery iron according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	The cautery should mark each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the spine with the cautery iron, making two or three lines, and let the points be close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treatment, keep the limb as healthy as possible according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply heat to numb any nerve pain.
de la dolor des jointes	joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When the joint pain is caused by moisture that spreads to each part of the body, and when a sharp pain comes on, they call it "podagra" properly speaking; and when it is due to cold and cannot be cured by medicine, then cautery is the cure in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make the wound of cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary to prick on the face with a needle, make the cauterization all around with a claim of "no point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then he should cauterize each knee with three cauteries or four from each part, making every cautery olive-shaped.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	and if you need to do more, do so, but do not hold your hand too tightly until the depth of the heart is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, apply the cautery as we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wound with two lines.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there is no pain in the joints, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part and give good care to the patient and take medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give good care and purge the flu, it will be healed by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	From the rupture of the sinew.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a rupture occurs in the thigh and the tendons descend to the knees, it is new, so it is important that when you see this, he does not move that leg for the day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that he uses things which ease the stomach, so that the bowels descend from his stomach.
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after making him lie on his back between your hands, and commanding him to keep his breath until the boils are healed, arrange them at your will, and seal each rupture on the bone of the wrist, and mark it in every place with a sign resembling half a circle above the body.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then heat the cautery with which there is this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and exudes scent.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the bones to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the healers should place their hands upon it so that they do not return to the previous state.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and open well the thighs of the patient, and place beneath him cushions and supports on the thighs, and others upon the feet which hold his hands.
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then place the cautery upon the sign across your entire hand, and hold it straight and firm until you reach the bone, and if you do not touch the bone the first time, repeat this another time until you do.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and guard carefully that the boil does not burst when you perform the cautery.
que tu ne le brulasses;	so that you do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that the patient does not die or suffer other ill effects.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and for adults also as large according to their measure.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days, cure the vein with butter until the burn is healed.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	After treating other wounds until they are healed, place the patient on his back for forty days while ensuring the wound is well sealed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary that his movements be restricted for a long time, so that the boils do not appear when he moves around in bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, apply a well-made bandage and wear it for another forty days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and have good rest, work little, and guard against excessive drinking and eating, and from too much loud noise.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he gives this instruction, he does so entirely sanely.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will now describe the treatment for cutting in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When ruptures occur in other organs and are recognized, and you see that they do not grow any more, it is necessary to perform cauterization with cautery according to its quantity, and burn one-third of the wound.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the treatment according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and no of the ancients have said that one should cauterize with three-angled cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place of the hernia with a sign, and make a line across the width of the rupture; then another from above, and hold your hand steady over the entire area where the hot iron will be applied.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cautery is lighter and more manageable.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain arises in any member, whether from a fall or an injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the cure of medicine is ineffective, then it should be cauterized with the cautery known as "point," and the cautery must be applied according to the length of the member and its smallness, and its weakness, and its strength, and its twist, and its location, and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If he is healthy after the first cautery, that is good.
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If this does not help, start another cautery on the nearest limb, as it is usual for it to move and heal in that way; therefore, you must perform cauteries until the patient is healthy.
de meselerie	It appears that the term "de meselerie" is
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	These ailments are never helped by cautery alone, especially the illness that arises from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	Can you cauterize it? Be careful if the disease is in the beginning and treat it according to what we have said in the previous discussion, without delay or hesitation, and if you doubt that the corruption might spread throughout the patient, then perform cauterization on the head.
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I cut off the tip of the nose, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and then on the two horns, and behind on the scalp.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and I allow the fire to burn until it reaches the bone, and until the skin peels away so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and apply the cautery to the mouse according to what is before it.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the disorder is scattered everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it is evident that you need to apply these cauterizations that we have mentioned above, and cauterize the first one near the wound, and the second on the spine of the neck, and the sixth on the spine of the back, and the first on the thigh, and another delicate one, and the second on both shoulders.
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and the second on the sides, and the second on the tendons of the hand, and the first on each joint of the hands and feet, and in the pits of the hands.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and guard the nerves that are on the lower side, stepping on them, so you do not burn them.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never perform cauterization on the bones of the fingers, or any other bones, such as those of the stomach, or the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that the more cauterization is performed, the greater the aid, and the greater the benefit it brings.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	and know that the patient feels no pain from cauterization as a healthy person would, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be great or small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, apply flour of grains with honey and other remedies until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling appears in any member and is cured by medicines, oils, and bandages, but it does not heal completely, then one should perform cautery on the affected member according to its size and the severity of the condition.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and the cautery should be performed slightly inside the heart's chamber.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then attend to the wounds until they are healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And one should never perform cautery on the hand, foot, or back, at the end of the nerve that supplies the member, and thus if the swelling is removed.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and nevertheless, no one should interfere if they are not knowledgeable about the members and the passages of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	Of albaras (albaras could refer to a
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is ignited, and the medical arts are powerless against it, then cauterize with a hot iron, according to the extent of the pain, until the blanching is removed, and the color returns.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then apply a cure of meal and lentils with rose oil, plantain leaves, collicon (a herb) and alder bark, each in a portion.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and mix it with everything, tie it with a cloth, and keep it elevated until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of a ulcer (chancre) by cauterization.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a ulcer appears at the beginning, and you wish to stop it, cauterize it with the cautery that seems like a circle around the entire edge of the ulcer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	Yet wise ones say that cautery should also be done in the middle of the cancer.
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	However, this does not seem good to me, as I am afraid it might ulcerate and corrupt, and I have never seen it work before.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the more correct thing is that it should be cauterized around, in the cautery called "circle," as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	from the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When anyone has a disease called "adubelati," and it takes time to die, either because of the excess it produces or due to the old age of the patient when they are weak (i.e., too much), and there is little blood, or because of the time;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see it hasten to die:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then cauterize around it with small cauteries by pricking;
aprés le laisse ensi.	afterward leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	Because it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing through all the cauterization, make the cautery so hot that this is its shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the midst of this ill-named 'adubelati' disease until the cauterizer has perceived the heart, and it is arranged as the cauterizer wishes, so that the patient feels freed in such a way that the course of the decay is halted.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure, until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	Heal the fire with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another type of disease is called 'corrodens', which is nothing other than a corruption of the limbs, as it attacks the members just as fire does the dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in a limb that can be treated with fire cautery, then heat the cautery instruments slightly and greatly, according to what is suitable for the limb or the illness.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After cauterizing all parts until you eliminate all corruption, and nothing remains of it, everything that is corrupted must be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and apply oil to the cauterized limb suffering from broying until all the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds that cause pain.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if after three days you see no sign of healing, that is good.
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if that is not the case, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the limb that has been corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this dislocation is sometimes cured with hot medicines instead of fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	But nevertheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already spoken about the treatment with hot medicines in the previous section.
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	from the vessels that come as pieces
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that a piece due to deficiency develops a disease called "close" according to our intention, and it is a great fault that damages the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the treatment for this illness is according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This refers to fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	For fire cautery, if you are skilled in it, it is like sewing with a needle, also as thin as a feather, and made of good iron to fit the size so that it can pierce the skin from all sides and have subtle edges.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After applying all heat to the nail, and turning your hand around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and leave it like this for three days until it begins to fester;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then make a poultice of sage leaves ground with string, and leave the poultice on all night; the nail will come off and be pulled out from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the shoulder with a healing ointment, making it clean and sound.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are burned by fire and many times occur in hands and feet, then it is necessary to apply a hot water cautery to them.
et est en teil maniere:	and it is in this way:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take a cane of iron or wood, or a feather from a pigeon, and place the nail and the glue, that is to say, the wart-removing paste.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and place the cane around it so that it envelops everything, then apply a little hot ash, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while twisting until the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and can find the hot water channel all the way to the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and make the patient suffer a little the bite of hot water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it thus, and it will pull out at the roots entirely.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	First, make one after another, until you straighten all those that are in the body, then treat the wounds that cause harm.
li cure dou trembler	It cures the shivering.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When anyone shivers from cold or trembles with quartan fever or any other illness, it is necessary that you make four cauterizations or five along the spine, one cauterization between each spine;
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and make one cauterization on the foot, and another on the stomach with an olive cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	if he lets it shake, and hastens the health of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	from the pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never is the body's health apparent through external baths or pus-filled blisters, which come from deeply corrupt materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	it is necessary at first to know when they appear that we make cautery on each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a subtle cautery with hot charcoal, so that the point is taken to the fire, or with a long root of aristologus, or with lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And under no circumstances should cautery be performed at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow worse in front, but it breaks the excess from which they come, and heals;
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there occur great complications from the blood of an artery that is cut during a wound, or at the complete healing, or during cauterization of a member, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is a very serious matter to stink.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And nevertheless, if it happens to anyone, be quick to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly until the pain is completely relieved from beneath your finger, and no more blood flows.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then apply to the fire various olive oil cauterizing tools, both small and large, until they are entirely red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then take, according to the size of the wound and the location where the artery flows, either a large or small cauterizing tool, and place it on the vein where you hold your finger, keeping the cauterizing tool there until the blood stops flowing.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if a sudden leap occurs while you are lying with your arm over the vein, and the cauterization is complete, then quickly take another cautery from the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	and do not stop doing this one after another until the blood stops flowing.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and ensure no further harm comes to the patient.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and know that when there is no bleeding from the artery, one cannot properly feel it, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of the three ways we have mentioned.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by tightly wrapping it with thread, or by medications applied that have the power to stop blood flow.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and it becomes stiff and constricted.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers relief to a tight closure with cloths or places burning objects or similar things on it, will not be successful unless he does it carefully.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and they have no suitable medication, they should place their two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tightly compress it until blood stops flowing from the wound and the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often as it becomes very cold until the flesh is frozen and swollen and numb.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make inquiries about those who need cautery and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	We begin the second book of surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter all about the diseases for which it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicine, and we have explained the reasons, instruments, and forms of cautery.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have placed this chapter on the most common problems, and I will follow the same way in this chapter so that you may find what you seek more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, before we begin, it is necessary for you to know that this chapter involves greater risk and fear than the first one on cautery, and therefore requires more careful attention.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come for cure.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	if they come from those who have become so accustomed to their illness that they die gently due to the severity of their condition and the magnitude of their suffering.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and from these one must fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And of these there are those who give you their trust, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am tired.
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the illness is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	You should not agree to those who come to you with this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your greed, and do not act rashly but wisely regarding what is certain to you, and what you can safely take and let go of.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use divination and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health is restored.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you gain good reputation, glory, and lasting fame.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Most precious child, Our Lords give you good understanding and rectitude, and if you desire the holy inspiration from His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter for you, reflecting on chapters of surgery, according to the one that is before or at the end of the chapter on cautery, which I have devised from head to foot, so that you may find it easier to understand what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Dou chief plein d'aigue" translates to "a head full of blood
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and when the head is squeezed too tightly.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and never comes from a known cause, as we do not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and to all those that I have seen, death has come quickly.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and for this reason, it seems to me that I should abandon the work in part, regarding certain treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw children with their joints filled with water, and the head swelled each day until it could no longer be borne.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture was so great that it became death, and this moisture is gathered beneath the skin over the bone in the region of the heart and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and if the work is such that moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you must make a wide cut with your knife through the skull.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and it should be as long as the moisture runs.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and see here the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more severe, and the abscess larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the openings of the skull's crevices clearly, and there is a sharp, strong pain when you press your hand inside, and it does not return:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If you wish to cut into the head, make three incisions according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After making the incisions, close them with bandages and powders, and then apply wine and oil, leaving it for up to five days.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then open it, treat the wound with bandages and compresses, and further dislocate the head equally, allowing the patient to eat dry meat from a bag of moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another method of incision is to observe the size of the abscess and the collection of pus.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for never is she before;
aucune fois derrier;	not once behind;
aucune fois en destre;	never once on the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and never once on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Then cut open the abscess, and drain the pus, and make an opening according to your ability.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and be sure not to cover the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and draw out the blood flow with a smooth motion, so that the patient does not die from the sudden influx of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of the root
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a condition called "cataract" in one or both eyes, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the final remedy is cauterization by sealing the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is therefore necessary, when you see them cover their eyes, that the patient turns his head back.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after rubbing the affected area with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then carefully extract the patient's collar with all the cloth.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	then look at where the vein is located, and the joints on both sides are behind the ears, and they are properly repositioned.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	then mark the joints with signs, then cut one and both with a sharp spatula, reaching as far as the bone, and this should be done from the wide end upwards.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, remove the spatule beneath the artery and cut through the covering above, cutting as it should go through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, it bleeds continuously from above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	and if the artery does not open upon stimulation, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space with three fingers, then mark it with a sign and cut through to the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and that one should put the cautery over the blood if it is six parts deep, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	then examine the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if it remains on the bone with a hard lump, and no abscess forms, then strain the wound and bind it, and apply treatment until it is clean.
de emigrainne	from migraine headache
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine headache occurs, accompanied by catarrh, due to moisture in the eyes and sockets, and ancient fatigue and similar symptoms, it is treated with various medical cures, but often without success. Therefore, we drain the arteries of the eyes and apply cautery, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the method of extracting them is that the patient pulls out the hairs from his temples, and finds the artery that opens in the temple, as it opens well with its beating, and is hardly closed outside that no other men who are too weak can do.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is reduced, the patient should pull on the collar with some cloth, then rub the joint with a rough cloth and immerse it in hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spatula with its shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then scrape the skin lightly until you feel the artery, then hold it with pliers and remove all the threads that adhere to each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is thin, return it to the tip of the hook and cut off that part according to the number of joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it does not heal at all without pain.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And extract the blood from six vessels, up to three times.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you bind it in two places with a strong double thread of silk, to prevent any leakage before the wound heals, and to avoid further bleeding.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	then cut off the excess between the two threads at that very moment, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with a cutting cautery instrument up to the bone, as long as the chips are removed.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and this is the mother work, if the patient has fever and is of hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For cautery is helpful in ending moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	because it is of greater help with moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Or, for the extraction of arteries, it is appropriate to fill the wound with fine cotton and cover it with well-made bandages.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are unbound, take care with dry medicines that produce heat and bandages, until it is healed.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and without any delay of the artery as you do it, if you hurry to cover with cautery, or you use the fire of vitriol and press it in your hand so that the wound is cleansed;
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you do not have this at hand, place cold water on the wound until it is frozen, and then apply hot water until the wound is healed, and press it as needed.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and the more mobile and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery from both sides, but the cuts should be well spaced to retain their heat for longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they do not hold their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And it should have between the two knives a space of good size, and then when you have marked with a sign both sides, and put the hot iron onto until it reaches the bone, cut the vein in two places.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and be separated between the two sides, for this cautery is not firmly attached in every way.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears from the eyes flow into the veins that are on top of the head, and no benefit is gained from the medicines applied there, and you see the face of the patient turning red, and smell a foul odor emanating from his forehead as if from a wound.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and his face is warm and moist so that the hairs of the skin fall out, and the skin is dried, and scorched by the heat of tears, then there is need for this remedy.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called it the "old cure," and what you do for the patient who has this condition is to let the hairs on their forehead grow, then make three cuts on the forehead evenly according to its length.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and one of the cuts is also as deep as two others across the forehead, extending down to the nose, and the other two are made along the temples, above the skin, but be careful not to incise the arteries that are located on either side, above the skin.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and move your hand away from the continuity of the two jaws, and make each wound the quantity of three parts across the joints.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and take out a piece of sponge and cloth its edges to wipe the blood, then shape the sharp spatula with two parts from which this form is:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision that is made on the forehead, up to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape off all the skin that is between the two slits to the entire extent of the wound on the bone, then make another incision from this midpoint to the other second, and then extract the spatula forcefully.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you insert the instrument called "cultellaire" (a type of scalpel) into the first cut, it should be very sharp on one side and soft on the other; this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	and place the sharp side of the instrument towards the opposite edge (of the bone) and the soft side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the veins that descend from the neck to the ends, so that the incision is continuous until it opens the heart, and then make another narrow cut until it reaches the other extreme.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then extract the blood equally, and press the vein to express the blood taken.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then place a strip of wet cotton in each cut, and cover it with moistened cloth soaked in wine, oil, and linseed, and ensure that no abscesses form.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and apply a strong poultice of hot water, then administer the basic cure with rose oil and other remedies to heal wounds, as long as he is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	dou reume des eulz (in this context) translates to "until the
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When there is acute catarrh habitually, and you see the thin and small veins, weakening sight, and burnt papers;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair turns gray, and the head aches painfully, and the patient sneezes;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	So you know from these accidents that these matters and this cleansing come only from many veins, and the moving cure that is in it, so is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And instruct the patient to bend his forehead backward, then make a deep cut across the forehead, and another one quite wide.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin from the crack in the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone.
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move at the touch.
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood out with a sponge, and then separate the two edges of the crack and insert old cotton and wrap it with linen.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then place them on moist cloths soaked in wine and oil, and beware of hot pus.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until it begins to heal, then apply things that promote healing, which help in the process.
En teil maniere:	In the same manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	take two parts of rye flower and three parts of cologne, and make a paste.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and administer these remedies to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From ear trauma
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	Everything that matters to the ears is one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or seeds, or animals, or minerals from the earth or similar things as it were done;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seeds, such as beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or fluid things, as water and air, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	If anything, such as a stone or any other object that does not adjust to the ear or grow in the ear, is inserted into the ear, it should be removed and the ear exposed to sunlight.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see a stone, and it distills any little drop of purple oil or oil of cloves, then it is time for extraction.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and the cold causes sneezing, and it numbs the nostrils when sneezing occurs, and puts pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and stretches the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times, this treatment causes fever.
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come out, apply extraction with fine pincers, from which comes this form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	if it jumps out through the pincers, that is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if it does not, apply extraction with a fine, small-toothed instrument;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it still does not come out, make a hook with iron and twist the hook deeply into the ear canal or ear hole, and stuff soft wax around the hook so that the wind cannot enter through the hook;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then take him to a skilled surgeon, for many times it comes about as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come about in this way, then grasp it firmly with your hands and use any sharp instrument to do so, and place a bit of cotton around.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then press the lump against the stone or something else, and treat it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if none of the things we have said work, then quickly split the ear in such a way that the abscess hardens and stops moving.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the method of the cut is that you first dress the patient with the disease in the head, extract the blood according to its quality, then place the patient between your hands and return the ear to its place, and make a small cut at the base of the ear where the fat or tissue is attached.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and make the cut as thin as a moon, until you reach the bone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it gently with your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it while it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if there are grains that are embedded and they swell, then administer extraction.
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot be extracted, then administer the delicate scraping according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not attempt this if you think the grains are moist from earwax, as long as you have made many attempts.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract them with delicate tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case that something has entered the ear, have the patient use a gentle sneeze, and open the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie down on that same ear, or the water is inside.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps through the fire, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	if indeed you take many needles according to the length of your thumb, and hold them slightly warm over fire.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and then place the patient in a pit or hole on his side, and try from another direction, and strike with another stone on the stone that is inside the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and continue to strike one stone with another until the blood completely flows out, and thus it will completely come out.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see, take a thin strip, and insert one of the openings into the ear, and burn the other end over fire until the thinner strip is completely charred.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then make other preparations from different joints until the pain completely disappears, as we said before.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	When extracting a small creature, such as a tiny pest or similar thing, treat it as we described in the previous section.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is large and can be felt, extract it with tweezers.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and it is the easiest thing to remove, which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	During the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the section on dealing with distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If no worms open, using delicate pincers, and if they do not open, take the cane from which their shape is thus revealed.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be tight from below and wide from above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And insert the most delicate instrument into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then suction along the entire cane.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often until all the wounds are healed.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey in coming out, cut around the wound with a cotton thread as I have said before.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have tested in treating worm infections, and you will find them discussed under distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear using all these instruments, it will take the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And whether it is of silver or gold, make thin plates from small openings to distill above.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press the distillation down with a well-made silver instrument for this purpose, and if you see that it sticks, take a razor and wrap cotton around the tip carefully.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medications in the cauldron, and place the cauldron in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then put the razor completely into the cotton and press your tempered hand until the oil is distilled or slightly from the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and he feels the patient within, and let there be distillations from fire so that they are heated by the flame just as one distills in the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and ensure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From ear trauma
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born with any holes in their ears.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and the same thing happens to adults due to a wound or a foreign object in the ear, and this blockage never completely blocks the ear unless one can see it.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and never does there come a time when the wound is too deep, and the sight is good.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	When, therefore, it comes to perfection, if one cannot see it, it is a great misfortune for the patient, and requires various remedies. And in this case, you must put the ear of the patient towards the sun.
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the swelling is evident, and the work has all these contours, then this is the shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And make incisions and cuts all around, both front and back, so that the ear is not damaged.
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the operation is from within or at the base of the ear, and you have fine tweezers, hold it gently and pull it slightly until the whole pin is extracted.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	If the infection is completely within the ear, take a fine, sharp razor, heat it slightly over fire, and insert it into the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the operation causing great pain in the ear, make a slight incision and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then place in the ear a piece of cloth according to the width of the opening, and dampen it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Make no movement until the wound is healed, or take a cloth and soak it in rosewater, and sprinkle it with powder made from crushed vitriol.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary that you dry the cloth and use another moistened cloth made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it as long as it is clean.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other treatments to stop the bleeding, which include using distillation remedies.
de la char des papieres	concerning the use of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	Consider all those that come in papers when they are moist and dry, it is necessary that you extend them with tweezers and pincers, and cut off a piece of its root with a spatula.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then place a hot glass (or 'vitriole' in Old French) on it.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if, after removing the skin, you cauterize with a delicate lenticular heat, and the cauterizer moves after incision;
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and often they heal, but nothing stays rooted in its place;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized with fire, their roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	(without context it's difficult to provide an accurate translation, but based
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times come to paper some things that seem gravely in their form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hail," and it is a gathering of great moisture on the paper above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	The work is as follows:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	take care that the hail is silent on both sides, and this is a light thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	then make the cut deep, then peel gently from each part, then take them with pincers and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	if you cannot cover it without piercing the paper slightly, then it will not harm the patient.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if the fracture is large, and the assembly has a seam, treat it until it is healed.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, do not apply too much strength, because the bruises will quickly restore themselves and cause pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the pain radiates downwards inside the ear towards the top, turn the paper in that direction, and use pliers to hold the ice, cutting and pressing on both sides.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is separated by the incision, it causes no harm.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the pain is severe, leave the oil of salt water, and heal the wound of the one who suffers until the patient is well.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Xerophthalmia is a fat that is deposited on the surfaces of papers, and this happens more often in children than in adults, causing them great suffering, leading to cataracts in the morning, and they cannot bear the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and for this reason, they lay their face down and sleep on it, and their eyes become moist under their eyelids, which inflames and changes the appearance of the skin due to the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel the exit between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the method of this work is that the patient places his head in a healthy position;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take the linen cloth, and make a tent in a circular manner according to the quantity of each part's extirpation, and place it over them.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your hands on both sides so that the bone is brought together within the circle.
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make a groove in the middle of the moisture with a sharp scalpel, not wider than the wound made on a vein.
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and cut the skin completely until you reach the bone.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and from the groove, with various arrangements, pull out in the shape of a white fat piece.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Take a whole piece of cloth dipped in hot water between your fingers and turn your hand to the right and left as long as it is warm.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and ensure that you do not pry open the gap, that you reach all the way to the bottom without pressing too hard, and do not cause it to bleed.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the gap does not open at the beginning, gently widen it a little until it opens.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	then pull it out as we have said, then moisten cloth with oil and water, place it on the joint, and stretch it gently.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such people who grind and apply something to corrupt the moisture that is stuck.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it as long as it remains healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the hot abscess, treat it with external plasters soothing as long as it remains healthy.
des poilz des papieres	hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When papers (hairs) grow in an abnormal way and become tangled, they are just as harmful, causing conditions like normal tears and soft or flaky skin, due to the damage done to the hair itself.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and the treatment is according to four methods:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	or by cauterization with fire, or by using remedies according to the condition presented, or chapter on cauterization, and it is performed by incision and stitching, or by bindings, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your hands, then turn the paper from the oil to your left hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	if it turns out well, that is good.
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if no, then push an needle through all the thread above it.
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and it should be smooth along the edge of the paper where the hairs grow, and pull the thread through all the paper, and turn it to the razor.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	Then, peeling off the skin from the affected area, separate the hairs, gently pulling them from the base, all the way to the tip, from the great tear to the small.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then, extract the thread and place a small piece of cotton and linen paper underneath it, then trace on the paper an enche shape (a type of hook), similar to a mirte leaf, and ensure that the shape is according to the quantity you see the paper rise to.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if at that part where the skill is, much paper is needed according to how soft the paper is.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then make incisions across the entire split at the marked places on both lines, beginning with a large tear from above to below.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and it should be one of the splits near the natural hairs, making it as thick as a root, then turn the hook in one of the two angles towards the heart, and then peel it entirely.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then join the two lips with a stitch using a thin needle and thread, wipe away the blood, and remove any excess thread from between the two edges without anything sticky, if you are able to do this.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if this does not help, then after leaving the stitching and threads for three or four days, or even longer.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then treat the wound without stitching or restrictive bandages, for the paper (or dressing) renews itself with the healing of the wound and its gathering, but stitching is moved (as the ancients said), and this causes pain without benefit.
et si a une autre maniere:	and if in another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is similar to the shape of a mirror, as we have described, at three points according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then take those who are weak and equalize their small forces according to this form:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the pincers steady, and the task is not even, take a needle where there is thread, and wrap it around the object.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and wrap another thread around the larger tear, and the second thread around the smaller one, and gather the threads equally between your fingers.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then gently hold your hand equally, and press all the skin where you have marked it, as we have said, then sew together both edges of the wound, and treat it until it is healed.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with wax and similar remedies that soothe.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and never does it happen that the paper's fibers are changed.
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but stitching on one side and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of dogs is as follows:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and it is that you convert the paper and make it inside according to what I have said, and then make two strips with skill, also as long and wide as the paper with a delicate tool.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and cut as well the parts where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then carefully join the two parts together over the paper from the oil, and strain the two strips from the two parts formed.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and leave it thus for several days, and the skin that is strained will die and contract and heal, as long as it remains in place.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it's delayed, if the patient has any strength, then treat it while he is healthy;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and if the wound is deep and fresh, and when it is opened, the papers (scab) are lifted, and the hairs do not grow back.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and this is the shape of the two lines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	the work involves piercing with a fine needle and threading it with soft and delicate silk thread;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then gather the joints and gently join them together, so that the length of the bones is a palm's length.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then arrange in the wound another fine thread of silk briefly, and join the ends delicately with the main thread.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	then place the patient's head in a healthy position.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and make the sun shine through so that the work is revealed, for it is a delicate and small task. Then insert the needle throughout the wound at the root of the hair gently, piercing the paper-thin skin until you reach the natural hair below.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	then extract the hair right up to the root, and push the hair back into the root if there is one or two or three or more;
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	then extend your hand until the hairs come out completely from the root in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the root is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then pull on the root from inside out until the whole thread that you had ordered comes out, as long as the root comes out completely through the opening above and you see it with the eye's vision.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then take the hook and thread, and close the wound with oil and leave it for two or three days until the hair grows back in its place and the scar heals.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	and if the hairs are small, accompany them with the long hairs of natural growth, and raise it with that or leave it until it elongates and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	regarding the impurity of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease called "aleacrati" or putrefaction occurs in the oil, it has two manners:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	One naturally, and the other unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the method of working on it is that you split that suture, separate the lips, and place cloth inside, binding it until it is healed.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and it is not advisable that you use things that dry and constrict in the treatment of it.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do that, the illness will return worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but I work with softening substances, such as fennel.
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the rosewater of water or linseed, cooked, and the diaquiled onions melted in either oil, and it envelops a bandage, and the treatment of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the true treasure of your cure is that you take care not to let it harden according to its former shape.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and these works that we have spoken are not only remedies for this illness, but also to prevent it from returning in the same form as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the grease that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness which is dislocation, truly called "axacrati," is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident arises from wounds, cuts, cautery, and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the path to success in it is such that if you press an needle, having a double thread, and insert it into the skin, starting from the left tear (i.e., side), so that the thread comes out on the right side of the skin;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then the skin is pulled tight over the entire needle, and the flap at the incision site is wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the paper returns to what is appropriate, it is good.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If this is not done, take a razor and place it in the split, turn the paper, and make two cuts on either side inside the paper.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and let the seeds of the two cuts be at the two corners of the incision you have made, and make them form an angle so that when they are joined together, the shape is like the letter 'I Greek'.
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then cut this one, according to the thickness of its edges, from the paper, then adjust the two parts and sew them with a thread of wool.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply the treatment of those things we have spoken of regarding soft and gentle medicines, as long as he is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the illness comes from a wound or stitching or cauterization, it is necessary that you make a clean cut beneath the skin and paper-like hairs, following what has been said above.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then separate between the two parts of a tent, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one must perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters have devised various means by which they can restore the natural shape.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and instruct the patient himself, according to what is necessary for the operation and using various instruments in different positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	The phrase "dou soudement de la papiere" does not have a clear or straightforward
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this suture is done by untrained hands in such a way that the paper (bandage) on top is smooth with oil and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it slightly.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and stretch it as if using pincers, while you carefully do what is necessary with a very thin spatula, not too sharp or too blunt, so that the patient does not suffer from the overly sharp spatula and it does not cut through the oil.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and let your cut, which you make on the affected part, be light, so that the skin regains its natural shape.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and it becomes healthy, and never form pus in the infected part, nor create an abscess of foul-smelling water, or a swell of clear water, or a collar.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then place a thin linen cloth between the paper and the oil, and put over the oil a generous amount of damp wool.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after the third day, apply hot compresses and suds until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	from the nail of the finger
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	You know that the nail is according to two manners:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	it is nervous and appears hard and dry, and another that is not nervous at all, but appears like white, frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and treated with forceps, cannot be moved by anyone.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and both appearances begin towards the great lacrimal gland, growing smaller and smaller until they cover all vision and all light and the movements of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of the incision is that the patient places his head on the healthy side, then opens them (the eyes).
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and hold the paper in your hand, then bend the finger like a small pincers, and stretch it above.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and insert a horsehair, or a goose feather, or ox hair, and tie it tightly.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle slightly and insert it through the nail, pushing it all the way through the nail bed, and tie the nail with the thread, stretching it above. And scrape along the side of the nail close to the skin using a thin, sharp tool, removing only enough to prevent the nail from splitting or breaking as it grows back naturally, without causing the skin to bleed excessively.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and never extend the nails to the wound only, and with thread, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then the skin is peeled from the entire soft part, which takes the shape of:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	and ensure that the soft part does not touch the tender flesh and damage it, and that the instrument is not pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision, pour a little of this powder into the wound, and then apply a collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then attend to what is necessary until it is healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not connected to a nerve and you cannot push the needle through it, the hooks cannot enter. Often, this appearance of a nail requires treatment with medicine.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow as I have described in the dissection; and if you see it covering, open gently the wound of the afflicted person, and take a light spatula according to this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And carefully remove the nail from above, and if you see that it becomes softer and the pain subsides, distill this mixture into a collar made of lithargyrum (a type of sulfur) and red dye, and apply the oil to the wound for the next day.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then begin the other task according to this same work, until it is entirely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing contradicts you about the oil, such as a hot abscess, then apply it, and treat first the hot abscess until it is healed, and then continue the work as before, until it is completely cured.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh from the wound causes great harm in the eye over time, if you suspend it at the point and cut off only a part, not all of it, then the watering (or irritation) will cease.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	then distill into the eye a red collar made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	on the flesh that is born on the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	Some people's eyes never turn red, and they cover the pupil and rest on papers and turn them into ashes, resembling a rose of balsam.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the work is such that the patient places his head on the healthy one, then opens them, and applies all the tools suitable to it, and holds it firmly with strength.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then take the first tool, and go all the way to the end with it, always being careful not to harm the patient during the procedure.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and let the incision be delicate, as we have said in the incision of a fingernail and with small forces, removing the nail gently, as the shape after this chapter demonstrates.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is complete and all the flesh cut away, apply oil from crushed silk or distil a red collaret and similar corrosive medicines, and place on top of it cotton soaked in hot water to ensure the abscess is hot.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if it does not move and the fever rises, and you doubt a hot abscess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing remedies for a hot abscess.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus make cuts aligned with this method in the oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But nonetheless, it is necessary that you pay attention to each weak part of the natural path.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and of the accidental path, in the work of doing.
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb suffers from that work.
des voines des eulz	veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These are the red veins that are covered over the eye, and they steal from the sight their work and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	Skill is therefore given to the first that you look at, in which it is swollen, hard, and there is no other disease outside of the swelling.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	Then tie it in this manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position, then suspend the veins at every point according to their knowledge, and let the veins be thin and double according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And there should be two incisions according to degrees in the body following this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then tie these veins gently, and let the blood flow hour after hour, until you see the veins disappear from the flesh.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and be careful not to puncture the skin with the spatulas, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you only remove the veins.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and once you have done this, distill the green and red collyrim oil to corrupt that which is delayed in the socket.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you cannot gather all of these in that hour, make a poultice over the oil with soothing things for the pain of the joints, and leave it for no days until the pain is soothed and assured from the hot abscess, then continue in this manner as before until it is healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	from the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	They call these "arrested" fistules:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	As you treat it with cautery and medicine for the burning pain as I mentioned earlier, and it does not heal, there is a danger in cutting into the abscess where he must die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, then take all the instruments mentioned here to shape it.
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	It is called an "aspire chisel", and it should be made of iron from the root to the tip, and pointed like a limet in the present shape.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place the corrupt bone back into its original position, then twist it between your fingers, and press your hand slightly until you know that corruption is healed.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this once, then return the position with drying medicinal herbs.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the bones are fused together, and it grows, and the bowel's opening is fused, and remains like this for forty days, and does not renew or become abscessed, and no bad accidents come, then know that it is healed.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If there is no other device to bring the fistula back to the opening of the wound according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and it is that you discover the bone a second time by iron or by aggressive medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the cautery as follows, and let the tip of the iron be at a 30-degree angle, and make it thin up to the top as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then place it on the damaged bone above the artery, and move your hand away from the wound, then return to the whole cautery until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels the pain because of this if he holds his hand on his wound.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the joint with dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the pain subsides and hardens the joints, then see the matter in the fresh air.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the wound
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the joints open widely and cause no disturbance or reduction in respiration, it is necessary to keep the patient still.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then apply health-giving poultices or leeches without causing harm to suck the blood, then place oil made from fennel and aloe and incense and dragon's blood on it, and then strain the oil and apply it over bandages and cloth.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the way of the bandages is such that you press on soft bandages, doubling them each three times, and then place one upon another according to the need of each.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then stretch from above with a firm bandage, and restart the suction cups to suck without hurting;
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the suction cups and leave the stretch for day and night, and if it becomes too tight, you must gently pull to adjust.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	then remove the bandage after day and night, and if you see that it has healed well, that is good.
se ce non;	If this is not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the plaster, bandages, and bindings are re-applied and the suction cups are removed while the wound is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	loss of fabric integrity
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When the wound cloth is removed, it opens up and there comes out something like grains of resin, which is hopeful to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then if you see it covered, the work is such that you pierce a needle into the root of the lower part just above this one, then pierce another needle where there is a double thread from the upper part of the wound.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then cut the skin with a thread of double thread and tie one part of the eyelid around it, tightening it well, then extract the needle and apply another oil, moistened in abundance;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it until the thread disintegrates with the eyelid, then apply oil with comforting substances until the wound is healed;
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the wound should never be restrained by the eyelid in any way, as long as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the joint appears to be well-formed, pierce it with a fine instrument that comes from oil, and drive out the white moisture of the joint, and immediately enter within.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then extract it as long as it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the fat of the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This illness called "alcunnati" is only characterized by moisture collected in the oil, appearing like sharp descent, but it is not sharp.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit up straight, then take the head in both hands, and move it until you see the moisture rising towards your joints.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	Then it should be firmly fixed, and let no light descend or become dim, and the sick person will see things as they once were.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if the light does not descend, know that it is acute, and if the bowel's descent is not equipped as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	if you delay the sick person between your hands, then take the delicate spatula and make incisions on the cornea cloth in the form of a circle along the continuity of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown, while the bowel is still present.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is separated, it should be distilled in hot honey or a mixture of honey and mint, or boiled water with fennel, then treated with another remedy until it is cured.
des aigues de l’oil	The phrase "des aigues de l’oil" translates directly to "of the waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have similar waters in the division, and what is necessary to pierce.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if it is done according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	You should place the patient between your crossed hands away from direct light for the sun, and tie healthy oil firmly to them.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then place the paper from oil in your left hand if the joints are on the left, or in your right hand if the joints are on the right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then, in your right hand if the joints are on the left, take the instrument called "almagda," or in your left hand if the joints are on the right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	then, using the tip of the instrument, remove the crust along its thickness from the outermost part towards the inner corner of the eye, then press the instrument called "almagda" gently, and turn your hand until it pierces the membrane of the oil and you feel that "almagda" reaches the empty space.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and it is necessary that the measure of the magical path be exactly equal to the measure of the space from the tip of the plum to the end of the darkness.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and this is the crown of the oil;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	if you will see the bone on this paper due to the clarity of the corny fabric, then place the instrument nearby or where the water is, and then press it from one way to another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he lowers himself now, let him see the patient before him and the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After resting, let the small one, and then the water climbs up the second way, place the force with the instrument, and when it is firmly stuck and does not rise, gently extract the magical matter by turning your hand back and forth.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put back in place a little piece of silk string, and remove from these the oil inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply hot oil or any other moist oil (roses) and an abundance of heat, and wrap it with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, place a fine, new bandage with abundance of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the foreign body cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are many people with very hard eyelids, it is necessary that you press the instrument called "alberit", which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then pierce only the outer joint, and do not cut too deep, but make it subtle, then apply almagd, as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and upon completion of the work, prepare for the patient a comfortable bed, so that he sleeps on his back in a dark place.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and he should be restricted from all movements, and given light foods, and not move his head to the right or left, and be bound according to his condition for up to three days.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then loosen it in the same dark place, test its vision, and make it see nothing, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and it is not advisable that you do this during the treatment or after the incision now, but rather you should lighten it, because the sharp pain has increased severely.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	if abscesses occur, that you loosen the bandage before the seventh day and apply the remedies for the healed abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is calmed, loosen the vision and place a side on his face to cover any light, and be in that dark house again.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	Then he goes out of the house little by little and returns to his usual self.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and knows that no disciple should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us from the East who told us that in their peaceful lands, they made an instrument which sucked out water, but I never saw one in our land, nor do I read about it in the books of the ancients.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and by chance, this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the appearances of the shapes of magic, because whoever does not know them will see them differently.
et soient d’arain proprement:	and let them be of gold properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the front of this same subtlety be sharp, and the rear in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	Of the pain near the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	No creature ever born or formed with diverse joints will have any that seem like scorpions in their multitude.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if it has such as it has been charmed with bright colors, and if the hair is soft and of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In this case where the wound is sore and not yet healed, it is necessary that you make the patient rest between your hands facing the sun.
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open the patient's nostrils, and pour the liquid into those wounds, and treat them vigorously.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then hold what you can sustain of the thin, sharp spatula on one side, as long as you know that the wound is entirely opened.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open it completely with all the delicate, light instruments, so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and without stirring or moving, you must clean the abscess as it should be;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if these are malignant abscesses, act swiftly and cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the channels are closed; then apply new, clean, and cool compresses with wine or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the new wound opens and moisture reaches the palate, knowing it is healthy;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if the moisture does not open as it should, knowing there is a channel in the bone above, preventing the tools from cutting.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Then you must insert a thread slightly thick, and be careful with your hands, and leave enough space between each one, either more or less.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and place the patient's feet with the thread in their armpits, and rub them gently until the thread comes out through the armpit into the mouth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and often children learn this practice, and it is an easy thing for those who wish to do so.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head that comes through the armpit in one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth in the other hand, and pass them back and forth as we are doing with thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do as you know, corrupt the new wound, then treat the child, wipe away the blood, and moisten the wound with Egyptian ointment, and then put it back to its place as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that is left from the wound.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put a bandage around the neck for no more than days until it is healed, and if it needs dry medicines, use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, from which the oils and medicines are distilled:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	and it should be of silver or gold, resembling an open lamp, like a candlestick, and lead it thither.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you make a closed candlestick, then it is the instrument to purge the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and it should have many parts attached to the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Of the pain near the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a disease appears on the head due to a condition called "telul," it grows and becomes great over time, as long as it is visible to the eye.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and for this reason, it is necessary that you grasp it firmly at the beginning, completely remove it, and then apply the hot cautery or burning medicine.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if it is not treated quickly while it is still small, take care if it becomes hard, of a dark color, or lacks sensation.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	do not touch it with iron, as it is an abscess that has grown worse, for when you remove it, great harm comes to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is of soft touch, not filled with pus, and you can completely cover it, if the patient allows and treats it without fear, it heals the limb by drying and restraining.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and closed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the continuation of one of these powerful cartilages is broken, it benefits no one.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	One should therefore pay attention so that this does not happen to anyone, if you consider whether the wound is fresh and filled with blood.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then adjust the two edges with a stitch, then treat it until it is healed.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are loose on both sides, it is necessary that you burn all parts of their edges until they heal, then adjust the two edges with a stitch and tighten them, and apply powdered dragon's blood and incense dust.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and place a piece of plaster, strong or otherwise, over it and leave it until the pain disappears, then apply a healing treatment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The method of stitching is such that you join the pieces together:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	At home, there often appear hard abscesses on the lips, resembling small stones, both large and small.
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	then you must turn the lips and make a cut on each one, and take them with tweezers and remove them from each part.
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply the hot (vitriole, a type of sulfuric acid) to the wound until the sight is cleared.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then the cold (air) from the silk, and treat the wound with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	from the work of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times a swelling appears on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus".
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	It is necessary that you hold it with pincers, cut off the root, and let the pus or blood flow out.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then place on it vitriol powder, or other powders that constrict and dry up.
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if it returns after the incision, this happens many times, if the pus comes out a second time, and then cauterize.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after the cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the shapes of the instruments for closing.
des sordens	from disorders
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Never should they be assembled at the root of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, those scars that are ugly and rough;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and never should the tooth be black and yellow and rotten, as long as the corruption comes to the gums, and it smells bad;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	If you want that you make the patient rest in your hands, and his limbs are at ease in yours, and remove any bones or scabs that are protruding, until nothing remains.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and do the same for blackness and greenness, jaundice and other colors, as long as they are fresh.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if what is at the root of the problem is removed, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, then return to reading the second and third times, until everything is removed.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that the tooth requires different shapes of instruments to remove, according to what the work demonstrates, because the plier used to pull out the teeth has a different shape than that used between the teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these shapes and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	When treating a tooth causing pain, it is important to take your time and apply gentle pressure as much as possible, for no one should ever use excessive force.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	because it is a very sticky substance, so there should be no excuse for pulling.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then, when the patient is constrained from drawing out the tooth, it is necessary that you be certain about which tooth is painful.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the patient suffers great pain, and believes it is from a tooth or gum issue, and has the good tooth pulled.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	but the pain does not cease for them until the evil is removed, as we have already tried this on our patients.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are well certain of the painful tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth with a strong spatula to remove all the gums from all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then move it with your fingers or subtle pliers bit by bit, as long as it is well dislocated, then firmly hold the pliers.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and place the patient's dislocated joint in your holy hands between the knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take none of these instruments and press it gently from every side, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	If the bone is broken and fractured, it is necessary to fill the space with cloth, either in the wound or the gap.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if it is tightly grasped with pliers, do not force it so that it does not break.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is necessary to carefully cut around the gum to extract the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Take good care so as not to break it, and if a piece remains, return it to the patient; by the evil of its root, he will suffer greater pain than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And be wary that you do not act like the ignorant healers who, through their haste and boldness, break the healing process each time, and do not follow what we have described.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but they bring about this great disease through the moisture that lingers or through the damage they cause to the joints, just as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the swelling is severe, wash the affected area with wine or ash and silk.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and the inflammation of blood, which often occurs, can be alleviated by applying the juice of broken glass.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if this does not help, then cauterize him.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The instruments should have long, sharp points and thick handles so that they do not bend when pulling the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be large members so that they do not bend when pulled, and made of iron well-forged, and toothed for proper movement.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root persists during extraction, it is necessary to place a piece of moist cotton or butter on it for one or two days until the tooth becomes loosened. Then, use the pliers called "algefri," which resemble a care-full hook.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and they should be made as smooth as a lime and this is its shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out of these grips, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument called "altali," that is, a plier, which has this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	and it should be firm and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out, that is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	if not, with all the instruments, whose forms come as follows:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument with two prongs, its form is:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are used in the treatment of teeth, and this tool that resembles large pincers, whose form is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	and this instrument should be strong so that it does not break, and remember that many instruments from within are.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also of other instruments, which are not mentioned;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the most skilled surgeons cleverly create their own instruments, according to what their works and the illness show them, for there are many diseases where the ancients did not teach any instruments due to their diversity; and if they break a bone or a fragment, or it splinters, and they seek the instruments that they need, as I have told you, and are aided by gestures, this is how the form is:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	and they should be large and well-holding for holding the bone, that it does not escape, but can hold and remove;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the proper use of medicine suitable to it, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, even if it is small, remove it with all these instruments.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth does not appear according to the natural course of growth, and its shape is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth has grown after the other teeth, and is not in the proper place, and cannot be filed or polished.
adonques lou raie;	then the extraction.
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is stuck with a tooth, takes this instrument whose form is as follows, resembling a small beak, and made of sharp iron in all parts.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the dentist should work slowly and carefully with his hands for the pain of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it from one side as the shape allows.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is also like the lime used to make needles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and with the lime, gently tap the tooth with your finger several times, so that it does not move until it is ready to come out.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then in the end, it has no rasping edge, and its density cuts too deeply and damages the tongue; so you must smooth out the roughness until it is even, so that it does not damage or impair speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth aches
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the tooth aches, either by striking or pulling, and the patient cannot bite down without pain, he can be cured with restrictive medications, but that is of no use.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	if they need to restrain it with a golden thread, for the silver thread turns green and rots, but gold never changes.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and the thread should be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the amount of space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you need to align the teeth, take the thread and wrap it around the two healthy teeth twice, then place the pieces between the loose teeth, as many as there are, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side firmly.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then begin to cover again just up to the part where you apply pressure, and gently yet firmly hold your hand in place until it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and make sure your finger is at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the pieces of thread with pliers, assemble them, and insert them between the healthy tooth and the one with the cavity so it does not damage the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then leave it as tight as it can be for as long as possible, and if it loosens, the threads will break, unless held by another thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if it could stay put and serve thus all its time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the correct placement of the two healthy teeth, and the two jaws, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth is dislodged, it should be carefully reset in its place, fresh by fresh, as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and do not attempt this unless you are skilled and patient; never form it like a bone tooth, but place it in the missing spot, holding it as we have said, and letting it stay thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	from cutting the tongue's ligament
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	No such bonds come from beneath the tongue or nature, but thus we are born.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or due to an accidental deep wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient with pain, and hold his head in your hands, and gently extract the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cut the large nerve tie, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is stiffness or other, and it is a sudden wound, if it pulls the hook and cuts widely that tie.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and ensure that the cut is not too deep, for the artery below.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	once you have done that, raise the limb with hot water and ash, or cold water, then apply a compress of linen below the tongue.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and every night, apply this mixture to the patient, so that the limb cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	and if a fever develops, apply a compress of crushed vitriol to the limb.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if it does not heal, if cauterized with a slow-acting cautery, which is good.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then apply another treatment as long as it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see it is red or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it turns pale and there is moisture, cut the tumor with a sharp instrument, and free it from both sides.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if it does not leave your work, dip it in vinegar until it is stained, then return to your task while you treat everything thoroughly.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift the limb from rest and silence, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	from the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes a condition enters the throat called "godath", which is properly known as the "two mandrels", and when you treat them, as we have said in the previous discussion, if they remain unhealthy, be careful.
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If it is an abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the discharge of pus.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but leave it until it is dry, and then you will remove it, or it would break on its own.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if it is of white color with thin roots, then have the instrument ready to cover it, but first ensure that the abscess is calm and at ease.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient wait before the sun, and his feet should be in good condition, and open the mouth, and press the tongue down with the instrument between his hands, pressing it against the whole tool, from which this form is derived.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and be of silver or subtle gold as well as our knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	You cannot press the tongue against all of this tool, and you see the abscess, so take the awl and the file, and insert them into the flesh, pulling upwards more than you can.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and do not attempt to extract anything from the wounds with it, then cut with the instrument, which forms a shape that resembles strength.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	but nevertheless the instrument bends this way and that, and it is very sharp, made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, if it is like pincers, thus is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	and it has incisions on one side and no incisions on the other.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have cut one of the tendons, cut the other in the same way, and after the incision, rinse the patient's wound with hot water and cold, clear water, and it is necessary to gargle the patient with these waters or with extracts from pomegranates cooked with cinnamon or mulberry leaves and similar things, until the blood stops.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply the cure as long as he is healthy;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	and never does any other abscess form in the throat than the two mandibles, so cut them as you would the two mandibles.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was formed inside her throat, namely a small abscess.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and had a lot of pus closed in the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, and could not eat or drink, and would have died if left that way for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so swollen that it had pushed two ribs through the two openings in the throat where it entered.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I have often hastened to do so, and inserted a point into one place, then drove it through, and pulled out a great portion of bowel.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I did the same thing on the other side of the opening, and opened the mouth and pressed the tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	after inserting the point into these abscesses, and taking out a portion, I did not pull out much blood.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and thus the throat of the woman was opened, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I did not stop cutting this abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and it makes the abscess heal again, and fills the cavity that I had emptied, as long as it was very large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	then I designed and cauterized it inside the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	so it delays feeling better;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and I left these parts behind, and only God becomes of them after me.
de l’uve	from the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the eye returns to its socket, and it is swollen and distant, it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is detached, thick, and round, it is called "uve".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscess is calm, and it is subtle, then it is necessary to drain it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and that is round and not long.
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is red or of a dark color, then it is necessary to be careful with the incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the sick person.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is necessary, when you see this, according to the manner I have said, of cleansing and lengthening, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument of which we spoke earlier.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then insert the hook into the eye and remove it from the inside, and cut with the second instrument that I spoke of for incising the two mandras.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	and it is necessary that you do not cut off more than the excess beyond the natural limit.
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	because if you do not take care, it will cause distress to the voice and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use the same method we described for incising the two glands, and dress it as long as it is clean.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient suffers from great pain, it is necessary that you use an instrument for cauterization to alleviate the sensitive pain.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The method of cauterization must be sharp and quick.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient places his head on a healthy surface, and then presses the tongue with the instrument described in the chapter on cautery (fire treatment), using a hot compress, not too thick or too thin.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and using the care of this instrument, which forms thus:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And let there be a clever person with a beard, who puts on the medicine as if it were the handle of a spoon, and places the instrument over all the medicine on the eye.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the patient should lie on their side, so that the saliva and mucus from their mouth flows out of the medicine into their throat, soothing it.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then take your hand and press the medicine onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it cease to sting and the pain from the medicine is soothed.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, dampen the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument completely into the wound over the cotton until the cotton is saturated with blood.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often, as long as the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and after three or four days, remove it.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to redo the cauterization with the medicine, when you redo it, after the cauterization, wipe around the wound with cotton soaked in butter and change anything that is around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and it is raised from cold water, and it is cured with gargles as long as it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incision, rather than cauterization.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take plenty of salt and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and similar herbs, and combine them all in a pot or some of them, and put it on the fire and boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and attached to the pot is a handle according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And whether it is of silver or gold, and if one of the joints is squeezed into the mouth of the patient with pain, until the vapour rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye becomes numb.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	after the recurrence often, while the eye is dry, be sure not to do this at the beginning of the formation of the abscess, as many things may occur.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not make any movements except during the decline of the hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, take a canal and insert a piece of cloth into the mouth of the patient, so that it is not too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	Because the heat of fire does not allow moisture to collect in the mouth, and this is a good cure that brings overall health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Often there is a burning sensation in the throat from bone or fish spine, or any other thing;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	so it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing move.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and if it does not open and is withdrawn into the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit so that the food in the stomach is cooked.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	perhaps if the thing turns around by vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patients swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval (stringy part of an apple), or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and it swallows the sponge string, and then spits it out;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes back to its place, if it swells up, then pull gently;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come from what we have said, take a plunger tool according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	and let the tool be curved at the end if it can more easily enter the throat, and hold the head slightly raised.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, so that it does not come out, and do not push the bone inside.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and it is necessary that the patient pushes the tool, because he should move it or the thing is open.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	if the bottle goes down, where it is pulled out with all tools equally, as long as it comes out completely.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Never should medicine be applied without reason, as I said in the previous section, through the treatment of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and if it does not benefit, then look in the throat of the patient suffering from disease in sunlight, and press their tongue with the tool I have told you;
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the vein, draw it out with all its tiny hooks, or subtle pincers that are fit for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, take a horsehair rope and tie it around the throat of the patient, then slowly tighten or loosen the rope until the vein heats up and this is done often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is filled with water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in, moving the tongue with your hand often.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and if at once he feels the cold water, then quiet.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not quiet down as we have said, then smoke the patient with the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	do this many times, for it will loosen without target.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the method of fumigation is that you light a pot with hot coals, and place it over an open dish in the middle, and through this opening, the instrument's thread will emerge.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	then he applies the fumigation, and the patient puts the cane's end in his mouth, and closes it tightly, so that no smoke escapes but only reaches up to his nose.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and now the nose will bleed, and if it does not stop, the fumigation should be repeated several times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and the patient suffers from thirst, eats salty and bitter things, but does not drink water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then he/she must be less concerned about speaking or moving under this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound, if it is possible to see it, resembles curved pincers designed to enter the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and it resembles the beak of a curlew, and has the roughness of lime, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go.
et vez ci la forme:	and here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many appearances of abscesses are, according to the memory that comes to mind after reading this book, and they vary in piercing and sizing.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and this is in two ways; one is in its own image, and of those that hold moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for the joints where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess of the upper part is different from that of the lower, and the abscess of the fleshy part of the shoulder is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if an abscess is not to be pierced until the bowel is entirely dried up according to its completion.
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if they are such that it is necessary to pierce them when they are dried out and do not die according to their completion, as abscesses that are located in the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from damaged joints, and they are left as they are until the pus is drained, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, leading to contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Or the abscess is located in the main limb, and if you delay piercing until it is entirely dried up, it will harm the principal limb.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	if it is possible to remove the source, so that it does not harm any further;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is not advisable that you pierce an abscess without first completing the healing process, lest, after removing the source, it becomes infected inside and develops a fistula.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and will not heal completely.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is important that you know the appropriate time for piercing an abscess when it is completely healed, and this is when the pain has subsided, the fever has disappeared, there is a reduction in pain and swelling, and the abscess head becomes softer and smoother.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is necessary that you make the piercing sit more dependent on the abscess, where it opens movement.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and the piercing should be as long as the skin, and if the abscess is in the hand or foot, or in the joints and tendons and arteries, and everywhere it is even where there is no curvature.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	When these swellings occur, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when there are abscesses in soft flesh, it is better to let the incision heal completely before moving it, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it in front of that, the skin will be stretched with the blood from it, and is filled with much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance they harden the lips and deepen the wound within him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if an abscess is pierced according to the thickness of the flesh and the part that the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	and it is necessary that you make small incisions, small openings;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large incisions, large openings, and many fissures according to the size of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if at such abscesses it is necessary to press the heart, and cover;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has become as dry as cloth, and is numb, then it needs to be treated like blisters.
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if they are split in three angles, and if there are such as one copes with also like the fleece of mint, as abscesses from arrows.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are such as one makes a round incision of various sizes and shapes.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those that have no head, like a soft, superficial abscess, it is necessary to pierce them deeply.
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is necessary when the abscess is large and has a strong bow, and you pierce it, if you cannot draw out all the bow in that moment, but only part of it.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then cauterize the abscess until the next day, then draw out nothing from it.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	do this many times, gradually, until the bow completely draws out.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	most often the patients are of weak constitution, or pregnant women, or very young children, or old and frail nobles.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For often the patient will jump with the release of the pus, and by chance might die, and you will not notice.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, if the wound has drained, and observe whether the wound of the abscess is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a deep wound, then apply these attempts with linen or fresh cotton.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess with many openings, then you must insert a tent in each so that they meet.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have removed a portion of hard skin around the abscess and it remains open, then you should fill it with old cotton or dried linen rags without moisture, and bind it for three days.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the bone, and the treatment of healing as long as it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the progression of blood occurs in your work, apply cold water and ice, wet the cloth, and repeatedly place it on the affected area.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the blood poisoning persists, with proper governance and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter, and the veins or abscesses are very sensitive, then it is necessary to place several moistened cloths soaked in wine and hot oil on them.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in summer, and the vein is fleshy, then it is necessary to place moistened cloths in water and cold oil, or wine and hot oil, for three days, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then dislodge the abscess and dry it and treat it, as appropriate, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	or as told to you, how one must proceed with the treatment of abscesses, read this chapter now.
des soros	From the sources
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or consider how small boils come, which are like our skin's threads, just as the joiner of a woman's garment, and there are many of these appearances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some large and such ones where there is moisture as well as pulsation;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and if it is of such that are hard and resistant to cutting, and there is no doubt, then the arteries do not act against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of size is such that you must try all instruments called "entromissory", from which the form comes as follows, something it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, and they open it from above down, it causes pain.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, if it does not leave any trace of the skin containing the moisture, because it returns again when left alone.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, with water and twine, and apply to the wound, and leave it until the other day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and they will correct those who are delayed from breathing.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then begin the bandage again, as before, on the second day, and the third, as long as you know that it does not hinder breathing.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then dress the wound with suitable medicine as long as it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess persists and becomes large, following this form, then cut it deeply.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and apply these ointments, and scrape all parts, and put all your care into drawing out the poison from the wound where it lies.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if it causes the patient pain, do as I have told you.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do the same for an abscess that is deep, and cut and cure it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut into the deep and moist abscess, which is lighter because they have less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if none of these abscesses or parts where there is no moisture, and among these deep abscesses that I extracted from the shoulder of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess as hard as a sharp, white stone that cannot be broken.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if none of these helps, one would also make a wound as if from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other cases of abscesses occurring in the head or neck area, those who come as leaders of the children and affect the roots of the ears, the opening should be kept entirely closed for as long as possible to allow the pus to drain.
et les cure si com il covient.	and treat it as necessary.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess appears in the neck, and dissolves the adhesions, and engenders anger, and never comes elsewhere in the body, and is painful, and severely entangled with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula (scaly skin condition) is properly located within its own cavity, just as the neck and abscesses in the head, as we have said.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the appearances of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	Some of these contain moisture, and some are malicious and do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that one where you see a good disposition to the touch, and it resembles the color of healthy flesh, and it is quiet from every side and is not exposed to any coldness in the collar or to the artery or vessel, and is not too deep.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	you must then lift it from above, and peel it from every part, and the two lips of the heart should be at once, if necessary, as we have said in the chapters of the head.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	And then pull little by little, and be sure not to catch the nerve or vein, and do not use too much force or dig too deep, so that the hand does not slip, and look ahead too much, lest you catch something you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you catch the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then put in the wound vitriol ground, or any powder that stops blood, and close the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and leave it until the abscess is calm, and the wound is softened, and begin to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the wound is stained with blood, it returns to your work, as long as you complete it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then seek your finger's clue if it persists no small scabs, if it scrapes and becomes dirty.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, it is not enough that you scrape this scab at its root, but tie it with a thick double thread and let it fall without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	then use the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you clean the entire abscess, it is necessary that you close the two edges of the wound and sew them now, so that there is no unnecessary delay due to the size of the abscess.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If it is necessary for you to understand how to treat the root of the dislocation, pull it firmly, and dress it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrofulas that hold an excess, cut them where they seem to be closing;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and make the cut as previously mentioned, depending on it, then he applies these remedies and similar things, so that it corrupts those who are delayed by corruption.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well cleaned, if the healing remedy begins to work, as long as it is healed.
de squinance	squinance (Old French) translates to "dislocation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients spoke and wrote about the treatment of the throat.
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is written in their word's scripture.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those with a narrow throat, it is necessary to avoid the fold in the throat called the "epiglottis";
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and no help is done through this, because all the veins and the source of the disease are in those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both jaws.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the tongue, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to prevent the damage that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we should cut it in three circles or four a small slit through, between the two circles or according to the depth of the cut, not into the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if these muscles are suitable for cutting the epiglottis, so that there is no harm, and the vessels are long and thin.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary to stretch the throat skin all around the wound, and cut the heart until it reaches the bone.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the swelling, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by cutting the flowing part of the bone that jumps due to the broken place, and through the loss of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed and there is doubt about the strangulation, bring together the two edges of the wound with care, and cut through them right up to the cartilage.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medications that induce vomiting, as long as the patient is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albuscasim (a surgical tool) should not be used unless the throat is completely sealed, and the patient is judged to be near death, as it lacks the necessary strength.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then pinch the epiglottis so that the patient cannot cough, and they will breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and for this, the ancients command the wound to remain open until the ill-will of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they command that the wound be stitched and treated, as long as it was cured.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took a knife, and pushed it into her throat, cutting through part of the channel of her tongue.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to cure her, but I found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and realized that it had no power to reach the veins or flow into the throat; the only outlet was through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I rushed, and sewed up the wound, and treated it until it was healthy.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and since the damsel had no further need of it, she returned to her condition before.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I say that in the construction of the epiglottis, there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the great throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	A hernia of the throat is called a "neck hernia," and it is a large swelling in color of an arrow, and it occurs mostly in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	and this is according to two manners:
naturez, et accidens;	natural and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	for nature has no power.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	and the accidental is according to two manners, of which one resembles flesh, and the other manner resembles an abscess that arises from an artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and it causes fear, and one should not attempt to make fire outside except in a small space, testing and carefully examining the entire opening.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you let it grow out as much as a new grass, and it does not give way to any force, if it is held tight, just as we hold our own limbs, and treat it with all its equipment, if there is none.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and surround it carefully, and treat it as appropriate, as long as it is completely healed.
des nous	From us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of which I will describe all their similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is necessary that I explain the entire difference between our and their origin.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that the cause is heat and fever as long as the ebullition has not passed and the putrefaction is complete.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then rest the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the new heat, there is neither fever nor pain, and it retains satisfaction, which is its own sack and follows the colour of the body, and begins as a small seed, and grows large.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they follow the same appearances, whether it is fat or moist, and have a similar colour as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	You should, when you come to treat someone with a new injury, test and inquire about all the tools called "instrument" according to their form, as described in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of examining abscesses is that you press more or less moistly on the abscess, and move your fingers in and out little by little, until you know that the instrument has reached the center, according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then extract the instrument, and be careful that no part remains inside.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the moisture running under the skin changes its color, as I have described for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if no moisture comes out after inserting the instrument, you know it is a hard abscess. Then make a cross over it and grasp it with pincers, gently peeling it from each side to remove the skin where it lies, so that you treat it properly with new skin.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot pull it out whole, then pull it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if nothing remains, it will return to the body many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if a small amount remains and does not cause you pain, apply some corrosive powders or hot compresses to the wound, close it up, and treat it with soothing remedies until it heals.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the wound becomes large, cut both edges of the wound and treat it with remedies to prevent infection.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the pain is strong or severe, use quick-acting vinegar and leave it for two to three days until the wound heals and the blood flow subsides.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to covering what has been dislocated from the new.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See the shapes of the instruments used, which are of three types:
grans et moien et petit;	large, medium, and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and take three quarters which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three ways of doing this:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	grasp, gentle, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistules;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and are also like needles with which the spells are cut, and they are of gold, or iron, or silver, and the ones that are yellow are more effective in encircling the abscesses of fistules.
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the opening's size.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the incisions are much alike, as you can see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	great, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if the incisions have two curves of three kinds as well;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if they are once that have three curves, and are also of three manners;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if they are once that have two curves, and once only one curve, and are of three manners;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all this is necessary for their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these, which is made to cut, is sharp, and there are some that do not cut well from both sides, which scratch the skin, so that one does not sever the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and from these intrusions, the threads are withdrawn in different ways, so that the patient does not lose them during the opening of abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	great, small, and medium, as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and do not use it on any other part than on fleshy parts, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and never use any other small instrument, resembling the edges of fingers, according to this form, to stop the blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it should never be placed in a place that heals the cutting of veins, and arteries, and never according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	never inflame the breasts of any man when they begin to be corrupted, as long as they appear like a woman's.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and remain disfigured and swollen, and anyone who wants to cure them must act carefully according to this form of this line b until g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then remove the fat, and apply medicinal fire to the wound, then close the two lips of the wound with stitches, and heal it as long as it is clean.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and it holds the eyes steady, relaxing them due to their great size, as happens with women, if they pinch in two ribs above, through two similar openings;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one holds the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. to line .g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have mentioned about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, as long as it is healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not clean, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood flow, it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive dressing.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until it absorbs the moisture and fat, then treat it when it is clean.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses under the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses under the armpits that present as hard scrofulous nodules or with scales, and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B to line G.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess has been drained, apply clean cotton to the wound and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and continue with appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, they should treat it as we have said in the treatment of scrofula, and if the wound gapes, apply cautery as we have mentioned before.
de la routure de l’artere	from the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is exposed and the skin above it is sewn shut, many abscesses often form, and this also happens in the vein with an infected and abscessed swelling.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if you recognize it thus, as coming from an artery, then cut deep into the abscess;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your hands, if the feeling is strange;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is about the vein, there will be bright red appearance;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is deep within the flesh and filled with angers and other parts, and it is very great.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary to avoid iron care, and he who has a main injury should also be careful, and for him who has an arteriolar injury, make a cut through the skin from above for a long time.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then open the flesh at certain intervals, and carefully remove the artery from the tissues while it is exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then insert a needle from below and pierce it through to the other side, gripping the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you about the extraction of the two arteries in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then mark the place between the two links of an instrument until no blood comes out from it, and carefully open the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then apply the treatment gently, as long as the wound is open.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply this treatment to the healing wound as long as it is healthy.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is as large as a vein, it is necessary that you hold in your hand what you can of the abscess across all the skin, then insert the needle through the place you are holding in your hand, and pierce it, and make a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then, as I have told you, take the abscess, where one of the parts of the bone meets the other through the flesh;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, insert another needle through all parts of the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut the abscess until the excess is removed, then cut away the excess from around it and leave what is attached.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then administer treatments with bandages and poultices until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	from the abscess of the nail bed
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come from arteries and veins, so too do they occur in the nail bed when it is injured or subjected to excessive strain, and similar conditions.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this occurs more often with dislocations and joints in all limbs, which are painful abscesses, and their appearance resembles the color of the body, and they have many different arrangements causing pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when they stretch it, the patient feels pain, and it is not entirely healed to the body's satisfaction but rather pulls away from the heart.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and it must remain still in all directions, neither going forward nor backward, neither above nor below; and the one with joints should not be covered with iron.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	Perhaps he might experience a contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and he who is the head or forehead, makes the skin contract with the spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, if you have pliers, cut it off at its base;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, if you hang it with a hook, and peel it off, then remove the bone and close the wound with stitches, and apply the cure until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	Des grosses boces pendans" translates to "hanging large mouths" in
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	No such thing happens in bellies or any other place, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its appearance, it has subtle roots, and big excrements.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and it has small and large parts.
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I have seen at home those who had these in their bellies that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had a thin root, were deeply split, and constantly exuded moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I collected them and found one weighing XVIII ounces and the other VI З. The work in the incision is such that if you look at the patient, you will see they are moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist with a subtle root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if it is scooped out with a wide spatula, then perform the fire cautery in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For cutting often brings great risks of bleeding, and if blood does not cease, then hasten to cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient afraid and anxious about the incision, take a well-made thread of silk, and bind it as we have said, and leave it for a day.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	then hold it in place, and do not stop pulling the thread of silk until it dislocates the joint, and feel for its release.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are thick, be afraid to dislocate them especially in the abdomen, but you can still dislocate half of them, then cauterize it so that it does not come back.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then treat the wound, and ensure you do not cover the part that is of a bad colour, with poor sensation, and leaking milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an enlarged abscess, and I will come to the treatment of this ulcer later.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the wound is closed.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the bulge is due to cautery or an incision on the bowel or bladder, and it is located in the abdomen and not in any of the bowels, as it occurs in other openings, or blood coming from veins or arteries according to what is above, or from flatulence;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is through the opening of the bowel and through the discharge of the bladder, then the colour of the abscess resembles the colour of the skin, and it is a slight thing without pain, and opens up from various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the intestines, then it is more diverse, and when you press it with your fingers, it recovers and then returns, and perhaps it becomes squeezed, greatly constricting the entrance to the bath or through hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a slight thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, it does not constrain.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it is due to blood, it opens up with these signs: a swollen and hard abscess, and is fixed in quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to wind (or gas), it is soft upon touching, and the work (or condition) is such that you look and see it appears due to blood from an artery, or vein, or wind (or gas).
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary, you must leave the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, both for the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or bowels, then you must instruct the patient to keep still, and lie flat, then tie a sign around the entire circumference of the belly.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then command the patient to gently move it between your hands, then go around the place you marked with the whole edge of the bandage, and stretch half of the abscess above all the great needle.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie it around with a strong thread or firm silk string, and make sure the wound is completely closed.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then open half of the abscess extended over the ligament, and stretch your finger index, and seek the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you feel it caught in the ligament, free it, and pull the intestine out through the opening in the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the bowel, catch it at the narrowest point, and cut off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery or vein runs counter to your work, then return to your task and take two needles, and push them through firmly, and turn both needles in the direction you have made the piercing.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then stretch the abscess in four directions over the needles, and if you see them, remove the needles, and leave the joint to rot until it disintegrates on its own;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	when it is soft and pliable, then treat it as it should be treated, and cure the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the joint as it should be treated, and bind the joint.
dou chancre	A cancerous wound
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have spoken in the previous section about the appearances of ulcers, and how they should be treated with medicine, and how one must avoid the iron cure.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and let us speak of the ulcer that erupts in the mouth, and take great care in its cure, and say to the ancients that when an ulcer is in a place where it can be scraped, as with an ulcer on the breast, or on the thigh, or similar places, then all of it must be removed when it first appears.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and old, then you should not approach it, for I never knew anyone to be cured of it.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	no one has ever been cured of it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And for the work, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, it is that you should at no time rid the patient of black blood;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make it healthier if there is evident swelling, then cut the patient's pain in the good place to perform the work;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then pour your ointments or chancre, and the head from all parts, and the bone from all parts, leaving nothing behind;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow out completely, and carefully press the place in your hand or with any object, and if the bleeding continues from the artery or vein, cauterize it until the blood is stopped.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then seek other treatment as long as he is healthy.
de ydropisie	Of hydropsis
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have previously discussed the similarities of hydrops, and in what way the accumulation of water occurs, as well as the signs of each condition, and the treatments using medications, and those cured with iron.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is only inflamed.
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one should not apply iron to these two conditions.
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	This is to know, namely, tympanitis and yposchrodia, for it is a deadly thing;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	Then, when you treat this appearance of edema called "ecrites" with medicine, and the cure does not benefit the patient, consider if they are weak or if they have another illness besides edema, such as stomach troubles, diarrhea, and similar conditions.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	If you do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt.
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	If you see the patient is very strong and has no other illness but edema alone, and they are neither too weak nor too strong, then thus should you act:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Place the patient upright on your hands, and the attendant presses the belly while bringing water to the lowest part of the wound, then take the spiny spatula according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And make incisions from both sides.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	with a point, but not so deep as to reach the intestines when inserted, and it cannot tear.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then check if there is any inflammation towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if it is necessary that you open them from the anus, insert the knife three fingers deep directly below the knuckle.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if there is a drooping due to sick liver, it is on the left side of the buttock three fingers' breadth;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is due to mucus, it should be on the right side, and it does not suit that the sick lie on the fracture so that excesses do not flow to that weak place.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then perforate all the skin with the instrument, and press, and hold your hand over all the space between the skin and the muscle as if scraping it to the quantity of a fingernail or around.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then pierce the wound until the sponge comes to the surface, and this is the blood, then pull out the tool, and take out this instrument which forms:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	and it resembles a thin silver chain, made of fine or light gold, and on the underside there is a small opening.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on one side, three openings;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on the other side, and one on the other;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and it is the bone cut as if with a quill, and this is the form of the incision that the scribes make with the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top of them is the inflammation, so that when the instrument comes into contact with water, it now descends onto the instrument.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	empty it then half or a third, for if you remove more than is necessary at that moment, by chance the patient might die due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he might lose his palm, or come close to death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue in the sick person mean, and their pulses.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then take the instrument and hold the water, and it is now held by the force that stops the gap on the affected part, of which I have spoken, so you pierce according to this manner.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then continue with the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering, and take a small quantity of water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Take no action, and keep yourself from straining as long as it doesn't cause any pain but a little bit of thirst.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient and leave them with much thirst, treat them with a burial mound or hot sand, and by sweating or a bath and in the sun, and dyeing with wine;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and treat them with drying medications as long as they are healthy, and apply cautery to the stomach and liver and spleen after draining the water, as I have said above.
de l’estopement de la verge	from the obstruction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without an opening in the penis, or if the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary to pierce through all the subtle spatules according to this form.
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then insert or open a subtle plug from below, and hold it and keep it thus for three days or four, and when he wishes to urinate, the plug will be removed, and he will urinate, and then have it replaced.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and if, by chance, he does not remember, since the hot urine will not allow the plug to be kept closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the opening is small, it is a gentle closure of the bladder, as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have a plug in their place are cursed, because no one is born with a plug at the top of their penis, so they cannot urinate until they lower their penis.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot move because the material cannot reach the joint, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the method of the procedure is that the patient should lie on their back, then the upper arm and shoulder blade should be positioned as if it were a quill, so that the opening is in the middle, as it should be.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be careful of the bleeding that often occurs, and if it happens, apply pressure to stop the blood flow, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	from the pus of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times this illness comes to the tree (body), and it is an appearance of a ugly scar;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and it has both malignant (cancerous) and benign (non-cancerous) forms;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	you should then make them (wounds) bleed gently, clean and dress them with moist cotton in an Egyptian manner;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then continue the dressing (process) until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the illness is malicious, with a putrid and foul appearance, it requires cautery treatment.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	Once you have it, and if the splint is tight around the limb, part of it inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the splint that is inside.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and if it is nailed, then pull it out.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	Because when you bind it together, unless the position of the limb is assured, then there will be piercing, and blackening and decay in the bone and joint.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	so it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupt, then bind it with a plaster of honey and flour made from red apple bark and wool, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a blood flow occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cautery helps as the disposition of the limbs allows:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	that is to say, at the discharge of pus, and at the corruption,
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the tip of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, it is necessary that you insert or drive a plug of wood into the rod, and let the patient urinate among them.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the hair is seen to be dry at the top of the rod, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it causes a wound or abscess, it is then necessary that you scrape it with a sharp instrument, until the bonds are freed and all parts of the rod's opening are healed.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is a difficult thing to devise, then you should scrape it with the spatula at any point on the stick and the blade.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then separate the pieces gently, and place a thin, moistened linen cloth over it with cold water, so that it does not dry out immediately.
de la circoncision	from circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a dislocation of continuity like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	however, when we perform this work of our own will, especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best and lightest operation for their healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen most of the masters and elders who performed circumcision near the anus, and they had great strength, and used all kinds of new tools.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	if they moved because there were two threads, and by chance one is cut above and the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	or he reattaches it, and the pain is doubled, and the purification of the wound near the anus is not assured for the point of the member.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and to the purification of the nail, by chance the iron escapes and the wound heals, and often it happens that they do not need purification, and I have seen this happen.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the washing done with force on all the links of thread, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut precisely from above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if it is even in all parts, then you can feel the pulse.
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but the fingers should be well stretched around the skin.
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and the first method should be gentle if you want to encourage the child to breathe, if it hears, that you are only tightly tying the thread around the umbilical cord and then releasing it in all ways, so as not to hurt.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then stretch it straight between your hands and regain the strength in your hands or feet so that the baby does not see any of the tools.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then place your hand on the staff and blow through your breath, holding it at the top until the end of the staff is together.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	then thoroughly clean it from the dirt that is gathered on it, then tie the joint with a double thread, and bind it to another string.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it at the second tie with the little finger and thumb, and cut between the two strings, then gently lift the breath from above and hold the top of the staff.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow drop by drop, for that is how it heals.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and place powder on top and below the powder I mix with a half cup of cooked egg white tempered with rose water, confit with good rose oil and fresh, and leave it until the other day, and treat with another treatment as long as it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The method for purification is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	both feet should be clean and cut, and the nails should also be long and even:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	the error in purification is when the veins burst during incision:
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Then you must extend your finger, so that the joint makes an abscess.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and hold it evenly, and if you cannot hold your finger, use pincers, and then apply the compress.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they remain for three days, and the skin under the arrow is swollen, leave it until the abscess has healed, and gently remove the skin.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	if the compress is as you can make it, and it protects the part of the arrow, it will not harm anything.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Treat therefore the place of a sudden wound from gunpowder, which we have spoken about in our treatment of gunpowder, and if it is cauterized too much, and goes above, then it will not harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat it, as we have said, while it is whole and healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is a sign of stone or frozen blood, or bowels, or a blocked passage, or similar conditions, as we have said in our divisions.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	and if the urine cannot be released, and you see the retention due to a stone in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over on his knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and place them incorrectly on their back, and stretch their belly from the upper part of their back, and hold the patient still as much as possible.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then they constrict the colic of the bladder at the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is released.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument called "syringe", which has this form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and let them be delicate silver arrows, as if from a bird's feather;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and let the knife be one palm long and half again, and sharp at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the method of urination is that you take a double thread, tie one end with a wool or cotton ball at the urethral opening, and then wrap the other end tightly around your finger inside the syringe.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut off the excess thread and squeeze it tightly towards the top of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, place the patient in a comfortable position, and rise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and lukewarm water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently insert the syringe into the shaft, until it reaches the base of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the body.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	then squeeze the syringe before reaching the bladder, and feel the patient's pain reaching the empty thing, and this is not done properly according to these orders because the direction it goes in is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then pull the thread through all the wool bit by bit, and the urine follows the thread, then extract it forcefully, and stop the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and begin the syringing as long as the bladder is empty and the patient is calm.
des maladies de la vessie	From the diseases of the bladder.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When ulcerations or abscesses come to the bladder, and putrefaction is gathered there, you should draw off water and medicines through a device called a "clepsydra", and it is made in this form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if it opens again:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	from one side, and the other, as you can see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the hair roots by which the cure is made so sharp that it stops the pain without addition, if we can extract the moisture and drive out as much as necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see your drugs in the bladder, place the end of the probe in the moisture, and pull gently until it is out.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	if you pull out the moisture with the probe, then quickly twist the handle firmly inwards;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	if the moisture goes inside completely and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of a gentle enema by which the bladder is enemeated;
si est ci:	If there is a fire burn:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is of silver or gold, and it is the most precious part;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and remove it from the skin where it adheres.
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you intend to use for a warm enema; then bind it between the two breasts with a strong double thread, and heat the moisture over the fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then insert the tip of the enema bag into the rectum, and squeeze your hand over the bladder until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle of it, and pierce it evenly all around.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then insert a strong thread into these openings, reassemble the circle as one does with a dal (a traditional dish), and inside place what you see fit of oil and moisture and water, and bind it with the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already discussed the methods of cutting and extraction, together with medicinal remedies.
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and he explains the distinction between a stone that has grown within a person, its signs, and in which stone one must perform surgery.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is inside the bladder occurs more frequently in children, and it is a sign of acute urinary tract infection, similar to water in its subtlety.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and open the wound wide, and greatly soothe the patient's pain, and probe it many times, and then it heals slowly.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and at the mouth of these sores, we find their origins.
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and the healing of children is light until they are four years old, and it is very difficult for the elderly, and it is in the middle for those between youth and old age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and the cure is lighter for those who have great stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with a enema, to draw out all the impurities from the bowels.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often becomes trapped, seeking to pass the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, and upright him, and move him from side to side, so that the stone descends to the very bottom of the bladder, and never stays in the high part.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then make him sit between your hands, with his hands resting on his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downward.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then place your hand inside and touch it.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not yield to pressure from the fingers, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, and the patient is suffering from a chronic condition, or your middle finger for a younger patient;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and press it firmly in its base, grasp the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, if there is pain in the groin area;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press with your finger, and the stone will move away from where you feel it;
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the patient to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to stretch their right hand above them, and with their left hand, remove the skin covering the stones in the area where the incision is made;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	then I press the sponge tightly, which forms this shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	and make incisions between what is between the cheeks and the anus, not in the middle but along the left side of the opening.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and it should be straight on the stone, and your fingers should be either above or below it, and cut across so that it becomes wide enough to accommodate the stone's size, but narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	in case the fingers pressing on the one below (the stone) suddenly slip, so that it comes out without effort;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and knows that there is hard or sharp stone where it has corners or edges.
si est griés a issir;	if it is caught trying to escape;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if it is like a thread, thin and round, whose exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	At the place where it has corners and edges, make the size larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not yield, you need to use pincers that are also like a file on the tip, to extract the stone so that it does not escape.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	you must remove the sharp instrument from the shoulder;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot do it thus, if the wound widens and the blood flows, and the sinew strains like vinegar;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there is more than one stone, first remove the largest one at the base of the bladder, then cut it out, and after that pull out the smaller ones if there are any others.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, they must cut it out carefully, making a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things often happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	if he dies, or the urine comes back again through the opening where the bones cannot join together;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but nevertheless make every effort to draw it out or clean it out with pincers, as long as you treat it piece by piece;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, apply to the wound incense and aloe and dragon's blood, tighten it, and place over it a moist cloth in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then resolve the patient's complaint on his collarbone, and do not loosen the bandage for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, if a lot of oil and water arises from the place, then apply the treatment with ointment of dye and basil ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if abscesses form in the wound and cause corrosion, and blood clots in the bladder, and by this means the urination is stopped, known in this manner as sudden with the urine.
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Then apply pressure to the wound, and extract the blood clot, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and cause putrefaction.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cleanse the wound with water and salt and vinegar, and assist it in every way you can, as long as it is healthy.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and it is necessary that all the herbs you use to cure him, tie his two legs, and apply remedies on top of the joint.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is located in the urethra, and it is stuck together, and urine cannot pass through.
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if you cure it as I say, cutting many times, then the size of the cut is an excuse for its size due to this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tested it this way.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take the iron at the beginning according to this form, and place it at three angles into the fire:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	then take a thread and tie it around the urethra behind the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then gently turn the drill into the stick until it reaches the stone.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the drill back to your hand in the stone little by little, as you can pierce the stone from another side.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	if the urine comes, then press your hand against that which is stuck from the stone inside the stick.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	if it is finally broken and bursts with the urine, causing the patient pain;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this for any reason, then take a sharp stone and another from above, then make the stick into a hook on the stone between the two links, then pull it out forcefully, and loosen the ligament, and clean the frozen blood in the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it while it is clean.
de la piere des femmes	of the woman's stone" (referring to kidney stones)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It is rare for stones to become entangled in women, and if it does happen, the treatment is difficult, and it is hindered by three things:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin.
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second reason is that one cannot find a woman well-versed in uncovering herself for men, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third way is that, perhaps, one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of healing.
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth way is that the stone in the woman's body is often harder than in men, so a deeper incision must be made, and great care should be taken. And if it becomes necessary, you must seek the help of a wife well-versed in this art, and with barely any time to spare, and if you do not find one, then do not hesitate to use a subtle, uncast method.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and it presents a wise dance in the life of women, where a woman who knows a part of the art, and instructs her to do what you command regarding the investigation of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and carefully consider if this woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then she must remove her hand or finger and seek the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, despite the pain in her finger, she should remove her finger or hand from the stone, and advise her to withdraw her finger or hand with the patient, pressing her left hand on the swollen bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If it is cut, it is necessary to move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder down to the thigh bone, until it reaches the root of the thigh.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh, where it is most painful, and feel the pain in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move it from above or below the stone, but make the first cut small.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then insert the blade into the cut, feeling the pain deeply in the wound as much as the stone can come out, and know that there are many ways of stones.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	This is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have roots.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know these things to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the wound does not heal, take vitriol powder and apply it to the place, holding it for an hour until the pain is alleviated.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, as long as the stone is hard, and have the tools I told you for extracting stones from people to assist you in your task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if the wound persists, and it is an artery that has been cut, apply powder to the place and press with bandages and bindings, and do not repeat this, leaving the stone and not pulling it, unless the patient dies.
puis cure la plaie.	then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the eyes open, return to your work while the stone is still hard.
de hernie carnouse	of flesh herniation
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Raming water is nothing other than the combination of moisture or white starch, which is detached from the heart of the objects, containing the heat.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and it is called "starch", and it is never properly in the cloth of the egg, if one believes that it is another substance.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it is the skin of the object between the white starch that we have mentioned.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and this happens no more.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this rameous is due to weakness that affects the testicles, and this material expands.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And never does it come from a blow on the joints, and this moisture has many colors.
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it turns to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or clear white, and this happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white as we have said, then the abscesses are red, very long like an eye, and do not open the joints, because moisture surrounds them all.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the wound itself, so it appears as an abscess with part of the flesh, and because of this, one thinks it is another wound.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if there is moisture between the skin of the coils and the white part, then it smells well.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	then when you see to know the colour of the moisture, try to pull out all the foreign objects within it, which will show its form beforehand.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to their strength and the replenishment of their body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then lay him on his back, on one thing a little raised, and place beneath him several sheets of cloth.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit him on his left side, and command the attendant to sit on his right, and extend the staff towards one of the two ribs at the heart's edge.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the scalpel, and cut through the skin of the ribs from top to bottom, and make your cut completely straight by following the contour of the rib's skin until it turns white, and carefully strip away the flesh according to its natural tendency.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then make a clean cut with a sharp instrument through the soft tissue filled with water, and extract all the water, then place your fingers, and the swelling will subside.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the heart of the swelling, but only the affected area.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	cut it all or in pieces, carefully along the edge, for if you do not cut it cleanly and sharply, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the bubble bursts out of your control, it is important to return it to its place once you have completed the work with the swelling.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then join the two books of the heart with a stitch, then treat it as other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the heart corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you bind the veins that are suspended, in doubt of the flow of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	then cut the vein from all that is suspended, extract the heart, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the vein is joined into two parts, knowing that these are two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	if you treat the other part just as you did the first one evenly, then wipe away the blood, and put a clean moistened compress over the wound with rose oil.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and place another moistened cloth with wine and oil, and put two cushions on top, and cover it with double-layered fabrics, and bind it tightly according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two fabrics, make them of shredded wool according to this appearance and join them with stitching at the top of the leg opening, one covering the inside from the crotch to the back, and the other covering the outside from the wrist to the tip.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two joints at the top of the two arms, and gather all the restrictions in the loop of the arm's bone;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and under no circumstances should this cautery branch be used on a limb the size of iron, but rather you should make a delicate cut with a scalpel, and strip the skin from the veins, and heat it as we have said before, so that the white part containing the blood is exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white part at certain intervals, and peel it with this hot and delicate cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And the doctor, in every way you can, as long as you stretch it all out;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is safer;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and hold them steady, preventing blood from escaping, and move the tools carefully;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything goes against you, whether an abscess or bleeding or any other complication, treat it as described above.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horror, then administer perforation as I have told you, and make sure that when you are certain through the signs we have mentioned, that the dislocation is caused by moisture, then leave the patient in a raised position.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then incise the abscess at the base of the entire spatule-shaped area deeply with the perforator.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and make the perforation wide enough for all the pus to flow out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then place a cloth on it, bind it, and let it heal, then treat the wound until it is clean;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white cloth does not allow the blood to flow out of the wound, it is necessary that you insert a needle or the instrument used to drain water from wounds, in such a way as to form (the desired effect) beforehand;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and carefully probe the wound, and know that if blood returns, it gathers after six months or so, and when it gathers as before, then the patient will recover his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	You know that in the treatment of this branch there are more harmful dispositions, which is why it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I therefore say that many abscesses come where there is inflammation, especially in the bowels.
et c’est par mout de cas.	and this is through many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is to know by way of excessive acidity and aguity, which is spread through wounds or percussion.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the flesh.
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and it causes no pain, but the abscess is painful.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and sometimes it is a grey and purple abscess, with a bright red color, and does not come from any new artery or vein swelling.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from an artery, if it is known by the hot swelling of the abscess, when you press it with your hands;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it is not appropriate that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	What is made from vein inflammation is known by its arrangement in the gentle touch of the hands, and it can be carefully cut along this line, and on other similar parts.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the cord of the veins, then the heat goes up, and the white color becomes satisfying, and releases the suspending from all parts of the heat.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the eye is already inflamed with these hot poultices, then it is necessary that you treat the eye and the socket.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is swollen to the point of pain, or in those parts within the veins, then you must release all that pressure, and treat the socket accordingly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the source of the pain is behind, it is necessary that you remove it entirely, and extract the foreign body, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, immediately apply a moist woolen compress with rose oil and wine to the wound, then use other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess wrapped in a similar covering to a boil, with the softening of the tissues, and it prevents the patient from moving much due to the pain.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and the treatment for this illness is also very painful, as I have mentioned before, and nonetheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you make the patient lie on a clean bed, then apply a suspension of herbs below the armpits on both sides, to all the vessels close to the limb, and wrap them tightly with bandages.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	then cut with a sharp spatula along the vessels, as they are exposed, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then he inserts an needle with a double thread, and ties it to the first place where the bone came out, and then ties it again to the other side.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then place them correctly in the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound as with others, binding it tightly so that no one lags behind;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for if no harm comes from it, and all the vassals come together, then it is necessary to bring everyone together;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the eyes do not lose their vision due to the incision of the vassals, and become dry and cannot help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	From the rupture of the sinew.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The remedies of this branch are obtained through incision where it is needed, or by extending it on the belly in the region of the angles, so that the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the organs.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this rupture is either from the incision or from the extension, and these two methods of movement have various causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or from percussion, or jumping, or screaming, or the lifting of heavy sorrow, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is from the extension, are that it happens little by little, over a long period of time, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and it makes the abscess even until it reaches the healthy part, because it pleases to straighten the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign is when it is from the incision that a sudden pain arises at the beginning, and various abscesses appear under the skin close to it, due to the discharge of the intestine and the flow of blood from the syphilis.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never remove the pus with the intestine, as it becomes stuck and causes great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these poor treatments with iron, for which one must be wary.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of this work is that you instruct the patient to straighten the intestine with their fingers inside the wound if they are able.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then remember over their collarbone. Between your hands, lift the cheeks.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then take the knife above, and shave all the hair from the legs down to the root.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then insert into the books of the stomach with hooks according to what you need to open the wound, and be sure that it can no longer protrude.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then peel off the skin that is beneath the muscle tissue, exposing the white flesh on all sides until it is completely uncovered.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then insert your index finger between the muscle, between the white flesh that is beneath the skin of the thigh, and between the second flesh, starting from behind the bone, and between the second flesh.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then move the hand on the right down towards the heart, and let it rest with its palm facing upwards on your left hand, easing the pain throughout all the affected areas towards the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the attendant to extend the pain-relieving agent upwards, and release that which is behind the bandage.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and cut between your fingers if any part of the intestine is wrapped up or has hardened, and if you feel anything, press it into the belly.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle with a thick thread made of X threads, and pass it through the posterior part where there is flesh, after the skin of the cheeks.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	after the cutting, then sever the parts that appear as threads, as long as there are four threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the skin, which we have said is beneath the flesh of the cheeks, with a strong thread from both sides.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the parts with threads and bind them so that no foreign bodies can enter inside, preventing any abscesses from forming.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and then take hold of the ligament according to the first long ligament, and after these two ligaments, leave it as it satisfies the depth of the tissues, half a digit from the heart of the matter.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and after all the other according to the shape that the eye has;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut into the part that is beneath the skin of the tissues, as long as it is free from bones and muscles, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply moist wool in oil, and cover the wounds, and apply the ligament as we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the white flesh we have mentioned, after incision, out of fear of bloodletting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this often happens, leaving the ligament intact until it chooses to heal on its own.
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it takes time to heal, apply hot water and continue with what we have said until it chooses to heal.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another remedy until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of flesh herniation
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, never has anyone dared to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the elders say that it is made like a root that holds the joint together, in such a way that you bind the vessels, after trimming them lightly on both sides.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cut me open, and treat the abscess of him who opens, until the veins bleed.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	No fracture should occur suddenly, as we have said, and open the joints.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and do not allow any intestines to protrude like buttons, and if they do, it is a sign of great danger, and repair them every hour.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and nevertheless if it stays too long at this point, he believes there is a wound or ulcer, until the intestines descend.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens due to the extension of the ulcer, which is aggressive, as we have said, because it extends, then softens and swells up, opening up.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have said before;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and it is never cured with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and make the patient lie on their back between your hands, then cut the ligament of the dislocation with a sharp knife according to the quantity of three fingers.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the beneficial substance that is beneath the skin, take a needle and place it on the apparent surface of the dislocation.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it fully on the belly, then cut the two apparent ligaments of the dislocation on the side of the needle, and cut each one.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the side of the needle, and do not cover the dislocation with any substance or extend it, as I have told you in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then treat with wound care.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you treat the wounds, if they are dirty and the injury is clean, then do so until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The treatment is difficult, and it has no appearance in the rupture, but the cauterization moves in this place, and is closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the thick skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Often the walls of vessels in no man's land become softened, because the substances within them are mellowed, and it is visible.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it requires skill, when one wishes to cure it, to lay the patient on his back and cut into the softened tissue on his natural skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then bring the two edges together with a stitch, and if you see that the excess of the softened tissue is too much, cut it away with three or four firm stitches.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then cut between the seams, and treat it as other wounds, as long as they are clean, and pull out the thread.
dou chastrement	1. This treatise, a guide for medical practices, offers
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	You know that chastity is esteemed in our law, and for this reason I would rather not speak of it in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is not necessary, except in two ways:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one is that he should answer wisely when asked, and in a way that indicates the remedy.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often have need of cautery on certain animals to help us, as with a goat and sheep and cat and other creatures.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say, therefore, that cautery is performed according to two manners:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the method where we employ attraction, let us immerse the animal in hot water, so that the muscles relax and remain relaxed.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then press it with your hand until it is healed and you no longer feel it.
Du chastrement de taille:	From the castration of the body:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	It is necessary that you hold the animal, and press the hide of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut each one separately, when you have well scorched them.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and do not leave any pain or discomfort, nor the subtle pleasure that is on the vessels.
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this method of castration is superior to that which is done by attraction, because with attraction, perhaps something from the testicles remains, causing the animal to desire lust.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then treat the wound as long as it is clean.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphroditism exists in two manners among humans:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one is when it is between the two sexes so similar to the form of a woman's nature, with hair and never cuts short.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, who have a penis on their hand, as if it were a phallus, and two vulvas.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment for both men and women is that you remove all the infected parts, and treat them as other wounds.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In a second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Of the tendon
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tendons are a tightly adjusted char on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see.
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and no woman has it as much as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	You should remove the excess of tendons from your hand or fingers, and cut them lightly.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not harm me too much, lest the blood flow bring about further complications, then apply another remedy until he is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and there is another affliction that appears in the mouth of the mare, and spreads, and perhaps jumps, and resembles a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it the "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to take care of it, as we have said before, with the tweezers and cure as long as it is healthy.
de erratique	erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erroneous is the judgment when the nature of women is not properly perceived, or the opening (hernia) is small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is either by nature from birth, or accidentally from illness that it occurs.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is through the adjustment of parts, or a subtle and specific cause, and is done in perfect harmony, whether in front, or on the side, or beneath, or in any way.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and one must be careful with conception, childbirth, and sometimes even the flow of flowers to have.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of these is through the observation of dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the dislocation is recently apparent, whether by your own hand or by chance.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is a delicate pleasure, and close to the heart, if you are quick, and the tongue thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	with your two index fingers together, and the woman on her back, spreading her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then the two hands form a circle, as long as the delicate pleasure is round, and it covers the stoppings.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	then take wool and soak it in oil, and place it on the wound, and lay the woman face down each day, so that she cannot move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the dislocation is hard and deep, then you should use a spatula-like instrument resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the dislocation is of the shoulder, hold it still with bands and slings.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and use remedies to stop blood, such as licorice, dragon's blood, incense, and plenty of eggs.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then apply a wide poultice, so that the wound cannot heal.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and thus continue for a long time, applying a dry linen bandage.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat other ailments as long as he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when the swelling comes from heat, if it needs to be covered, do so according to this manner; if it is not an abscess, apply compresses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess swollen from heat, do not apply any treatment with the hand.
des emorroides	From hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that, without proper care, can become severe. When hemorrhoids have been present for a long time, they tend to worsen.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And we have discussed in the previous section the similarities and signs, and I will now describe those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and their complications, when they are completely in the rectum, and do not appear to be felt, can only be effectively treated with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the opening of the rectum can be felt, and these are those that can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is therefore advisable to place the woman in a cold house, then apply the other treatments with tweezers, and cauterize her roots, then powder herbal remedies that stop blood flow, such as mullein and dragon's blood, and similar substances.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then immerse his feet in the wall for an hour, then place them in cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if the fever persists, prepare a decoction of sumac and bark from pomegranates and gallstones and similar things, then take flour from barley, mix it with honey and oil, and make an ointment to apply to his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it becomes moist, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If that does not help, apply cupping glasses to his back without injuring the breasts;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	then take flax, soak it in the juice of plantains or in the juice of hawthorn with old wine, and apply it to the joint.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess rests, apply a clean dressing to the wound until it is healed.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp point, so it should be covered as I have said in the previous text.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then apply the cure until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses in women
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many different types of abscesses occur in the body, such as chancre, previous abscesses, herbs, boils, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is therefore necessary that I explain in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the gum, which is not a true abscess but one that is bow-shaped.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you want to know the work of fire, look to see if the abscesses are inflamed at the beginning of their appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red, then you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then do not hasten to pierce, but let it die as long as the pain is soothed;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then make the patient lie on his side, and have him take small sittings, leaning back and resting on his back, bringing his feet together to stretch out the leg;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his legs be spread apart, and place his arms beneath his knees, and bind them well with a strong ligature.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then push the tongue towards the right side, and use the instrument to open the mouth of the wound, from which comes the shape.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you use this instrument, you first insert the right side to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters with the instrument does not go further than it should, and it does not harm the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instrument is larger, it should be covered with a deep layer of cloth so that the instrument does not hurt.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary that he places the horn of the instrument above and turns on the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess opens and it is punctured gently with the hand, if it is necessary to cover it, use a cloth over the top, leading the pus.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the bowel is emptied, it is necessary that you place moist gauze in the wound, either with rose oil or dried green oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and place the clean, moist cloth over the wound at the exact point of the fracture, and place it firmly over the fracture and the attached forearm, using hot herbs or lukewarm water.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it after two days of healing have passed, as long as it is healthy;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and never raise the fracture or wound with a cleansing of water and honey, and then water or cooked roots of lys and long arista (herbs)
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to the dressing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is healed in the margin, it is necessary to be careful not to use fire, but treat it as we have said in the previous section.
de l’enfantement	from childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	Trade is first in birth that she knows the form of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman rushing below, and longing to smell the aroma.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then the child hastens to be born.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	then know that these children are according to the natural form, and their heads and shoulders are the first to emerge.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press the belly, so that the child is born quickly.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	because when it descends towards its head, it follows with him, and is freed from its excesses through good cleansing.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this, which comes otherwise, does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it never comes on its own feet, but rather invades the body or attacks a joint, and the hands, or it appears in the abdomen, or above, and turns by chance onto its neck, or takes other malicious forms;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	if one must dance, they should be wise and subtle in these matters, washing away error and disappointment, and I will show you all the forms as to how one should assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the fever comes upon his head by natural cause, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, making her stay on a saddle, or women hold her;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and if his nature is of oil or fenugreek cooked, then boil it between his two fingers using the small spatula whose shape is as follows:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and split the second layer, and cut into his nail as much as the moisture that is deeply embedded;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and press the woman's belly as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to enema the woman with fennel seed mucilage mixed with sesame oil;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then make him breathe deeply and sneeze from the condition, and hold his mouth and nose for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	if the child is now born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands come out, it is necessary that you reset them gently, little by little.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a seat, and raise her feet high.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then he should stand up from a seated position on the ground, and tie down the woman so that she does not try to get up.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	if he cannot insert his hand, the fetus dies, if he cuts with a knife that is placed before him, extracts the child, and resets it just as before.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes onto its feet, it should be pushed up.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it back and forth, until it is even.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then press gently from the feet and extend little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	He can jump as high as his feet allow if he is commanded to press, and the action makes him sneeze due to the condition.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if he jumps, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not happen as we have said, if it returns little by little, according to the natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it becomes slightly easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come out as we have said, take a small amount of musk and oil from the anus, and gum melted, and grind all in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and place it over the female nature within and outside this remedy, then make her lie in deep water up to the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is soaked, make a collar of myrrh and place it over her, leaving it for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her lie on a seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose tight, and gently press her belly, for the child is now ready to be born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the emergence of the child onto its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child takes this form, it will move its hands little by little.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then he should be mindful on his collarbone, and let the weight hang down below, and lie still on his side.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and he should bend his hands little by little, and then grasp the hands on the belly, and remove the cushions from beneath, as far down as possible.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if he feels pain, he should take his feet and move them slightly, then move the belly upwards, and finally bring the hands together.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and gently move the child.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instruct the woman to impregnate herself as long as the child is inside.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the birth of the child who comes with a large hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I understand it is my duty to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be brought back, then lift the woman and let her go;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot go, then make her lie down on the bed and straighten her legs;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then administer the musk that I have mentioned;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, if you keep her still on one side, then try to bring back the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and deliver the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command her to push until the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the birth of the child on its mother's womb, let it spread its hands and turn its face away from its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I know that the pain will grip her hand, then she slowly moves it back and forth, and gently presses it.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, apply the warm, natural muscles and oil as we have said, then command her to move little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, leave the fire on the seat, and command it to burn.
et la fai esternuer.	and make it sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for all the rest
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it appears in this manner at regular intervals, if the second one catches on your fingernail, while the moisture is being drained.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and bind it tightly to its face and neck, if the piece from the wound is caught, don't let it be restrained, and the dying person will pass away.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then turn the child inside, as long as you have placed it correctly, and instruct the woman to breathe deeply at regular intervals.
adonques si istra legierement.	then gently stretch it.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that many times twins are born, and never more than three or four.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not an unusual thing, and it happens often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	These are strange things, and they do not live long, without name.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they multiply, and are devoured by the pleasure that creates them, which is related to the mouth.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and never depart so naturally from all of us, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they depart severely, as the cure is as we have said, and there are subtle pains, making them sharp and light in their actions.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do so as it is worth for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	No joint is ever formed in the margin I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than XV, and they are all shaped like a child according to the measurement of its glorious sagacity, and it is necessary that the wise healer knows all this, for sometimes a similar occurrence happens.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	it is done according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you cure a woman who has lost her child or is pregnant, as I have said in the previous section, and there is no sign of delivery, and you are forced to intervene by hand;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	If it is necessary for you to know if a woman is of sound health and does not have any fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	It is necessary that the woman lies on her back, and that her legs are inclined downward, and raised.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and applies the ointment to both parts, so that she lies in bed and is not treated for the descent of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mother's mouth with moist oil and fennel seed powder and flaxseed, then apply this ointment to her hands.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then press the joint gently, then seek the place where it should be, and take care that the ligature does not descend onto his head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if the ligatures are in his own hands or on his neck or in his mouth or on his palate or under his beard or by force or near his sides, and if their descent is towards the feet, then tie them or pinch them to the middle ribs.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that he holds the ligature in his right hand, and places the forceps between his two fingers of his left hand, and presses it gently throughout his hand, and ties the ligature to none of the joints we have mentioned, until it reaches the hollow of the joint.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the shape of the bone:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then find another bone, where you need it most, so that the extraction is even.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stretch it equally from one side to the other, to extract it, and let the bones grip tightly, as shown in this shape:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part remains stuck, apply no oil to its joint, but press it in that direction, and pull the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if it persists, place this incision deeper or higher up, and do as much as possible until it comes out entirely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	and if one hand comes forward before the other and it cannot return due to tightness, then you should wrap it in a cloth until it recovers completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	then cut in the joint of the foot or leg, and thus you should also do with the other hand, and hold both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and stuck in the birth canal, or it has a sharp, concentrated wound, then you should press the spinous spatula between your fingers, open the head, and extract the blood.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	You use the instrument called an "almidach" to shape it with the tools and chapter that follow this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus, I myself make it attach firmly with great natural strength;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull the bones with pliers, and the joints jump out, and they are strained with force, as if broken, until all the moisture that is inside comes out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, break it into pieces with the force that you have.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swelled in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture drains out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the infant is on its feet, there is a slight attraction, and the direction towards the mouth of the womb is gentle.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is twisted in the stomach or at the breast, then you must stretch it until the enveloped drape around the hand is loosened.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and making the stomach or breast hollow, until the moisture within it drains out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if another member (limb) is broken and the chip remains, press the hand firmly into the wound's opening and draw it towards the mouth of the wound.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then I press the bone deeply, and pull;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the opening of the wound has narrowed due to the hot abscess that has formed there, it is not appropriate to work on it, but rather moist and greasy things should be applied.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and apply it with moist poultices, using warm water to soften and moisten it.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the limb is on its side, and you can put it back in place, apply what we have said for the living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if it cannot be joined together again, after being separated into pieces, it leaves no trace of dislocation.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when this is done, apply what we have said about the incisions that come from the sea.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if the flow of blood comes, it should be treated with immediate restraint, and other remedies should be applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had been bitten by a child; then I examined another on that same spot, and removed the other bite.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, a painful abscess formed in her cheek, swelling so much that it opened, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong plaster, and an egg came out, and after some days, others.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because that stomach has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I examine the wound, and if there are broken bones, I treat them until the woman is in better condition.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and examine the woman long tens thus, and then let go a little of the pain from the blue.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have never recorded this chapter except because, when the masters encounter a strange thing, they know how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	return the woman to her place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	After this comes the form of pressure, with which one binds the books.
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and at the second turn, as the second joint of the limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the horns should be more subtle in their tightening, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth should be wide enough to fit two fists, and the margin of the cut should be one palm and a half long;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and also adjust the two limbs to be equal in length of this same fist, firmly joined together, half a palm's length or slightly longer;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two adjustments are fitted into the mouth of the joint to open it when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, with a more subtle and lighter appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of pliers.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and it should have two adjustments, as you see, of a palm's length, and two fingers' width;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see the vagina open fully with the instrument, have the woman lie on her back, with her legs apart and knees bent, then carefully adjust both adjustments into the vagina, holding the end of the instrument beneath her hips.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then use your hand to grasp the entire instrument, just as you did with the pincers equally, according to the amount that you see opening the mouth of the wound, until the pain ceases to be what it was.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	all these instruments are thoroughly constructed and have many similar counterparts;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	and when you have equipped them, the more quickly they operate, and the greater their effectiveness for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not disregard the instrument even if you have not arranged it properly, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second stage of childbirth is reached, it is important that you instruct the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze forcefully, holding her hands firmly over her mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if it falls through this, it is fine.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If the bone does not come out, take I a tool, and make I an opening or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as fennel, rue, anis, chamomile, kasia, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all of these herbs, or none of them, should be cooked or put in water on the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then put a tube or opening into the wound, and the other end in the mouth of the injury, and hold it until the vapor comes inside the wound;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make him sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the patient experiences a second complication.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if after this treatment she remains weak, and is not fully recovered, she should be instructed to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or almond mucilage, then apply it to the affected area, and let it rest in that position.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she feels it, she should gently press and stretch it little by little straightening, so that the pain does not hinder the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but it is necessary to move slightly to the right and left, then pull.
si venra et se desaerdra.	if it comes and goes away.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the mare is tightly closed, we have said the remedy of sneezing and inhalation of herbal fumes.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not from all that we have said, be careful not to follow the milking.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that one who is at the mouth of the mare, you bind it to the woman's thigh, and then wash it with a four-ingredient ointment.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if it loosens and resets, it will return again;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but nevertheless, if it loosens and causes a foul smell in the stomach and head, and makes the patient pale.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Therefore, suitable fumigations should be used:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	No one among the ancients has tried fuming with arugula and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one cauterizes a woman to stop the flow of blood and milk is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is like a glass vessel, and one places the head gently in its natural state, and wide openings over the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let there be fumigations over coals, and scabs until they are completely healed, and start again with another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who have not yet had their roots pierced, but they are quietly satisfied with a subtle remedy.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	so it is necessary at the bath to pierce this remedy in its proper place, and do not pierce it with a sharp instrument, and secure the bandage so that it does not touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place a moist linen cloth soaked in wine and oil, and continue the treatment with the ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not return, insert or open a plug of flesh, and leave it for a long time, and it becomes rigid when the child wants to move into its chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And never does this stopping of the wound or abscess come suddenly;
si covient coper celui soudement:	if it is necessary to stop that sudden flow:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	if it is cured, as we have said about the pain of drowning.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from its foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that occur beneath the fundament are called "nodation," and those that come from above the fundament are larger, or in the space between the two parts, if there is one fistula or more;
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when this node is old, if it opens again and moisture causes a white or subtle swelling, then these fistulas do not heal.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and they are known to those who observe its management or vent as the patient makes an effort, and by chance one jumps up.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if the fistulas penetrate just below the bladder, and just halfway up the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach just below the knee joint, and just above the calf.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus recognize the present fistula in the fundament, and not middle:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and if you insert your index finger or fundament, and push a fine needle of steel or iron into the fistula where there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is curvature, if you push a thin point, or a horsehair, as far as you feel the point or hair with your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out with extraction or blowing, as we have said;
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	says that he shouldn't pierce at all;
si te haste dou curer.	if you rush the cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula persists up to the bladder or up to the urethra, if it lets go of the urine, and cannot be healed by medications.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced just before the joint of the thigh, then the blood tends to flow towards the joint;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no distortion and the pain around it is not severe, if it bows again later, and no sudden treatment with dressing is effective.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And regarding these persistent fistulas, there is no sure cure but through hard work, and the folly of those who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In the one that is neither persistent nor ancient, there is hope for healing through fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies on their back between your hands.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and flexes their legs up to their thighs, and inclines their hips towards their belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then wraps a bandage of cloth, or a sponge if there is curvature, as long as you know where the bandage begins.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels pain deep within, it is necessary that you press your index finger upon it, and they will then feel the point piercing them.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and if you feel a hole between your thumb and forefinger where the satisfaction or pleasure is felt, then know that it is open.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if it does not heal properly with any treatment, then it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	Nevertheless, there is nothing that we can do to fully heal them, but it happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and with this aid, it is when one applies the heat of the cautery gently according to the extent of the fistula, as has been said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and the entire heat is applied to the fistula until it removes the source of the problem.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this twice or three times, as long as you know that these marks must be burned, which resemble the feathers of an eye.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then apply warm, moist compresses until the inflammation subsides, and finally, use a soothing treatment that draws out and seals the wound.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he/she is in such a state, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this cannot be cured in any other way, then it must be treated thus:
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and insert between them, and do not pierce through to the deep muscle that is at the base, and between your finger and the tent, place a thick covering of cloth or something similar, and you will see the fistula opening where the covering touches the heart.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you seal the beginning of the fistula and pull it back before the tent, then cauterize after, as long as it reaches the top of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and he will be freed from pain and suffering.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then identify those marks that resemble a bird's feather, and do not remove anything without reason.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pain attacks you and cuts between you and the work, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For fire cautery combines two good things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, the burning of these adjusted parts, and the stiffness of blood and the dryness of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then apply a moist cure or something crushed, while the bones are bowed, and push the burnt parts into the bow.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound with hot irons and hard charcoal, which are dry medications.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula appears all the way to the bottom of its origin, and it is distant from the body, if you press on its root or origin, it will hurt.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel a tent, and within it is the web or the glue or the charcoal, or it is ready to pierce, and there is no other way out of danger or hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it all the way through, or if you can, you apply a tent and treat it as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not force me too much, so that you do not disrupt the attachment which holds the fundament, and the expulsion comes from the side without willingness.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then apply the cure, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	in case it should heal, remove that covering and clean it, then as it is freed from the fundament, either with a needle or another instrument pointed;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then remove the foreign body from the wound as much as possible;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then study to restore the wound and hold the fistula in the part devoid of the base.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And never are fistulas like this way:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side near the base from the leather above, then take a sharp knife at the top according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And press the thread wrong in two, and press the tent along the entire thread into the fistula as far as it goes to the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is persistent on the edge near the foundation within, then extract the thread from that hole, just as you insert your finger into your foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and take the thread from the head, and gather the two joints together, and tighten one to the other, and leave it for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and do not loosen it, as long as the thread breaks these three threads that are between them, and tighten.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then dress the wound as long as it is sealed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If you cannot puncture the fistula, no matter what method you use, it will not be too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not appropriate to make the wound too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	He describes a form of painful, thorny spasms that cause the formation of a fistula if it is severe and persistent, one side cutting and penetrating.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand not, because one cannot catch what one should not catch, as you see here:
des emorroydes	Of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Hemorrhoids occur in two ways:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	or they are inside the anus, as hard as a grain of resin, and there can be small or large ones, and sometimes they ooze blood, and sometimes they have one or more, protruding from the anus and extending into the anal canal.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are burnt have little moisture, and still, even now, if there is a little of the citrus water or some blood, and they have the colour of fresh flesh;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those who have them deep within the fundament, so instruct the patient to stretch himself slowly to move into rooms, until the fundament is healed and the children appear.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you act quickly, and have a pair of pliers, or hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at the roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if they cannot hold the eyes due to moisture, if they take them in a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and then extract them carefully, cut them, and sprinkle hot powders onto the wound that are suitable for cauterization;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, and treat other ailments until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the roots cannot come out, if you give the patient a harsh and biting enema to wash what is in the fundament, so that it can come out firmly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	Let the patient lie still, and if their legs are deeply embedded, it is a light cure.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and if you pin them with your fingernail or pliers, cut them off, then treat them as we have said, while they are still healthy, and fear the incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	It is necessary that you administer the stitch according to this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	take a twisted thread, and wind it into a needle, then pass the thread over the top and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread back through the needle, making them wide.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and hold the thread tight, then twist the thread, and extract the needle, and do thus with all the others, and leave some for draining the excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then place on the base a moist cloth or a rose-colored oil-soaked cloth, and place it over the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave it until they heal, and when they have fallen off, apply treatment and other remedies until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	The phrase "dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement" translates roughly to "the careful handling of the
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is drying up of feces in the intestine, due to nature's constraints, and when the illness is old and no medicine helps.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If it is necessary for you to remove the skin with the tip of a spatula or with your finger, which prevents it from becoming moist;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat it as it should be,
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be treated, then repeat the shaving more strongly than before, as long as it does not become infected and is cut.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it while it is healthy.
dou fremit	Douloure" is the Old French word
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Ants are small, hairy creatures that burrow deep within the body, and they continue to grow in strength.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and never does the treatment cool down, and it feels as if all life has left the body, spreading throughout the entire frame, and more intensely in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a thin strip of an ostrich or strong dove feather, and place this cane onto the frozen area, pressing until the red circles cover the entire affected spot.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand over the entire cane while pressing around the frost, making it completely dry, and extract the frost from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see that it is a needle of steel or iron made according to this form, and it is sharp from below and cuts through from above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	I do not understand, for I must hold the eye, and press it.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, if cauterizing the tremor, as it is before or in the chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a cloth enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Never should one use an enema of silver or arsenic, or molten iron or mail.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	And never should one use these small and large instruments, according to those to whom they are applied.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those are therefore small, used in the treatment of children who are weak and suffering.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	He must prepare a small and wide enema if it is too narrow above; thus, the abdomen is tied according to this manner.
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and I say there is a desire or the belly should be tied, as you see, and the feces should be seen to pass through.
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and the belly should be filled with medicines from a bladder of a good animal or parchment, and it should be punctured all around with small openings, and there should be one space between each opening, then thread through these openings a strong thread made of twisted crimped wire in an X or spiral shape, and tighten the belly as if it were a bowstring.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is applied, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then give a enema.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and it takes the form of a soft circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and apply oil or egg yolk or similar to the head of the enema bag, then gently squeeze it.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then the healer should grip the enema bag with both hands together, until it is completely full, then extract the enema and gently lower the patient's legs against the wall, allowing the medicine to exit as best as possible.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps soundly through the night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use the compress for a stomach disorder and the medicine flows out quickly, have the patient rest until it is completely healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoid is either internal or external, it should be treated with as subtle a cleansing as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the subtle cleansing with which the skin is tightened:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already discussed the treatment of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	or we will tell you the treatments of hands and medicine, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the parts where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by the striking of stone, and the cutting of sword and knife, or of spear or staff or arrow, or of similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or according to the laws of the body, as when a wound breaks out on the neck, or on the head, or on the side, or on the belly, or the liver, and similar parts.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple wounds of the head, because the remembrance will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound appears on the head, and the bone is not broken, be cautious if it is caused by a sharp object or similar things, and the skin is nonetheless torn and the wound is great, and you doubt slightly of an abscess forming.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if it soon becomes healthier on its own, especially if the wound oozes little blood, and it heals on the contrary from the affected part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and patients should avoid drinking wine and eating fatty meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to heal, let his flesh be reduced, and he should not drink wine, nor eat meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and apply this to the wound; if an abscess forms and it comes out, then use cotton moistened only in rose oil or strict wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, then apply to the wound, if it is fresh and all its blood is not moved by air or powder, I will say a little later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it moves again, after having applied any heating, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like the size of a sword or similar, and the edges cannot come together, they should be brought together by stitching, as I will explain for wounds in the belly from the stitches.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it bleeds heavily, but only for a short time, then he should apply pressure.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat substantial meats, such as beef, cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find putrefaction in the flesh or leather that does not reach the bone, apply pressure to stop the putrefaction and treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without cutting, and you cut it, even if it's only by a thread,
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and it is that you put this powder which hardens so that the fire consumes it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the method of the powder is thus:
pren encens une partie;	take a portion of incense
sanc de dragon II parties;	dragon's blood in two parts
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	take living chalk in three parts, and grind it finely, and apply it to the wound, and form it tightly, until it disperses well and joins with all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then bind it well, and leave it to loosen if it does not swell.
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	because one should not remove medicine as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never should one use charcoal only, unless you have frankincense or dragon's blood, but the fire must have moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	and if the wound has changed or moved, especially in an infected state, unless someone puts this powder on it;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply no hot compresses or poultices made of ground barley flour with water and honey while it is still fresh.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply other remedies until it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if a bone fracture occurs with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with delicate pincers.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you after these fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the deep wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound occurs on the neck and it is simple, then it has no distinction from that in the head, but if there is damage to the nerves of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy but to let them heal, and do not put anything constrictive, for it harms the nerves and causes them to retract.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not apply any heat to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuity extends to the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be prepared, as if to wash in sweet water and mix with rose oil, and also wash the bandage in sweet water and other herbs according to this method, and moist plasters.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is great, if it cuts through the tendons and ligaments, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and infected, and full of pus, pierce them or lower down.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and pus flows, if left untreated, and the law (presumably referring to the natural process of healing) and cauterization are required.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the pain in the throat is cut, or the colors, and the passage is kept closed, so that the flesh does not move too much onto the cartilage of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then the healing process continues, without any delay, and apply medicinal treatments to it until it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are pieces of bone, if you can remove them all, then do so, but if you cannot, leave them until the wound rots and becomes gangrenous.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones or a fistula in the wound, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	wound from a lance or sword
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a blow from a lance or a knife, and the wound is very deep, then consider its direction and how the patient feels:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	then know that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not very deep and fresh with blood, do not apply the powder at once in the first hour, nor bind it to prevent the blood from clotting completely, or it may return to the body and cause the patient harm;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but I found a more attractive remedy, and tie it twice a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you have no remedy, put much cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient lie on the wound for three or four days, or even longer.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if there is no twitching or severe shaking of the body or any distress at all;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the bones returning to their proper place, then know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Cure the wounds with various remedies and others, as long as they are healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, keep working, until you know there is a fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	if the cure is as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is superficial or deep, on the front or back, the treatment for that one should be as follows;
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, of sewing;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, of powder, and if it is tightly packed into the bone, and has caused fragments, perhaps the wound, and treats them fiercely if they are infected.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not infected, then leave the wound to heal, and lighten the extraction.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds in other members, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	disruption of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures in the belly are great, medium, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the great wound, never let the intestines spill, or the inner lining of the intestines, which allows foreign objects to enter;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the stitching is more delicate, and never worth less for a small wound than for a great one, because we do not apply force to the intestines in it, unless we press them tightly from above and below;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	for because the intestines swell soon after being pushed, causing pain, if they are not pressed tightly, and due to this, the smaller wound is easier to treat, for we must first reset the intestines to their proper place before treating the others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common stitches are used in stitching the belly, and the stitch for other wounds of the body, and there are two other specific stitches that are common to other wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Nevertheless, they are more precise with the stitch of the belly, and I will explain each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say, when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestine exposed, and it is an easy matter to close it, then this is by one of the two manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to the injury.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in this way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	soak a sponge or a soft cloth in hot water only slightly warmed with vinegar, salt, and pepper, and press the intestine gently until the swelling goes down.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and never make constricting wines, but rather, be ready to apply heat as needed to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling depart, if the intestine is moistened with cold or hot and bad fluids, for this lightens the entry of a little thing.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, make a slight cut with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first remedy is to move the limb, for we must not cut without great need.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument for splitting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if it cuts deeply into the flesh and does not deflect, then see the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines burst forth, if you can return them to their natural place in their proper position, do so if you have the power, for it is beneficial.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is large and located in the lower abdomen, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back and elevate his legs higher than his head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then place the head and feet higher than the affected area, and also, when turning the patient from side to side, let the wounded part be higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus we must administer what I say to great wounds and injuries.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds, make them as if you are equipped, then take in your hands a gentle remedy that heals every break and closes the lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and this is the common method of stitching: you should puncture a needle or more, according to the extent of the wound, then leave two spaces from the edge of the wound, and insert a needle where there is good strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two joints through the skin with the two joints of the syringe, which is beneath the skin, as long as you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two joints of the syringe in three groups.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then stretch a double thread around the needle from both parts, then bring together the two joints of the wound properly, and then leave two spaces, and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	then tie the thread just as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to your need for needles, until all the wound is constrained.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and let the needles be of moderate size, between fine and thick, for the fine needles take all the blood, and the too thick ones cannot enter properly.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	because they need to be moderate in size;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and do not insert the needles too far beyond the depth of the flesh and dermis, as they will puncture and open the wound before healing.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then cut off the ends of the needles, so they do not irritate the patient when sleeping, and place a cloth or blanket over the ends of the needles to keep them still, and leave them until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as it requires only one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitch is common, and it is that you join the two parts of the skin and the two parts of the tissue together with a needle using one strong medium thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have joined these four parts together, return the needle to the beginning part, and stitch in the same way that you sew clothes.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and leave a space between each stitch, no thicker than the diameter of two needles.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitch opens the wound, and I sewed a wound that had a knife in the stomach, which was deeply cut, more than a palm wide, and it extended from the intestines two palms wide, and the wound was in the stomach.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine to its original position after it had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed completely within fifteen days, and he was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And they marveled that he was alive, and it was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not cure him with any treatment, as I was in a place where none could be found, neither any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and apply a cold compress to the wound two times a day, and wash it with honey water until it is healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Now, I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and hold it against the affected part from inside to outside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the center perfectly, if the tip is sharp or blunted or you have held the needle in a certain way, and it pierces from inside to outside again, do the same on the other side of the affected part.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as a tailor sews fur, and leave once the thread satisfied on one side, and take it up again on the other, until the stitch is entirely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second way of stitching, which Galens calls the proper way, is as follows: just as some join the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the main threads to the other main thread in this manner.
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	take a needle or a thread of magic nearby, and pierce only one side, leaving the two threads of the stitch;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	then turn the needle and make it pierce from the furthest part towards the inside, until it reaches the affected area.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce both parts from the furthest towards the inside, in two other areas of the mirror-like surfaces on either side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the most effective method of stitching, and the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	These words are from a medieval medical text, and no one can testify to their truth—one must sew the belly with needle and thread.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and you should push one needle from one side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew corsets.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, it is the most difficult stitch compared to other stitches in the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you discover the fresh wound filled with blood, and the flesh has moved, then press on the wound and the intestine, and stop the bleeding.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then apply the burning powder, and it will change the color, if you put on any dressing that is available, as long as the wound is open.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and take the thread, make it strong, and secure the healing, and the mirror.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as with others, as long as it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you have no medicine, then apply this, as soon as it begins to open again, cotton cloth, and move it two times a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you need no other medicine in various arrangements when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound affects the principal members, then it is necessary to apply a light bandage in warm olive oil or rose oil, and place it around the affected area, and under the armpits.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if it causes pain or inflammation in the bowels, and this often happens, then they should enema with red wine, especially when the inflammation reaches the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce it from within, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestinal organ, called "young" (or perhaps "innard"), cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is due to the frailty of its vessels, the subtlety of the entire body, and the similarity of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the cauterized wound jumps or moves, place it back as it was before, just like the intestine, while it is still fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it becomes much and turns towards red or black, then you must hold the black part still, for there will be no further blood flow, as there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then cut away what is between the bones, and hang both parts from the outside of the wound until they fall off, to ease the extraction when the cauterized parts come out, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the bowels
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in no man, for I have seen that a noble man was wounded in his belly by a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and formed a fistula, and from there issued evacuation and flatulence.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to bandage subtily as long as it was healthy, and the wound healed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him bound, I doubted that the patient would have pain in his stomach.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he did not have any pain, but rather improved conditions, foods, and drinks;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and they said no experiments should be done when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in such a way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take a large needle, then gather the edges of the wound, and when the needle has opened the mouth, place it between the two lips, so that it pulls the mouth together.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then cut off the head of the shoulder, and this remains so that it cannot dislocate, then place another piece in its place in this manner as before, until the wound is completely healed.
et cout la plaie.	and examine the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If the pain is sharp and penetrates into the intestines, and causes no harm to the patient, one can bind the intestines with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	take the end of this thread from the intestine, which is well cleaned, and then bind it to the end of this fine linen thread twisted, then thread it onto a needle, sew up the intestine, and rearrange it in its original position.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this method of stitching with stitches is not stronger than according to the path of purpose and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it affects one of the vital organs, there is no treatment subtle enough.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula, whether it be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Every wound or abscess, when it becomes infected, is generally called a "fistula", especially when it is covered with pus and feels warm.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the truth, hard and white, where no pain is felt, and it is also smooth like the feathers of a bird.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and it never becomes clear at any time, or dense at other times;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	not at all times, and sometimes enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken of the division of wounds; that every wound which is not clean, and there is no fever, is only outside one of the nine causes.
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, due to the smallness of blood or pus;
ou por sa malice;	or because of its evil nature;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is a hard fever inside, and on the lips, which does not allow anything to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	for there is too much bowing;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	for their bones are brittle, and the material is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	for their medicines are not good for treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	for this is how corruption is a manner of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	for the proprieties in the region are delayed digestion, and slow health, and oppressive by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	There are veins or bones here.
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already described all these causes, signs, and treatments of medications in the previous section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I tell you about the treatment of a fistula which is performed by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	You know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	because there are fistulas that affect large veins, arteries, and nerves, as well as the bladder, intestines, or kidneys, or any of the ribs, or the spine in the back, or any joint in the hands or feet.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it occurs at a point that belongs to the main member, and has similar joints.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas of this nature are difficult to heal, and there is no remedy but labor and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is no fistula that does not come to the place I mentioned, and you have faith in the remedy, and you see it take effect, take a piece of iron or steel, if the fistula is deep, then press it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is crooked, try to insert a thin piece of something flexible, for the bend will conform to the curvature.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if it is a fistula, wide open and you cannot examine it properly with your fingers, then close it by inserting a plug in one of the openings, for moisture flows from one opening to another and purifies it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then grasp it firmly with your power, so that you know if there are bones or nerves, and pull it out completely, and ask the patient in pain where they feel the pain when you press your hand, and the place where they feel it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you truly know the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint or nerve or artery or vein, or in none of the places I told you, then cut it according to what I told you, and remove the disorder and the corrupted flesh within.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then the cure as long as it is clean, and if the fistula is deeply located in the right place, it is necessary that you remove it completely, as much as you can, then apply wet compresses with a medicinal herb, and keep them on top of the fistula until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then apply warm compresses with healthy garlic, as long as it is clean;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not clean through this method, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, remove it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve does not affect your principal limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackening, remove it as soon as possible, then cure the wounded area thoroughly until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not healed, and the bone still curves as before, know that you are not yet allowed to proceed.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if it becomes exposed and you want to proceed deeply, remove all the corruption, then reset the bone to its original position.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healed, so much the better.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If that is not the case, know that the corruption is too extensive that you cannot overcome it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other force but to leave it to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can extract it with tweezers, using an appropriate instrument, and if there are many bones, they should be extracted carefully, leaving none behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if moisture makes it worse, there is no doubt or fear, for warmth and moisture, and freeing the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them for an hour, then apply something to the wound that promotes putrefaction, and leave it until the bones are rotted around them, and then they will become lighter.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is a large bone, like the leg or thigh, then apply so much pressure to the putrefaction until all blackness is removed from the bone, and then dress the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a great amount of corruption within the heart, it extends almost to the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it is necessary, cover and protect everything up to the point of corruption, then heal as long as it remains sealed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you about a fistula that occurs in a person's leg, so that you can take an example from it and receive help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	It was a young man around 30 years old who had pain in his leg due to something within the body that caused materials to reach the leg, resulting in a large abscess that could not be opened.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but because of their madness, they pricked too deeply into the abscesses, and burned many things, and it became a fistula, and there were many openings through which blood and moisture left the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many others had no cure for over two years, and there was no wise man in the art of healing, until I was called to it, and I saw his leg and the remedies with which he was cured, and what was corrupted through the openings in the body.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the skin of the young man became red, and had the color of a citron.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these openings, and then I examined all the openings, and found that some came against each other from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I quickly prepared a tool, and inserted it into one of the openings until I discovered a piece of bone, which I found corrupted and pierced, and the corruption extended all the way to the bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I realized what I was seeing with the corrupted bone, and believed that there was no other corruption except for the one I had left.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to treat the wound with strong medications for a long time, but it could not heal.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I began to recognize and discover the bone as I have mentioned before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and treated it, and then tied it, and focused on fusing the joint.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not until I had completely wrapped the bone in cloth, then treated it with all kinds of medicine.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it became healthy and the joint was healed firmly, and it did not want to repeat the operation again unless because of the weakness of the patient who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For in the evacuation of blood, it often happens completely, and a hard callus is formed in its place on the bone, which is well arranged and causes no harm or damage to anything at all, neither coming nor going.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this way:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take hold of the ligaments, and strain the end of the bone that is opened, and command anyone to extend it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and attach another stronger thread to the first one, and bind it onto the part where the bone is separated, extending the end, so that you pull the corrupt flesh away from the bone, and uncover the flesh on the place where you want to treat it, so that the bone is not damaged.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place I a table beneath the bone to keep the flesh from moving;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	it is important to examine it carefully as one can see and smell the corruption, and sometimes in another way.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	and if the bone is corrupted and will not open, and the corruption is in one place or another, it exposes the flesh completely.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then place I a table beneath, and then gently move from one part to another the corruption, and be sure that the pressure is just long enough on the corruption as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, cut out the corrupted joint, and the bone it contains from the other side.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, cut out the affected part if there is no other option.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or the ankle of the foot, and it is very strong, nonetheless you must inquire about that corruption how it opens.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and purify it in every way that you can, but ensure the vein or nerve does not oppose your actions.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and knows that the saw and the threads to cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this, it is necessary to match each type of operation with its appropriate instrument;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and knows that the work will show you the instrument of which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you think of the instrument you need according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The joints may become dislocated either internally or externally;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have treated that corruption with medicinal cures but they are of no avail, it is necessary to immobilize that member until the corruption disappears, so that the patient may be saved from death or from the greater evil of a defective limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs of this are that the limb turns black, as if it were burned by fire, and then the corruption spreads from member to member, taking over the entire body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you hastily cover it, and if it's due to the penetration of some venomous creatures, such as a sea scorpion or snake, and the corruption is at the top of the two, if you hit it, and do not give it any space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, if you hit the joint, so that the corruption does not come up to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes up to the arm, if you hit the shoulder.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes through the cut, it is death, and there is no remedy outside of the quantity of its virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and do the same when corrosion or rust occurs.
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it occurs on the first joint, then chop after the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it occurs deeply, chop all of it.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it ascends the leg, chop at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other cause but to bring the patient to death.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the method of binding or wrapping the member: if you fasten it above and below, extend one minister from the lower link, and another minister from the upper link, and release the band that is between the two links with a wide spatula, until the bone is exposed.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then bind or wrap it, and place each drape of linen on either side so that the lint does not touch the healthy flesh, bringing about further injury and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if the occurrence of blood comes when you open, if you cauterize the wound too harshly or place any restrictive powders on it;
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then return to your treatment as long as it is complete, then bind the afflicted member with a strong ligament, and heal it until it is sane.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you if it happens at home as if it were a dream:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	it had a blackness that seemed burnt from fire, and that corruption first appeared on its second toe, spreading over the entire foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the bone feels the heat, it hardens itself against the pain, and becomes healthy.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and after a long time, the pain returns or the bone feels weak in the hand, and it comes to me, and I place it on things that resonate after the purification of the body, but it cannot stop the pains.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and it made me grasp the hand, but I did not want to hurt the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I also doubted that if he cut off his hand, he would not die, for the strength of man was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he becomes desperate, returns to his land, and covers his hand, and is healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have no objection to this, unless it is done differently, as needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Abscesses never occur in fat tissue, and they stay for so long that they cause a great gathering of bowels.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then they rot and pierce, breaking the bowels and remaining in the body like a vassal.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin that is above is as delicate as fine cloth, and does not cut to the bone or nerve, and such a condition is called 'healthy', and is not called 'fistula'.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so extended that it reaches the bone in its progression, then it is called 'fistula'.
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is such that you must cut through it completely, especially when it is delicate, just as if it were fine cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not cease because of its putrefaction.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you think that the skin is rotting but the putrefaction is not yet complete and the skin becomes very hard, treat it with a cleansing enema as follows:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	check if the swelling is large and the bowels emitting a bad odor, then use an enema with Egyptian medicine prepared as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take as much honey, oil, and litharge, equally, and cook it in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take according to your need, and make it with water and honey, and enema the breast, and tighten the opening.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	leave the medicine on for two hours, then extract it while squeezing.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this several times, until the breast is healed and the pain is gone.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and never enema with water and ashes when this medicine is not present, but you press ashes from the bark of a vine tree, pour water over them, then strain it and use it for an enema, until you know that the breast is fully healed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot endure it, neither Egyptian medicine nor water from ashes can help, if he is enemas with water and honey, or has a little litharge ground in it.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you give him an enema of honey and sweetened wine, since honey has purifying properties and washes away impurities, and the wine makes the body air and healthy.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and once you have done this and are confident that the seeds are well purified, give him an enema with what causes a certain pain in it, and press on with cauterization, and apply it with rosin oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	You should administer some medications and remedies to it, of which I have spoken about their properties in treating wounds.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the wound in the side is small and the cannula of the clister cannot enter, enlarge it a little with a hot iron and insert a plug of Egyptian or basilicon poultice, as long as it is enlarged.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too wide, so much that it causes a great suffering to the patient or prevents the cannula or clister from entering, and if the opening that leaks is above or below the level of the wound.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bowel is completely healthy, it does not allow anything to ferment inside.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you cannot cover the stomach as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bowel reaches its lowest position, for when the bowel is completely healthy, it does not allow anything to ferment inside, and if you cannot cover the stomach as you see appropriate, arrange it accordingly.
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	so that the bowel moves slightly downwards, and does not leave any part of the bowel behind.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidant medications to put on the wound, and apply them under the linen cloth that covers all the wound.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cut with force around the hole in the side of the chest, making it larger than the first one, and apply gentle dressing on another cloth according to the size of the hole, and place it over the wound in the chest to align the muscles, and do not remove the large initial cloth until after several days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and the one who is over the chest wound often removes it to release pressure on the muscles, and knows that whatever comes from the muscles, whether it's poison or blood or not enough, or digestion or indigestion.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or no, and when the medicine has extended in this way and you see the nature that springs from the wound, then know that healing has already begun, and approach health.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change to another bandage, and renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast feels bowed and indigest after many days, knowing that it will not open.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons manifest after a long time, do not despair of your health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are people who tardily begin to care for their wounds, and others who do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if the patient has an indigestive stomach ache for many days, knowing that the pain does not subside.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the pain persists for a long time, then use remedies that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, as a final treatment, since there is a great part of vitriol in them, which is the last medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take the final treatment, and make it with rose oil, and mix it with old wine of equal substance;
puis le confit et en use;	then bind it and use it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and itself makes the honey thick and rich, when garlic is not present, take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it over the honey while it's still warm from the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then I wrap it, and extend it over the breast, and never administer aromatics or long roots of celestial herbs, which is also like flour of grain and lint;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and use of simples or compounds;
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	Break them, and make a powder, and add the honey I mentioned, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the cure is prolonged, and this cure does not heal it, then know that the corruption is deep, and it leaves an impression on the bone, or makes the members hard, or the limbs stiff.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the cure for the fistula, as we have said above.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	A pustule is an abscess that forms under the nail of the hand, or foot, or occasionally in other areas.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when they become old and care is not taken, if an abscess forms, they run and throw themselves down until the root of the nail runs out, and perhaps they will cut it off entirely.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and the inflammation comes right up to the bone, causing such intense pain that it smells bad, and the swelling becomes very large, and the color turns red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When treating it as we have described in the previous section, if the treatment is not effective, then you must remove all the dead tissue from around the nail, and after that, cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	Cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy and the nail is uninfected.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail becomes infected and begins to hurt, and a blister forms, you must insert a knife under the nail that is causing the pain, and lift it up, and then cut the infected part gently and slowly, and apply hot and corrosive medications to remove everything.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then attend to the treatment of wounds as long as they are clean.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it off and remove it, for as soon as the bone decays, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see both bones corrupted, cut them off as mentioned above, then treat them while they are clean.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is injured, swollen, and causes great pain, then you must first heal it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the nail with a sharp instrument diagonally from above, and be sure that the cut does not go all the way to the quick of the nail, as the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, apply something that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain so sharp and intense strikes the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	He who is born into the hands of no one, perhaps quite fleshy, and by chance has a part with bones, but never a nail, and none are born in the root of the joint, where birth is against nature.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	He who is born without any new pain should not be mute, and he who is born with a joint pain may remain mute.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the cut on the fat person should be light, in this way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	if it holds you down tightly.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those who are born with or develop a deformity, it is necessary that you first hold the round shape of the joint firmly towards the bone, then dislocate the bone to a suitable position, and finally cure it as long as it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The deformities that come together in a joint may be due to birth, or the healing of a wound, or burns from fire, or similar conditions.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	You must ensure that you heal the tightly closed one according to its natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place between two moistened oil-soaked cloths so that they do not adhere.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	You should insert between two thin pieces of cloth, as long as the wound is closed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If dislocation occurs in any of its fingers with the palm, secure that joint as appropriate.
des vils	venoms
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Their veins are thickly wrapped, filled with melancholic excesses that affect various parts of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And it is more pronounced in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry things, compared to others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary for you to administer purgative once and then cleanse the bowels.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The treatment for this is according to two manners:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One is with a knife, and they scrape out the black blood.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other method is that you open the vein, and scrape it out completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The size is according to this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	first, the leg with the hot water becomes very strong, so that the flesh remains tender, then stretch the sick leg from above the ankle to the part below the knee.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then open the vein in its place, either in I or II or III, with a wide cut, then gently and carefully squeeze out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient's strength allows;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then apply it, and command him to eat foods that produce dark, black urine;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and resume the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, and harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The remedies for this are as follows:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Lift the leg of the ailing patient, if there is hair on it, then immerse it in hot water and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bath, then warm it over fire, and then apply it to the vein with long heat at the top of the knee or in the area below the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the joint, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears as if one can feel it.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and it appears red and black, and when it enters or pierces the skin, it seems like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then pull the right of the socket, as long as it is lifted from the skin, and then bend it slightly to the oncine, then cut across in another place on the other side above the third joint.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then strip the skin from the vein while it is open, then lift the flesh slightly, as you did before, and bend it to another oncine, as you did first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then take another size, or as many as you need, then gently, and cut it with the right foot, then treat and move it until it reaches the second size.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then extract it gradually, as it becomes stronger, then cut it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you cannot pull and lift it, take a needle with a very strong thread, tie it, pull and move it from side to side until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and be careful that it does not cut, for if it cuts, you cannot pull or lift it, and it brings harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have finished treating it, immediately place a warm compress of wine and rose oil on the moistened wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the vision is contracted, twisted, and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it in an unconventional way but do not cover it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The form does not allow for extracting the eye if it is stuck, without cutting the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is very difficult, because if it were delicate, it would cut the vein, but since it is thick as we have said, this is its form:
de la voinne civile	of the natural vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is located in the legs, in warm regions where no plants or trees grow, and on land that is not moist.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance it may appear in other places than the legs, and this results from a putridity that arises from beneath the skin, as if it comes from within the body, winding and writhing, nestled between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein appear, it is that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to emerge forcefully, just like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the joint is open, you should wrap it tightly with a piece of cloth from one and a half to two fingers wide, and compress it, leaving the cloth on the leg, and every time there is no movement, you should rewrap the cloth around the affected area.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part of it and wrap the remaining portion, but do not cover its root until all the blood has stopped flowing.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	because if you cut it, it will return to the root, causing an abscess and putrefaction or gangrene there, leading to a severe illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For every small thing, it is necessary to treat it quickly and carefully from its root, leaving nothing in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and there is no time when this vein should be treated with anything other than the palm of your hand, or with a needle, and often a patient comes to me whose vein is as long as ten palms, and when you cut it, if it bursts open or closes up, and pierces through to the bottom, then everything flows out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and it should be emptied of the matter that is inside, and then apply medicated poultices for several days, and then treat it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And never should this vein be cut again, especially when it opens at the ankle or knee joint, and much injury occurs, and from which it bleeds a lot.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers that are born between skin and bone.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This illness is called the "beef disease" in our land because it often affects cows, and it is a small worm that appears between the skin and muscle, spreading throughout the body, ascending and descending, and causing great pain from limb to limb, until the skin is broken where it has spread.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is caused by putrefaction of some humours, as they come and wind and worms and parasites in the belly.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and doubt arises about the nature of his illness, for when it spreads throughout the body, it ascends to the head, and reaches the brain, perhaps returning and destroying the brain.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it healing and draining, it cannot be done again until it has passed.
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If it is necessary, then you must place the limb firmly and tightly above and below with a strong bond, then cut and pull it until it moves freely in the socket, and if you cauterize it with fire, let it heal.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it does is when it bleeds, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming close to the wound, tighten the muscle below forming a bump, then cut and pull.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary for the patient to purify his body with solvent medicines to remove harmful humors, and to eat foods that prevent putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called "vakerir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in no particular member, but can move from one member to another.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I have shown what I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to see a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and noticed a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and then I saw, the spirit rising in the shoulder, more so than anything else, as bright as living silver when it cuts through flesh to another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain departs from the affected limb and fixes itself in the shoulder, then after a short while, it spreads throughout the body, until it reaches the other breast.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then it told me that it returned again around the body, as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled much at how it moved from one limb to another, for I had never seen this disease in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Nevertheless, I wanted to know why the pain moved from one place to another, but I did not understand it, as I saw it in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought it was because the woman had dry skin, her veins were exposed, and this constraint of breath was apparent.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and did not appear according to this reason to those who are delighted, and have moist skin and veins covered.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see this illness healed, and the patient feels this pain, if it opens as we have said, press it from above and below vigorously, and then continue until this constrained breath at the place leaves.
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the place;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it to your own, if the treatment of these winds, like foul pills, and pills of serpentary, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows vary, according to their appearance and the parts of the body they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	Their diversity is such that there are those with great points, and small, and curved, and solid;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those with sharp angles, and some with tongues, and others where there are pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and those that break in any limb break in two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in the main limb, as the head, body, liver, kidney, bowels, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it breaks in any part of these members, then the signs of death that I will tell you below will appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	you must be wary of extracting this arrow, as death comes after in various ways;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this evil sign does not appear at all, and the arrow is not entirely extracted, if you pull it, treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain when the arrow breaks and pierces the bone, and swelling appears on the head, it is a sign of concussion and stupor and drowsiness and red eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps it is without feeling in the nostrils or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and by chance he loses his speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and there springs from the moist wound a white discharge resembling pus, and also as if from a bruise of a horse;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears, if you hold to the cure, and pull the arrow if it is not fully out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it breaks or withdraws is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were stuck in hard, non-empty matter.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance, he may become mute as if he were a bird, and there appears black blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	so he knows with certainty that death descends.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that the patient never sweats is that no foam comes from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns pale, and he breathes heavily and stops moving.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow comes out under the skin, it is necessary to clean the small costs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and it gives great pain and causes great sorrow and sighing;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and it moves all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow pierces through the stomach, perhaps something from the undigested meat will jump out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow pierces through the belly, and there is no sign of healing through the intestines, then there is little hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if an arrow pierces the bladder, the urine jumps and flows out, and the patient feels great pain.
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	you know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, as they are formed and their joints and neck and shoulder and helper (muscles) and the sharp pain in the back and the forceful and stiffening (of muscles), and the foot and legs, and the appearance of the limb, differ according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you must do the same.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man that an arrow struck him or pierced his side.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and I pulled from the other side under the ear's fat, and it healed without scar.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And take a needle in hand, insert it into the fat under the paper skin, and the needle is withdrawn with only its point towards the wood, and the needle is large as an arrowhead, very light without ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	it became healthy, and no bad accidents befall it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And take a needle from the throat to a Christian, and it is an Arabic needle with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I opened the jaws, and as I gently withdrew it, the Christian became healthy.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And take an arrow from the body, which was stuck in its stomach, and thought it was dying.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then it passed XXX days, and its condition did not improve;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut the arrow, and opened it up, and pulled it out, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a person with an arrow stuck in their back, and the wound is deep;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and hold the arrow within it, and do not change its natural positions, nor find harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And see another man, to whom an arrow has fallen into his face, and the wound was deeply seated;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and held it thus without suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many others of similar kind.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And pulled out an arrow from the body of a prince, the king, which had been struck in the neck and was slightly inclined to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and it was the arrow completely withdrawn.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to treat her after she had been bedridden for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I probed her with utmost care, and found no sensation.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and she felt sharp pain and discomfort behind her right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the arrow's point. I applied a soothing poultice to the wound, as the swelling had not subsided.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the arrowhead appear.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I applied the hot hand to it for several days, and then sutured the wound accordingly, holding the patient for a long time until he felt the arrow inside his flesh.
et il le me dist.	and it came out.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied strong, corrosive medication to the wound for several days until it opened up, and after testing it, I felt the tip of the arrow still stuck in the flesh.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then adjust the opening of the wound with this medicine until the head of the arrow becomes visibly apparent.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and after three months, the wound healing process should be well underway, and then it widens, so I inserted pincers, pulling from both sides, but it cannot heal.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	so I did not cease to try and invent new tools, until I found a set of well-made pincers, according to the shape that would be described at the end of this chapter, as I continued to pull and turn the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the greatest experts believe that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I then restored it, and the wound healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Or, I have told you about the quality of extracting arrows, so that you place your cure on what I do not mention, for books cannot encompass everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but the most skilled physicians consider even the smallest thing and what is present and lacking, a true new work, and new tools, at the decline of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not leave the limbs where they are embedded, but in two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through the place where they enter, or from another side;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which comes out from the other side where it enters, is an arrow entering into flesh, and never comes out again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not come out now, leave it until the flesh around it decays, and then free the issue.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is stuck in the bone, it cannot come out, unless left like that for several days, and moves each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, it pierces around everywhere inside, narrowing the joints around until they are wide enough, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if an arrow is stuck in the bone at the head, reaching down to one of the belly cavities near the brain, and none of the symptoms I have mentioned affect the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If it cannot be pulled out, but left as long as it remains even after several days, for if the arrow goes all the way through, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the bone and does not come out satisfactorily, it leaves the patient no rest for days without further harm, if the skill of pulling it out is lacking.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be pulled out, then apply herbs around it as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the limb as long as it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is embedded deeply in the body and cannot be seen, then try to extract it with all your might.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, use a suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot reach the wound due to its depth or the arrow's position, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein to be seen, then cauterize it until the wound heals.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and extract the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that hold it in place, carefully remove the charred part from both sides as much as you can, then break or bend the barbs of the arrow until you can pull it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and gently, without breaking the arrow, draw it out more forcefully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, so that the limb is entirely relaxed around the joint, then continue to treat it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the bloodletting causes adverse effects, then apply the treatments as described in that chapter.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of cutting into nerves and veins, and use any means you can to draw out the arrow safely, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and place the patient as he was when the arrow entered, for that is the greatest aid, and if you cannot do it, then follow the signs shown to you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another direction, where it opens something within, or the skin is swollen in a noticeable way:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	then cut it, as the pliers can grip it, and then extract it:
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then try to extract it again until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the arrowhead is in the flesh, it presses against the entire flesh.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if the arrowhead is extracted, you must apply pressure, if you administer an instrument, ensure that the tip of the arrowhead enters the channel of the instrument.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then press firmly, and if the arrowhead is embedded, insert an instrument with a pointed end to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you clean all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrowhead has come out in the stomach, or bladder, or ribcage, and it is accessible, then you may cover it;
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and guard to not cover the vein and nerve, then extract it, and then stitch the wound, it is a skill.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the treatment as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The instrument used to extract arrows resembles a bird's beak; here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is like a feather, to point the tip of the arrow, just as if it were the form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of pincers, to pierce and hold if it is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are 31 veins from which one derives health, of which there are 16 principal ones, namely:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	II beatens that are after the ears, which are called the soft "herbesh";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are in the temples, appearing;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the veins that are in the arms of the limbs, called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is on the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is on the head, near the eyes;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two glands which are at the collarbone;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are on the upper lip near the mouth, and these veins are called "augeherich".
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins that one commonly knows are 'V' shaped in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, which is on the left side of the body, and people commonly call it 'vein of the head'.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the middle part is called "fast" (tight), and it is composed of the head and body parts, and common people call it "vein of the heart".
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilic is on the right side, and common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is beneath the skin, and it is the one that heals, which opens clearly on the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the saving vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and if it rains (i.e., swells).
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and where the foot has three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is detached from the ribcage on the left side of the body, and the second is at the ankle on the right side.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg, there are three veins detached from those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The healthy purification of veins located after the ears is beneficial for old catarrh and migraine.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the qualities of the healthy substance, as I have said, and it is that you apply the head of the patient, and rub the affected area or veins with a rough cloth.
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then tie the patient's collar with a string, so that both veins behind the ears, dependent from the head, become visible.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	place your two fingers there, and where you feel the pulse under your thumb, it is certain.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lancet, and cut through the vein just beneath the bone, then gently place your hand over the entire vein upstream, and press and hold the skin and the vein well, so that blood can flow out as you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then stretch and hold it, as long as it remains healthy;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already spoken of incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The health of the two arteries in the temple, which is worth an old and steady migraine, and a habit of sudden blindness, and the heat of acute tears in the eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of a good healer is such as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient holds his breath, as long as both veins are widely open;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel the intense pain from both sides, and then seal with a bandage.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then gently apply pressure on the vein at the top of your thumb index, insert the lance from below, and draw out the blood, first from the vein above and then the sap, just as you did with the other veins, allowing the blood to flow according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then free the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then the wound forms, and leave it until it is healthy;
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have spoken much of their treatment and extraction, as the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The healing of the vein on the forehead is just as valuable as the healing of the skull in ancient facial diseases, and for migraine and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and its quality is such that the patient tightens their neck by twisting, until a vein opens.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called "fosseur", which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	and place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another object, allowing blood to escape according to the quantity you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then gently release the patient's neck and tie the vein until it is healed and never open a wide wound with a flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	Nevertheless, one must not let the flames be too fierce;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and do not let the healthy part be crossed, for the bone is hard, and perhaps break the flames when they are subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The health of the two veins that are in the arms is especially helpful for abscesses, and for itching, and redness, and inflammation in the eye, and facial diseases;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is such that the patient feels no pain from any twisting of the veins, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then bring the healthy flesh, and make it heal across, slightly narrow than the length of the flame, for there is no need for excess.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	and if the flames are subtle, they might break.
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then make the blood flow, as much as needed, and then tie it up on cotton, securing it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The flesh around the nose is most valuable for healing quickly, and for severe wounds, and for facial diseases, such as migraines and redness that appears on the face, especially when it's old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the quality of the wound is such that the patient squeezes his throat, then pulls his nose towards your left hand, and takes the thin flame with long tips, and inserts it between the space of the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well enough, and blood will now begin to flow.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not be too hasty in its application, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for a night, for it is often quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The holy water of the two eyes helps in the narrowing of the pupil, and at the onset of illness, and in many diseases, and in ulceration, and corrosion, and herpes, and swellings.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the water is such that the patient draws their breath from both within and without, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and if the master is standing over the patient's head, and the patient sits in a certain place, then open the vein with a long and slightly wide cut, then treat the blood with warmth as much as necessary.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then repeat the process on the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and tighten the veins gently so the patient is not strangled.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and leave it until morning so the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	from the health of the veins
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins in the mouth helps to prevent colds, and the corruption of gums, splits in the lips, and pain and swelling.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the healing is such that you should have the patient sit before you, and tighten their collar as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the patient's face, and look at both veins, one on the right side of the mouth and the other on the left, and you can recognize them by their black color and the small, black lines around them.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	So deal with each separately, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, take the largest one from each part, and also make the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	From the cleansing of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The treatment of the veins below the tongue is most helpful after treating the neck, and it is for conditions of the throat, eye, and mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of the treatment is such that if the patient feels a sharp pain in your hands under the sun, lift their tongue and look below each side for a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Then heal both of them, but do not cut too deeply, for they are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins through which blood flows, which are commonly healed, are treated according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or cutting through all the inflamed tissue with either a broad knife or a thin blade, as you would cut through flesh, and it is called "anezyl".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are broad and thin according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the fevered area turns red and is very renowned, and it is large as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins with a sharp knife on the smooth, broad sides where there is much blood visible, which contains much blood and pus.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of olive oil flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more delicately pointed, and is for healing the delicate veins where there is subtle citrus-colored blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein from the basil (one of these veins) is very helpful for illnesses that are beneath the throat, and the collarbone, and the chest, and the stomach.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the doctor to draw blood wisely and wash away the vein that lies beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if it affects the artery, and bleeding occurs, it must be stopped, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and the flame must not be pricked, but cut as if with a gentle tool.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the vein does not open clearly, it is necessary that you extract it and change to another one.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or if you want none of this, you heal it above the vein in the arm.
elle apert manifestement;	she opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and apply the flame gently, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you recognize the place of the wound, it is necessary that you extract the arm, touching the place until you feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place with a sign, and then tie the arm, and apply the flame gently.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and be sure not to injure the artery when you see the bone enter (the joint), for it is the artery.
eschui la donques.	then avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it protrude at the top as well, like the urine of a child, and the skin is red and tender, know that it is an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	then act quickly, and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the skin becomes numb, which often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	he lies with his arm relaxed, leaving it thus, and does not move the patient;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and he should be afraid, and does not move until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the wound is not healed, it will worsen, and no remedy is present, especially if an artery opens, as with the root of the problem.
et estainche li sans.	and heal the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of fig bark, and cut it, and take one half of it and bind it tightly to the other side;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if it does not become numb, that is good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if it does not, apply as we have said, powders that numb the blood;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the numbing should not be too strong in various preparations due to the small size of the wound and the power of the limb.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The surgeon of the vein should clean it with care so that he treats the blood from the top and bottom of the wound, for it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and the surgeon should wash for the nerve that is exposed, and if he does not cut it thoroughly, he may damage the nerve, causing swelling and infection, and perhaps it cannot heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any place due to its subtlety, then you should use a gentle instrument to heal it.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and avoid using your strength.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if a vein is between the two bones, it makes it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The healer of the head should draw out the blood from the head and aid the joints.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary for the healer to prick with olive or myrtle flame, for it is the safest of all veins, as it does not damage any nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to seek the lightest limb, and do not be grieved if it hurts the first time, and repeat.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance the swelling may appear on any man, as it does the first time, but it causes no pain.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound healing depends on your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about healing is that health care is not merely a cure for illness, but also a means of preserving health and preventing future diseases.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the health be established in one of the three veins, namely:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	that is to say, the cephalic, the femoral, and the basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should heal in the beginning of prayers at dawn, and in autumn and winter afterward, when the sign of fullness appears.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one should heal the first day or the third, after two or three hours of the second day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The healer who is assigned to diseases has no set hour, but whenever it is needed, at any time of day or night.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not advisable to heal children under twelve or women who have not been pregnant for less than seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	One should not treat the old who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when anyone wishes to be healed, in any way, it is necessary that he cleanses the bowels with a light enema if they have retained much feces, so that the veins do not attract the excess waste from the intestines, harmful to the main members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	One cannot heal himself who is too soaked in the juices of meat, or who has excessive or weak humors.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and he should wash himself after colic, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent defecation, multiple pregnancies, childbirth, watching and fasting, and this due to the weakness or condition of either the weapon or the body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then gently draw out the humours, if they are thick, through food and drinks and medicine, if you have such means.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to draw out the blood, and cleanse the vein deeply from within and around it, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and guard yourself from work, and worry, and lust, and similar things that day.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be calm and joyful, and make the healing better than that of others, and rub the arm twice or three times, then gently squeeze the ligament from above, for if it is too tight or loose, it will not heal well.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the limb with both hands until the veins swell and feel hot.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then moisten the wound with a little bit of old oil, then place your left-hand finger on the vein below the limb where you want to heal, so that the vein does not open and cause harm.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flow like strings when healing, and if they are filled with pus, so much that when the fire is applied, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus one suffers from this condition.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if it opens a vein, if the wound is too tight, then it is necessary that the healers be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens for the first time, that is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	if not, it is necessary to repeat this a little further down the affected limb, otherwise the limbs will not heal.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the limb is swollen, and the patient is frightened, let it be for one or two days, and do not tie up the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	Perhaps there come abscesses suddenly.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	He should not bathe immediately, then renew the dressing if it seems suitable.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if it is a small opening, pierce gently and doubt not that there will be little blood as you see, pressing firmly on the same piercing to draw out all the heat.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and open it slightly gently, so that the joints may be inflamed.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	Because this often happens, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the vein swollen, do not immediately reopen the wound, but apply a little oil, because it lightens the body of blood, and the sticky substance that is attached to this vein is dissolved by the oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the oil in each wound that you heal the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and it also acts as a cure and draws out the evil, when it is applied to the vein;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	if subtly the bone moves and separates when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there develops a large abscess, which often happens, especially when the patient is not in good health and the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and place a moist sponge soaked in wine and silk on it, and hold it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the flow of blood from the vein stops, and if it remains in place for several days without any black or green discoloration, then it does not harm him.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, place on anything cold or mirror, soaked in an ointment of calamine, show, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often abscesses and swelling appear at the wound of the sanctuary.
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	then place your hand on it, and if you feel the place soft at the pressure of your hand, then this is the appearance of evil.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	So be careful not to put anything that we have said, for suddenly it might cut off the flow without an artery.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but he makes an embrocation of dry plaster to harden the joint, then applies other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each case of pain according to the quantity of its strength and the color of the pain.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the skin is pale, let it continue to turn red.
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it swelling, let it continue until it becomes subtle.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for one who is bloated and strong, and requires the extraction of blood, to make a larger wound, with wider flames.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and they should be treated healthier and more often, and it is best to heal them by cutting across, not piercing.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this method of healing is free from the corruption of blood and the loss of nerves, and it should be done in a way that extends from long to wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	and for those whose body requires healing, it is necessary to apply a moist dressing with pomegranate juice.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	if it is overheated, then apply cold three or four times a day, and if it has a cold complexion, before the healing, moisten the wound with syrup made from fresh pomegranates, or honey syrup infused with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and anise, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints during cleansing, after the release of much blood, it is necessary that he inhale a brew of charcoal and subtle fragrant syrup, and use other things as we have mentioned in the section or chapter on syncope for vein evacuation.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to straighten his arm and heal it later, if it is weakened by much blood loss, he should pull it little by little, according to the amount of its strength continues.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to straighten his arm after the first dressing and has a strong contraction, he should heal it seven hours after the first dressing, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to heal from another side, he should be healed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is much blood within the body, which is already heated, and it causes fever.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	if it is necessary to draw out a large amount, and expand the wound as wide as possible, until it completely heals.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you should consider all the signs of healing, and place your hand on the pulse when it is whole, so that death does not come in its place, which often happens when the healer is negligent.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not good when you see the arm dislocated and blood coming out again, and the wound is closed, that you press on it forcefully.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If he is bent, he should stretch the arm slowly, for it would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but he should let it heal completely the second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you should apply the tip of the flame to the frozen vein until it bursts, then immediately wrap it in cold water and gently press.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflated, leave it alone and do not squeeze it until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to drain blood a second time due to the abscess recurring in the same place or in another vein or arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthier in place of the vein from the head because it is composed differently.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of healing is that the patient should immerse their hand in hot water until the veins are red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then tie it gently, so that the vein opens well, then apply the medicine across, not too wide or too long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and if the opening is wide, and the wound is close to the joint of the hand, and the pain prevents it from leaving, then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood flow out into the water until enough has been drawn.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if this does not help, do not push the hand back into hot water, as more harm than good may result.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are neither arteries nor nerves in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The health of the vein in the right hand is worth for all diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	strain the hand, and immerse it in hot water, as long as the vein is inflamed, if you see that;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and hold the hand across, and if it hurts in any way at all, do not worry;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not hurt the patient too much, for the nerves are entirely exposed without any flesh, and then apply the hand to hot water again, so that the blood is frozen in the wound, and it cannot flow out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as best you can, then apply oil and string to seal the wound tightly, and do so for every person.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The healthy person holds the eye with their left hand to cure the disease of the mouse, and does everything as I have told you towards the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The healer of the soul holds itself to all diseases that afflict the body, such as illnesses of the heart, and retention of flowers (possibly referring to a condition related to flora or a metaphorical 'blooming' issue), and diseases of rain (potentially meteor-related or a metaphor for humidity-linked ailments), and old joints and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of his health is such that the patient should immerse himself in hot water and rub the vein until it bursts, and tie over the joint with cloth.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot it flows with much blood.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Heal then the wound, whether it is deeper or wider, at the shoulder, or ankle, as it was before.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you heal it on the foot, be careful with the bands that are underneath, and also heal across it as if you were sewing.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and so the flames will subside.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	If the pain cannot be relieved, immerse the foot in water and allow the vein to drain completely.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if you heal it the first time, be careful to start again from above a little, because the ligaments are salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same for the wisdom of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein's lion is at the foot's ankle, and its health corresponds to the pain of the back when it is hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of his health is such that if the patient is in the bath, he should pull three times on the ankle, otherwise the vein will not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, take the health in all ways that you can, and crossing.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is worth that you hold it, for the veins are safe, and it is much relieved by many hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not release it, so that no healthy ray of light enters through the opening or hole in the back or foot, and turn towards the little toe, and guard against constriction.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and apply pressure with your hand to the blood as you see it, then unbind the ligature and place cotton on it and tighten it.
ele est maintenant sanee.	it is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	from the suction of the cupping glass
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Vacuum cups are made of horns, or iron, or glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and ventilation is done according to two manners:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	or by perforating and drawing out pus, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this ventilation without piercing is according to two manners:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	or it is with all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and ventilation done through piercing and extraction of pus is performed in twelve to fourteen parts of the body, so that one part remains entirely still at the top.
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are at the neck.
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and the others on both sides of the neck.
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the suction from below the jaw.
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the suction from both shoulders.
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the suction on the knees.
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the suction on both arms.
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the cups on both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the cups on both ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the ventilation does not remove blood, because of the small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken anyone, as is done with healthy veins;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not advisable to allow it in any case without fire or sensation of fire, in any disease that arises from overindulgence, as long as the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if, by necessity or due to habit, it is required to expel air, we must do so each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in every season.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are such people who, when they need to expel air, have a heavy head.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if such people experience relief from pressing and redness on their face, head, neck, and darkness around the eyes.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and such people who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, have an inflamed tongue, and feel pain.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are any who think, and see through blood and pain and fear and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we order it to be ventosed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The surgeon of the wound uses pressure on the neck ... to bring relief, and it is not appropriate that this be done after the evacuation of all the blood.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this compression should be done on the neck of the surgical patient, and it is not appropriate for those of a cold temperament or who have catarrh, as it does them much harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason, it is not appropriate for the elderly or those with cold diseases of the head to use it.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from it often become obstructed, and for this reason a suction cup should be placed slightly lower in doubt of obstruction.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The ventilation of the chest is beneficial for the health of the heart and basil (organs), and therefore it tightens the pains in the chest, opens the channel of the windpipe, and helps digestion and replenishment.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to know when to release pressure, because if it is held too tightly, it can cause forgetfulness or stomach and body pain.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The wind flows between the ribs of the chest if it causes head, eye, and temple pain, and strangulation, and tooth root pain, and is detrimental to the health of the heart and basil (organs).
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is necessary that you instruct the patient to extend his hand when placing it, so as not to damage the artery and prevent bleeding complications.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The removal of the tooth is beneficial for mouth disease, gum corruption, and similar ailments in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is located in the gums between the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The inflammation of the shoulders is associated with disease that arises from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The extraction of the roots is just as important as opening three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the healthy not to cut too deeply, for the flesh is bare of fat, and knows veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The leech placed on the rump is worth much, for it draws blood from the depths and treats internal ailments, and it must be large, made of iron, and have a good suction to draw effectively.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and if, by chance, it were too delicate, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	and it causes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The suction cups on the legs are tightly sealed, for they draw blood from throughout the body, and they are as painful as ancient rains, and inflammation, and bladder issues, and they cause paralysis.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and they are attached to the inner and outer ankles, yet they weaken the body after long use and cause pain in various ways.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you apply it first while it is empty and suck thoroughly, then place it firmly, and move it equally, without ceasing to do so, until you see red and inflamed skin, and open the blood-letting wound.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then apply heat, and remove the suction cups, and take care in the placement of the leeches, for there are some with strong blood flow and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	if it is necessary to strike only once, then wide wounds should be made, and deep cuts.
et suce legierement.	and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the pain is intense, it is necessary to strike twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	The first time to gently uncover the way of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to pierce for the third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to draw out blood little by little, it is enough to do so only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want a lot of blood, we should not recommence often;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the blood is thick, piercing it successfully will complete the process, so that the veins are suddenly perceivably filled, and it is necessary for those with thick, hard skin and calloused pores to apply oil to the suction cup before and after use.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is of a purple oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of oil from pumpkin seeds;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is of olive oil, or of watercress oil, or of lily oil, or chamomile oil, or any similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take amaranth oil, or balm of Gilead, or donkey oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if anyone has a skin that is too sensitive and has narrow pores, it is not advisable to apply oil, but instead, after cleansing with rosewater, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of calabash, or water of porcelain, or any similar thing, they should wash it.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those with excessive moisture, they should rise from it using myrrh water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have abundant secretions should rise from old wine, or elderberry water, or chamomile or anise decoction, or any similar thing;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and should not attempt to use a vacuum (for medical purposes) before or during a bath, but rather after the bath, one or two hours later.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and do not sleep after the bleeding, and it is necessary that he washes himself, when he must be bled and when he is bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	and beware of those who have a hot temper, and if someone is too aggressive and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	it is necessary that he apply cold things, such as grapes, endive and lettuce in the shade, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and eat figs, and grapes, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion, should sip syrup made from honey, and drink fragrant wine mixed with herbs, which is between old and new, and eat small portions, and enjoy raisins and small birds.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day when he feels hungry, he should drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary not to give any hot drinks or spices to anyone, either before or after the treatment, to comfort the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the treatment be subtle, but it is not suitable for those who are hot to drink such things.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The suction cups that are used to harm are those placed on the liver, and the skin, and podagra, and the stomach and the bowels and the kidneys and the spine, for this member cannot be harmed except to attract blood from one member to another, as we do with mammary glands when nursing.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to reduce the viscosity in the member, as we apply suction cups to the stomach and bowels to ease the pain.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and alleviate the pain when there is oppression or stone, if by its attractive power it removes the oppression, or deserts the stone from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and thus it is done when one places it on the liver and stomach where there is retention of wind, and these suction cups are left empty to suck only for a time.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and never should they be used together with fire, and never should they be filled with cold water, as in the case of diseases that cause excessive tearing, and in such a way one fills the cup with hot water, or with water he has boiled with medicinal herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it should be two and a half palm widths in length, and on one side near the middle there is a small opening, as wide as to push an needle through, and it should be made of iron or any other suitable material so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and tell him to place a stick diagonally across it, either of iron or wood, to hold a bandage in place, according to the size and age of those who suffer from them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the suction cups of children are different from those of adults, thinner than fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must thus place this suction cup over the member:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	take the cloth of wax or linen and place it between the suction cup and the stick that holds the suction cup, so that the light goes to the bottom of the suction cup, preventing it from burning the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it over the member, and your fingers should be on the opening that we have mentioned, so that when you want, the vapour goes there, and we remove the suction cup.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take up the bandage as before, and repeat often, if you have need.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the case of the suction cup, which is applied to treat pleurisy, and any acute condition, it has no opening or gap, and is only effectively applied when it is filled with water, and placed over the member accordingly.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	According to the context of the text, this line translates to: "Without being able to apply suction for their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar parts.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in parts without hair, such as the face, hands, or feet, and similar areas.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the user is such that when you find veins that are smooth, clear, and free from any impurity, then take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and place a needle in hot, sharp water, as long as they are familiar to her, and have nothing in their bellies.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then make the vein and cupping glass clean, and rub the limb until it is red, and apply the compresses.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they stop crying and whining, if it is a place where a cupping glass can be applied, apply it, for this helps greatly afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If that is not possible, then raise the limb gently, and wash it well with water, and then dry it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and hold the eyes steady too after the body of the wound, if a damp linen cloth in cold water is placed on it and left until the pain subsides.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the pain increases, add vinegar or gall, or similar things, until it subsides.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you can place half-peeled beans on the joint and leave them until they adhere to the bone, which will now soothe it.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if this method is more suitable for you, then take other wounds.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the veins do not want to be captured, so strongly rub the fresh vein with blood, or you insert an needle until the vein bursts, and then place them back on, and soon as they feel the blood, they will move.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are moving, sprinkle a little aloe and silk powder, or ash, and they will now stop.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	We begin the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know this, dear reader, that the folly of this chapter flows from it, for never did they see or read of such things in any ancient books.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason, the art is strange in our land, for I never found any good about it.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing of it, except through the knowledge of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have acquired knowledge of it, both through experience and through the habits of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and at the end I have summarized it, and clearly shown the shapes of the instruments that are used, as I did in the two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we explain in this prologue of this book the essence of the words and the chapters where the wise apply their understanding, focusing on truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture, dislocation, twist, or sprain occurs in any part of the body, it is necessary to quickly attend to the patient from both sides, if nothing else prevents you, such as weakness of the body, illness, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if it is very tight or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and warm things, such as hot poultices, and cloth from pigeon's blood and horse chestnut, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods, or consume too much meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess or the spreading of material in the member;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the patient returns to sleep after having been under stress.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be relieved of the foods that cause heavy digestion, or have a viscous quality, like cooked flour in water, and rice, and vegetables, and wine, and fresh fish, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For heavy digestion often returns and makes the injury worse.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones broken from old age or decay cannot heal properly and mend according to their nature due to the stiffness of the members, nor those that are too soft, such as the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but there is no cure, instead, hold the broken bone with strong fingers that separate and join the member together, as it was before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not restrict it entirely from its movement, and because of this, one must avoid heavy foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, and in this chapter, I will tell you all manner of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another when sharpening, just like the edge of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if the fracture is with a wound, and there is a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each condition has its own mechanism, and its specific instrument for restoration, according to the memory that comes to it naturally.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and the fracture of the bone is recognized because the joint is twisted, and it opens well when pulled away from the body, and responds to pressure with the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting or pressure, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can still have twisting, or splitting, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You should not move it with the hand, but apply medications that come here later, and then tighten it very subtly now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture that goes up in the air, and the two parts are disjoined, now you must put them back together evenly so that an abscess does not form from it.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if an abscess forms, leave it without moving for as long as the abscess is healed.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then align it evenly with gentle and firm touch, and know that the healing of it is easier than the healing of one where it has been broken.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then tighten it, as it should be after this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the broken bone there is dislocation from two parts, whether it's of the hand or foot, or one small member, or both tendons, or a tendon and your hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and place the member according to its natural position, so that when the parts of the broken member are out of alignment, by all means reset them to their original positions, and ensure through your care that no further injury or pain comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust both parts of the bone according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel the pulse well with your hand if it seems not to be well.
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if the dressing is done well and not pulled too tightly, nor pressed as those who, by their own will, cause hot abscesses and contractions in the member, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the member is at its worst, gently encourage the patient not to move it, neither awake nor asleep, nor in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and ensure that the member is so secured that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	Because when he feels no pain, except perhaps at a specific point, it is necessary to put him in a position where he feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and ensure that it is set correctly, preventing any curvature when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb should be as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You know that broken members are diverse in size and shape and strength.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	Because it has small members, like arms and legs and similar ones:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	if it is necessary to cover with soft and delicate cloth;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are thick, like the foot and leg;
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	it is necessary to cover with a wide and firm bandage, as the wide bandage embraces the entire limb, holding it tightly from all sides equally, so that there is no movement.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then wrap lighter strips around it three or four times, depending on the limb, tightening your hand slightly across the entire bandage, then move up over the dislocation and tighten less, allowing the dislocation to gradually separate a little.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the skin little by little, as you press deeply into the healthy flesh, then take another hold and return directly over the broken bone.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then go back to the part of the fracture, and hold it gently, neither too tight nor too loose, as we said in the first chapter above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then place thick linen or cloth between the bones until it is entirely even, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then place your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is an inflammation or abscess, apply a hot soothing agent to it, which reduces the swelling, and leave it thus for several days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then strain yourself on your stars, and use half of a narrow cane cut sharply, or of wood from which scythes are made, or palm fronds, and follow this form:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the star which one places on the fracture be somewhat thicker and broader than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and be as long as necessary for the size of the member, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then hold it steady on the stars just as you did with the first fracture, then tie it with a thread as in the first chapter when dealing with the break.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the tighter it is bound, the less movement there is.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is necessary that the thread be of medium thickness, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is too thick, as I have seen fools make their ligatures from twisted flaxen cords, it is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too thin, and it is not appropriate that there should be less space between each star.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is angry because of the pain from the stars after dislocating them in their joints, he should put compresses of linen or other soft cloth over them to avoid bleeding.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the bones are broken, I will then describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not appropriate to dislocate all the stars of a member broken in the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, it is not advisable to apply heat immediately, but rather wait a few days, either five or seven or more according to your judgment of the hot swelling coming on.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and here, the ancient method of splints for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and take flour that clings to the walls of a mill, and mix it with an abundance of egg, and make this mixture, not too liquid or too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of splints for restoring fractures in various positions, especially for women and small children, as it is neither too hard nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another method of plastering restores breakage, dislocation, and twisting:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take bark, gall, and gum from the plant and mix them with water, as directed by Doctor X.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	Mix mirror and aloe, as instructed by Doctor V.
alechil VIIII З.;	Take aloes VIIII (a specific amount or dose) as directed by Doctor VIIII.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make it into powder, then mix it with egg white.
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the patient's skin is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it gently restores broken bones, and benefits many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another method of plastering that is beneficial for twists:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take moss and wolfsbane, and mix them with three parts of something else (unclear due to lack of context or specific term).
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Mix mirror and aloe, with nine parts of something else (again, unclear due to lack of context or specific term).
acaice VI З.;	Behold six (parts);
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	mix Armenian (herbal) X parts, grind well, and mix with ample egg or honey, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another method of splinting joints and securing bones to their proper places, soothing the pain that arises, and using saws on the bone, and fractures.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	take another new cloth, dampen it with water and oil, and place over the bone.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Cyst splints do not restore, but they are good for easing hot abscesses and properly extracting bones that cause pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another method of splinting to restore broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dry fig leaves and terrestrial pawpal leaves, grind them together, and make a splint.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of mending the broken bone and thereby alleviating the pain from the abscess's return.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take the root of alder, chamomile, violets' flowers, and wheat flour, each in equal parts.
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Grind and mix with wine, and if the member is hot, mix with fresh coriander water or water, and apply as needed.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another stronger method of mending the member when a hard abscess arises during restoration.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of vismalve, and flaxseed, and balm, and melilot, and fennel, and violet and chamomile flowers, from all these plants a part.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and grind it, and conserve it with salt water, or fresh water, or wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates writes in his book that to restore a broken member, one should not use anything but a mixture of wax and oil, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen suggests applying warm, dry substances to a broken member to restore it, such as myrrh and aloe and incense, as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another method of treatment for injuries and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	take mice and cats from humans who have been cut, or feathers from an eye, and vismalve, and string of equal length, grind them together, and make a plaster and bind it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then dislocate it a little later, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved out of its place.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if it does not dislocate by strong hands.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching, feeling no rest, or swelling, act quickly, dislocate it, and remove the splint now.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and gently raise the limb until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the member rest for an hour, then place it on a dry cloth, moistened with water or rose oil, and tie it up with a bandage, as long as you are certain of the hot abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and rest the inflamed member, and if the pain subsides, then resume the bandaging with a gentle touch and some plaster, and do not strain it as strongly as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is closed, red, painful and swollen, you have successfully treated it; but if it reappears, as you did at first, then you need to use plaster and binding.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if the member shows no improvement from what we have said, then do not dislocate it until after three, four, five, or seven days.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and never leave it for more than a few days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals and draws closer to the adjustment of the limb on its bed.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then the compression must be stronger than first, and it thickens its flesh, as I have said before;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if the limb seems healthier than necessary, know that improvement cannot come from it.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	soak it in hot water every time you dislocate it, each day for three days, and slightly loosen the ligament.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	Through this work, then, we cut the nerve passages in the limb, and prudently perform what the ignorant do, which is to straighten a deformed member:
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	This is harmful, and if the work is perilous, I see no other option but to leave it alone or do it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various methods of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways of fractures, various shapes, and the causes are diverse.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	Because there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the bone splinters completely through to the other side, as if cut with a hatchet or club.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for this reason, this method of dislocation is called "hachure.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	He then uses the sword to cut through the bone without piercing it, and this method of dislocation is called "absolute.
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and this injury from these two dislocations is either great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a pulsation or swelling, or cutting from stones or from blows against stone, or from other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a recent fracture, which approaches the bone tissue underneath or on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound that is closed over the bone is as subtle as a hair, and the fracture is small, then it is called this dislocation "capillary.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound is made by a blow from stone or arrow or similar thing, and the bone fragment enters deeper, and the joints are stiffened as when a blacksmith works on the hearth;
si entre li piere dedens.	if the stone enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more frequently to those with soft, moist bones, like a child's head.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it occurs in all these ways of breakage, leaving small fragments dislocated as if they were.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak to him in his place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all the ways of dislocations by pulling on them, and questioning at each point, and by corrupt flesh above it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair appearance is recognized when, after uncovering the bone and rubbing it thoroughly, the dislocation gap opens up.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be wary of accidents with the patient, and if you notice any harmful accident, such as vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, dilation, numbness, fever, sudden heat or redness, or other similar symptoms in various combinations, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any dangerous accidents and hope for healing, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the frost comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the moon, if you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it happens that you hasten to remove the bone on the seventh day, so that the tissue around the bone is corrupted, then come the complications that we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone extends to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must cut through the fractured part thusly:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and you should pierce the patient's head with great pain, and expose the bone in every way that you can, and carefully clean the wound, gently removing any pus or abscess that appears, if it drains when you uncover the bone, or a fistula forms, then you must use whatever aid is appropriate, and fill the cavity with moistened, rosin-soaked cloth.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and make the wound rest until the abscess is completely healed, and be assured of the stop of blood flow.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin around the bone to open it, and this is done according to two methods of operation:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one method is that you make a narrow cut at the front, and it takes this form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I use another treatment even greater than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	and the second method is that you have numerous cuts of different widths, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and made of iron indelibly.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and when working lightly, do not knock the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and dense, it is necessary that you bore into it carefully, so as to administer the treatment accurately, without going beyond the bone's thickness, and there should be a margin or curve on top of the point to prevent it from penetrating beyond the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you will need several of them, so that each one comes in its proper place according to the bone's thickness, giving you the necessary accuracy.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and this is the form of the three types of treatments:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality to understand around the broken bone is that you apply the treatment to the bone, and return to your normal activities as long as you know that the bone is healed.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then apply the treatment to another area a little later, and do so all around, then carefully incise the space between the fragments of the bone, and make it as subtle and gentle as possible, while still holding the bone in your hand or with any tools you have, such as pliers or tweezers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and ensure you do not touch the brain nor the eye.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is necessary that you remove the stiffness that is delayed from the bone to all other instruments resembling an incision tool, but it should be more flexible and more subtle than the other incision tools.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if it delays nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, gently remove them with the instrument.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then treat the wound with care, as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another method of treatment is as Galen says, which is safer.
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and speak very loudly, for that is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you expose a part of the bone, either where the fracture is open, so that when you have exposed this part, you will place the tip of this curved scalpel beneath it, whose shape is as follows:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not deviate from this method in any way, for the sharp side is on the second coast, so the incision should be towards the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then strike with a small hammer from above, so that you gently compress the bone all around, and be careful to protect yourself from the sharp edges below.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is detached from the bone, if the bone is gently pulled, for it is removed with great pain and fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the skin, and the bone is only cut from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and shave off the scales with a delicate razor, having various quantities of it at hand, in order to make each one suitable for its place, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you encounter great difficulties and then even more subtle ones, do not cease from this task until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	For each of the other haircuts and subtle injuries, it is necessary that you treat them according to their location.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and this is something that is not fully answered for those who have dedicated their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if it brings satisfaction, it is necessary that you apply a linen bandage according to the size of the wound, soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another cloth doubled over in two or three, moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and make it lighter than you can, without straining the wound, then apply another bandage on top and do not tighten it too much so that it only touches the wound.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and leave it thus for a day or two until the abscess is calmed, then remove it and apply medications such as fennel roots, flour of vetch, incense powder, aromatic herbs, and similar things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and from these things make a powder, apply it to the wound, and administer world-renowned remedies without biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and ensure that the wound remains clean, do not leave any treatment, and do not allow it to gather pus, for when pus accumulates in the tissue of the brain, it will corrupt and harm the patient greatly.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when you apply sharp, biting things to it, they do not heal properly.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care therefore, if no bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is uncertain without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness does not appear due to the medicine that has been applied, then it is necessary that you mix a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and add a cloth, and apply it to the sore.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply remedies in a manner appropriate to healing, as long as he is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Knowing that the two parts of the upper arm bones are never broken at the same time, either one by itself or both, because they are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and the inner part is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it bends or twists excessively, then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you insert your little finger or a pin in the joint, and place the same fracture in your index finger, and by force, until the joint returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and make it gentle, and ensure that the patient feels no pain through your actions.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the joint, and the fingers cannot return to their place, then it is necessary that you place it equally at the head of a slightly thicker thread.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is of the second degree, repeat the process, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if this is not possible, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, then apply to the joint two or three linen bandages, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you apply another from another side, if the fracture persists.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and let them (bandages) be so thick that they fill the gaps of the wound.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say that no restoration is complete unless the splints are soaked in butter and changed each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	I do not think that this is good enough, but it is necessary that they (bandages) be moistened in the preparation of egg albumen and mill powder.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then remove the bandage, as long as the bone is hard and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And never should feathers of a goose be used in place of bandages, and if a wound is wrapped with silk, and the break holds, and the patient breathes among them.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or make sure you see well.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses appear at the new wound while you are treating it, apply a plaster or moist cotton in rose oil, or in a poultice of eagle's fat.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if an abscess does not come out, apply a poultice from outside with flour of wheat bran and powder of incense, preserved with egg yolk, then place light bandages on it and do not tie the nose.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the nose is broken and in small pieces, extract it with suitable instruments, then cut the fracture and treat the bleeding with charcoal and other appropriate bandages.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no internal wound, he should rest for a while and apply poultices until he is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	from the rupture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is ruptured and there is no external wound, and the fracture is not severe enough to cause two pieces to be separated, but it is slightly displaced, then if you gently know how to recognize it, it can be realigned.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	If the fracture is in the right side, insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient with the injury.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the fracture is in the left lower jaw, insert your index finger of your right hand, gently push the fracture back into place, and use your left hand to pull it out, equally.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is severe in two places, it is necessary that you administer an extension to both parts, as long as they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the movement of the teeth occurs, or the fracture, if it is strained with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then apply cera to the broken jaw and place a double cloth on top.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And place it on a cloth, a large star-shaped pad, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and fix it with bandages as best you can, and order the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the shape changes, after three days loosen it again and then reset it when it has changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and apply a poultice of finely ground powder with plenty of egg or sesame flour after you have removed the plaster.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and place on it a light plaster, and if the plaster hardens, and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it until it is completely healed.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	often it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess forms, it is necessary to treat it as we have often said.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is both a fracture and a wound together, treat none of the bone that has been broken.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if it is possible to remove the bone with delicate tools.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, expand it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And after you have extracted all these pieces and it does not delay, clean the wound if it is wide, and cover it with suitable bandages to promote healing.
de la forcele	from the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	It forces breaks several times towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three manners:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	or it is broken and displaced in two parts, and there are fragments, and it is the easiest to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	or there is fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work is when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the aid that feels the forced break.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the others extend the collar towards the affected area;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then make the fracture even on both sides, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is no bulge or depression.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to further extend it, place a round, thick cloth or woolen spear beneath the shoulder of the patient, as large as needed.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and gently extend the force, stretch the spear with your hand, ensuring an even fracture as required.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the arm out due to its attachment, since it comes off completely, then the patient should lie on their side with the injured arm under their body, and have someone press down on the shoulder above, until the bone of the arm is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then address the fracture with your hands, and if you feel the bone is broken, it is necessary that you cut through it.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and gently try to move the pieces, and if the bone cannot join together despite your efforts, then the fracture is in one of the incisions you have.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but that you apply the strength of this instrument beneath, to ensure success.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it should resemble a spoon, and not be thin, and also as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and say to him, as you see, one should be wide and the other narrow, just like the opening of the wound that you made when you treated the bone;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are certain of the hot abscess, if you cut the wound, and if its opening is small, then you doubt the hot abscess, if you use a drape or tent on the wound, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses occur, then moisten the cloth with rose oil and wool and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The straining of the bone, when it is sensitive to touch and has no incision, is that you place on the bone the plaster of fine-milled powder and egg albumen, and put light stoppers above, and insert a spear from below the joint, if necessary.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	then take a very wide bandage of one palm's length, then place the cloth doubled over the stumps, and apply the plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a very thin and long stick of three fingers' width and wrap it around the bandage, so that the top of the bandage is exposed.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and place the stick on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the collarbone, and remove the healthy armpit, and remove the affected armpit.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and reset each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the stick does not move on the broken bone, tighten it each day, and when the ligaments loosen, release the constraint.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient lie down on his side, and place a small pillow under his armpit to raise the affected limb;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	if the fracture is light, secure the shoulder with a splint, fasten the arm to the collarbone, and do not unlock it for no ill accidents come, for up to 20 days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then recommence the splinting if you see that it needs to be done again, tighten it and leave it thus, until it is restored;
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is restored within 28 days, or even less for no one.
de la brisure de l’espaule	from the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It is often the case that the shoulder breaks or becomes severely dislocated and cannot be moved, except by touch.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if the apparatus is adjusted according to the shape of the fracture and reset according to its natural form in every way that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then place a light pouder of finely ground chalk and egg whites, and soft bandages, and cover with a double cloth.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then place a wide and delicate blade, slightly wider than the shoulder, and dislocate the blade from any part of the shoulder, using the sharp edge of linen cloth, so that the blade cuts evenly.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then tighten it with a great tight band firmly, so that the blade does not move from its place, and observe it each day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and whenever it loosens, relax the band and put the blade back in its place if it has moved, and lay the patient on his side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is reset within 10 to 25 days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number of days is completed, if it becomes loose, and be sure, for it is not bone that will immediately settle firmly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a fragment of bone sticks out and does not go inside the wound, it is necessary to do as we have said in the calming of the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	from the rupture of the worst
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The skin is never completely broken, but it happens rarely.
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks under heat.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it recedes inside and causes the patient great pain, and weakness, and sometimes bleeds, and opens up the wound in the broken bone, and it feels much better.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on their back, and places a cushion between the shoulders, then compresses them, and aligns the ribs to each other with both hands, subtilly making them even in all ways possible, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be.
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then place on it plaster and poultices over the delicate salt or other light bandage, wrap it in a cloth, and bind it to the broken bone so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and return the ligament to its original shape on the back, tighten it carefully, and check the patient's freedom of movement every hour, relaxing it if it becomes tight.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	if it needs to be released due to erosion or itching that develops in the area, or pain or abscess, act quickly, release it, remove the plaster, and treat what has come up with appropriate remedies.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then reset the splint, and hold it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	from the fracture of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the breaking of ribs only occurs in the upper back and at the top, and they do not bend unless they are clearly broken.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and the patient feels well at the examination.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is such that you put it back in place as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, tightening it with a splint if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the breaking of ribs is declining inward, the patient feels very great pain, stabbing, as well as crying, because the bone pierces through.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and so with fingers, touch and press deeply the blood, which is great pain, and they have put much art into it by the ancients.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And for those who say it is appropriate to administer foods that cause bloating in the stomach to expel the fracture from within.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not pretend that hot poultices will not come if they have not already arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes back, as healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	and they say among themselves that one should not use cupping glasses on the shoulder to draw blood, as it is akin to madness.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	however, there is doubt that the cupping glass does not draw out excess blood from the shoulder for its own sake due to weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that none of you should cover the limb with moist wool and hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to even out the space around, then apply treatment for pleurisy, flesh, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	and if the patients feel great pain that they cannot bear even to the bone where the flesh is torn, then doubt creeps in for the patient, and it is necessary to cut through the skin of the broken rib and put beneath a tool to relieve the suffering.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then one must cut the bone, pull gently, and stitch together both edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with bandages, until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if abscesses form, place moist, oil-soaked rags on them and cover with a warm compress.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat while the compress is on the abscess, and place soft pillows under the affected area, as needed, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	Of the dislocation of the collarbone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	No break should occur between the collarbone and chest bone, and if it does rain;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also to the pain of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone and you want to know if they will recover, be on the lookout for their hands becoming soft, swollen, and numb, and unable to move or stretch them; if you can push an needle through without pain, then there is little hope.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	You know that it is deadly in many ways; if the limbs remain motionless and there is no pain when they are moved slightly, then know that the joint of the bone is intact and the patient will recover, if proper treatment is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if similar symptoms occur in the pain of the back, you should know if it is healthy or not, take care to see if the feet are weak, and if there are any accidents that affect the hands, and on the back, sudden weakness and expulsion without will.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when it is remembered on the stomach, sudden expulsion without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is recalled to its back and wants to move, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Knowing that it is deadly:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if he does not work hard in his cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not occur, then the thing is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that you apply rose oil or egg yolk oil to the hot abscess, as long as it is soothed.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then place a comfortable and drying bandage on it, tie it with a band, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, as long as he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone becomes detached, then it needs to be covered with a bandage over the heart.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and take the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, and then apply a healing dressing made of clean cloth, until it is healed.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the bone fragment is broken, which is called the "fragment of the wound," take your pouchet (a small instrument) with your left hand and place it equally in your right hand to hold the fragment, then apply plaster and a splint, as needed.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then hold it tight, and if there is a bone out of place, push it back into position, and treat the wound until it heals completely.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	From the fracture of the bone of the shoulder blade
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	Often, the first thing to happen is that the hip bone is broken, and if so, there should be no significant loss of blood from the head.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and causing it to stretch long and thin, bending towards the patient's body, bringing pain, swelling, and bruising to the broken area.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand above, as long as you are on the broken spot;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and such are the fracture and form of it;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the fracture is only in the head, then make all such fractures even, as long as they are in their natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is very long, it bends inward, so make the patient lie on his belly until the restoration of that fracture becomes visible.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have made it even, then place a splint over it, and then a wooden or iron bar, and hold the fracture still so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and apply pressure from the inside of the ribs along the sides until the limb is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if an abscess appears and it is not touched, as long as the abscess remains calm, apply what we have mentioned above.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to reducing it, and hold it as appropriate if there is no adverse event.
et c’est li maniere.	and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The aider is the space between the shoulder blade and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one should restore it according to one of the two ways:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	Don't take one that is neither too hard nor too soft, according to this form.
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And bind the two parts together, twist them upwards, and place the patient in a sitting position.
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then pour the patient's broken arm over the foot, until it is relaxed, and place a splint of wood across it, then twist it upwards to any heavy object or have the attendants pull it downwards.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	then place the splint against the break so that it is even with both hands together, until the break returns to its proper position.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another way is to lay the patient on his back and tie one hand to his neck, then instruct the assistants to have one apply pressure over the fracture at the level of the hands, while the other stretches all the ligaments, extending them as far as possible.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that extraction is too painful, hold the broken piece firmly, and on the break, stretch each of the assistants to their side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the fracture is near the top of the shoulder, it is necessary that you apply a moderate tie beneath the joint, and another towards the neck, beneath the fracture.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and also if the fracture is towards the neck, it is necessary to apply a light tie without strain, as long as the fracture is level on both sides of the shoulder and neck.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	then make the fracture even, as it should be, and hold it tight, if abscesses do not appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if an abscess appears, it should not be squeezed for seven days, and a moist cloth soaked in rose oil should be applied to it until the abscess at the base is calmed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	then squeeze it, and the manner of squeezing is that you place the plaster on the break, then reassemble the arm above the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or the breast.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and apply the bandage, squeeze above the shoulder and the arm, so that the arm is in a straight position, unless something prevents it or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a splint, and place a wider and stronger stick across the break, leaving two spaces between each stick, and let each stick extend beyond the break by three parts.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	then strain the sticks, as I said at the beginning of this chapter regarding the break, making them stronger and less distant.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you observe the position of the sticks and their strain, as we said, when you return the broken limb, and you doubt whether the abscess is hot, leave it bound for seven days, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then each day for three days, look at the wound to ensure it does not swell or become infected, or any redness cannot reach the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it is appropriate, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accident occurs, the dislocation should only be corrected after three days or more, and the patient should sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and place the dislocated joint in a soft cushion made of equal parts wool, and every hour during the day or night, check to ensure the limb's shape is not changing, or the bonds are becoming weak.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if it is cured by the virtue of medicine, and gives him food that we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is first subtle.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when it begins to recover, it will be significant.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the aid and leg should be recovered over forty days in all.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one must free it and administer baths and medicines of ointments to direct the limb.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the tightness is severe and compressed, it may take up to several months or two months to release.
de la brisure du bras	of the dislocation of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "forearm," where one is smaller and follows the direction of the hand.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is larger, which is located below the smaller bone towards the hand.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	should the larger forearm bone break by chance, or the smaller one, they may be joined back together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the smaller bones are broken, their restoration is easier, and healing follows quickly.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the bones are broken and healing is poor, it becomes more painful than when they were initially broken altogether.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bones that are broken, then it is sufficient to extend them slightly and make them even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is a large fracture, then the tension must be increased.
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and extend it on the cushion, placing the palm higher than the other hand, with the small fingers lower, and cross the patient over it, with the cushion in front, higher than the patient's discomfort allows.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then extend the minister's right arm to the side of his hand, or to the joint, and another minister extends his left hand above it.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then set it back even, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture each piece is set back in its place, and if there is no misplaced bone that grips the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place by manipulating it above and below, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if there is a break in the wound, I have spoken of it in detail to the specific chapter.
si pren la cure.	if takes the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And in the beginning of restoration, when abscesses occur, I wrap them with a mixture of rose oil and white wax, not too hard or too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and lay it gently over, until the abscesses close.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then remove the bandage, and apply the plaster of the soft powder with plenty of egg, then place the needles, and let the needle of the dislocation be stronger, a little more forceful, and slightly wider than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that he must have 6 needles or arms in various positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	so that the dislocation is in one of the bones, or both;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and hold tighter over the dislocation than anywhere else, and all the while moving less as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the cloths that are on the gentle and moist wound not be hard or rough.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the thread, from which it is drawn, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after no days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accident comes to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you wash the member with hot water until the itching is soothed.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the member not be squeezed too tightly at rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then repeat the straining, and if the ligaments become slack and the bones disarrayed, or any similar thing, address it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if any tightening prevents the member from healing, because it is too tight, then you must soften it slightly and leave it for a few days until the tightening subsides, and then strain it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said comes to the patient, then he shall be dislocated for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	You shall gently inquire, then make him rest his hands on his chest, and ensure his collars are even, and guard against movements and gestures, and have him sleep on his back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or forty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the combinations and complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that at the back of the hand and on each finger there are often small fractures, and it brings only pain many times over.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the hand's bone is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient make a cross cut, and hold it straight before him equally.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then place his hand on the extended board, extend the broken bones of the minister, and align them evenly, until they are properly joined.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and apply the plaster and hot compresses, if an abscess forms, then place a stick according to the size of the wound.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and it should be wrapped in a linen drape.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the rupture is near the abdomen around the plant, make a ball of cloth and instruct the patient to press it against their ruptured part.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then apply a long strip of cloth, and make the heat as intense as the palm of the hand, and tighten it, as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the open air, it is necessary that you place a stick above and another below on the limb, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if a fracture occurs in any of our joints, it is the dislocation that causes it, so it must be set correctly.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and tighten with the palm, and if you see that a small, straight heat correctly aligns the fracture, it will not move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the fracture is in other joints, as in the example or any other, set it correctly and bind it with the healthy joint that follows.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	you should hold them all in place with a bandage, or put a splint on them as you see fit;
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and be careful in the restoration and arrangement of the hot abscess, and support those who come to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	from the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bones of the foot are often broken, and one can clearly see them when they return to their place in front and behind.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is when they bind them together above the break and from below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on his face, then each limb extends its own joint equally.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the fracture is through the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the hipbone, one of the ligaments should be bound towards the knee, and the others should be bound over and around the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is close to the knee, then the joints around the knee are relaxed and the extension is downward.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then aligns the broken bone with both hands, according to its natural shape, and then applies the splint and binds it, so that the fracture does not move.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down, then return to your work and treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The bandage is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	You should wrap around the fracture a hard bandage doubled in two or three layers, and remove the excess, then turn the leg until the heels reach the root of the toe, and insert a long thread between the calf and the leg, passing through the knee from below, and bring the end up above.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn the bandage around the leg and thigh, then place a splint across it, and put a stick on the bone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then use the eighth part of a cloth soft between the leg and thigh to apply even pressure, then begin to tie three turns or four around the splint.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and as you go further up the splint, loosen the tension.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then take the two threads you have woven between the leg and thigh, and tie three stitches on top of them, then go back to the other side towards the ankle with the thread until you are done.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and hold it still, if it does not move from its place, then leave it as such, so that no abscess or swelling or anything similar appears.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it happens that it becomes dislocated again and you address what comes, as we have said many times before;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are pieces of bone that cling, it is advisable to extract them, if possible.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if one cannot extract it, then it is advisable to break the joint and draw it out forcefully.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and the treatment is as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And never should the ankle be broken in this way with staples, as is done in the case of the leg or arm.
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	However, this restoration, so done, does not benefit the patients.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the foot is restored in 7 days, or less or more, depending on the diversity of complexes.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the alley of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	You know that in the alley of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, even if it is only a crack or an opening, it affects every wound, and without a wound, and this feels good for everyone.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is when everything is placed evenly that it can be moved again with strength.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then apply the plaster, and place a round stick, if necessary, and hold it as appropriate, then follow all the arrangements that we have mentioned in other fractures, such as hot abscesses or similar.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	if, for each of these accidents, it is necessary, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	from the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	You know that the leg has two bones, of which one is called "right" and not "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile".
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And it continues to break as it comes to the arm, and for this reason, restoration is similar to that of an equal arm, and all work is involved. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg returns from every side.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bones are broken, they return to their original position.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain, and one can see it clearly.
et torne desoz.	and it turns inside out.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then apply extension, and set it equal, and bind the stars equally.
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but nevertheless, it is necessary that the fracture be ugly, and there are many pieces, so that the extension is smaller and lighter.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and lighter according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your task, take two strips of strong cloth that are suitable for binding the leg on both sides and are sufficiently long to cover the leg from the knee to the sole.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap around both legs from above and below, and tie them together in the middle, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and no one should administer any medicine to the long bones of the leg, especially if it is broken, and the leg is placed to prevent movement, and it is properly done at the fracture where there is an injury.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and each day move the leg to see if there is an abscess or any other complication;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if the treatment continues until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	From the fracture of bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones in the foot can be fractured and the toes, and they do not always break in a single place, but in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if there is a severe fracture of the foot bones, and you see these bones stacked on top of each other, causing the patient to lie with their foot flat on the ground as if they wanted to walk, then place your foot on theirs, holding where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their proper position.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then apply the plaster and stop it up, and place under the belly with a small board across both shoulders, then tighten at the foot's end, after you have wrapped it with drape and other things that you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three days or four have passed, if you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones either even, either broken, or discolored.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if neither of the bones is broken, if it is restored, as we have said about the bones of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	then place on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and make it slightly wider, then under the foot place the board I mentioned, and tighten at the end.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three (or more), break them, then place on each finger a piece of salt according to its quantity, wrapped in a cloth of linen, and tighten the table under the foot.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and make sure it is firmly on the top of the table, against the stomach of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And it is important that you do not forget the other things I have said about other breaks, once we have discussed them.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and secure each case as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	On the fracture of the bone in the hand.
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of a woman's natural structure is broken, if it causes swelling, then incline her to the side with the affected part towards the back and hold her there.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the wound with cotton, and also put in as much as necessary.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then stand up the woman, gently pressing her back bit by bit, and pull out the cotton until it reaches the opening of the bone, allowing the bone to return to its place with the cushion.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has urinated, put it back, and do this for seven days or so.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	if it is possible to repair the fracture, and if you see, take a bladder of a goat, and tie a cane to the wound, and pour all the bladder into its natural state;
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow into the cane until the bladder is fully inflated inside:
la nature si revenra li brisure;	its natural state will repair the fracture;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then fill it with cotton and leave it thus for several days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when a bone of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the hip bone;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these fractures are not hidden from him who applies his study and skill, and heeds this book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For this fracture indicates various dispositions for the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	understand deeply.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	On a broken arrow, take a goose throat and insert it into the arrow;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap rags around it and leave it for three days or until it heals completely.
de brisure avec plaie	from fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bones of the leg or shoulder or similar, it is important to seek immediate care, so that the healing which we have mentioned serves as testimony.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, but there is lingering vitriol, and you have no other remedy, then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or day, before abscesses form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscess appears again, it is best to let it heal for a new day or two, until the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it even on the third or fourth day, as you might cause a worse complication.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible upon uncovering the heart, it is necessary that you place it gently with your hands, at a slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	If the extension does not appear to be of equal length in both hands, reset this instrument which is made of iron, with seven or eight inches in length, and the width should be according to the size of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and because it is a delicate operation, it should be soaked for three or four days, depending on the need for each fracture treatment.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and it should be neither too thin nor too thick, so that it does not bend to pressure on the limb at your command, and is firm in front and thick in the middle towards the front, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	and it is called "palainche," therefore the crooked bones should be placed on top of the visible bone's head;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and twist it once, as it returns, and let them be even on each side.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, it is necessary that you hold the head of the bone, until the instrument has a good grip.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	and if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, then use a suitable tool, such as a knife or scissors, within your power;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then remove whoever is delayed in the bone due to stiffness and small cuts.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, knowing that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	if you do as much as possible to have it in its place, then wet the cloth with a black, astringent wine, and wrap it carefully around it;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not place any ointment or other substance on the wound that would cause putrefaction and decay;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer bandages after you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, removing any debris, according to the size of the wound, and be sure not to stretch the wound with the bandage.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and often they have done this foolishly, and brought upon the patient either death or corruption many times.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and so the tightness and pain from other fractures should be more gentle and softer.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is deep or great, and you doubt that a bad accident might come, as we have said, and you feel pain instead of relief, if it's not appropriate to put pressure on it.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap it around, instead of pressure, with hard cloth, and bind it.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is bowing or sinking, then remove what you have put on it and apply a healing dressing for wounds, such as a four-part ointment or similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is healed and cured.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be dislocated in such a way that the bowstring corrals the bone slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it persists for a long time and cannot heal completely, knowing that there are small fragments of bone, then you must open the wound with a knife and remove all these misplaced pieces to stop the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula or other form of corruption occurs, it is necessary that you treat it according to what is said in this chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when a bone is broken and exposed in the member, such as the bone of the shin or the shoulder, or other large limbs, do not pull it immediately, for many times death results, but leave it until it decays.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	if, by chance, it heals after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if possible.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, leave it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	burns that come from the heat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	Many times we encounter after the healing of the break, especially when it is near a joint, and the sight of the misaligned limb is an unpleasant one.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and by chance cannot perform the natural movements of its limbs.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Beware then, if it is fresh in us:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if you administer astringent medicines such as aloe, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, bayberry, and similar others, by immersing any of these things, or all together, in astringent wine or abundant egg yolk or honey.
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and place them on the wound in compresses, drawing it tight, and do not loosen them for several days.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then dislocate it, and begin again with another, until the nodosities are removed;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or hold it tight on a well-made plug;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of this plug is such that it removes all swellings from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the nodosity has become hardened like stone, it must be removed, cutting off the top and draining the excess.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	You must remove it with any razor while it is fresh (or raw), and treat it as long as it is clean.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The weak member after treatment.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone is healed and the limb remains weak and delicate, this happens for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	due to the fact that it was tied too tightly and not properly adjusted as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because it had too many constraints, and cannot follow the natural movement of the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	because of the abundance of inflammation;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or due to too great movements, not staying in its hour (i.e., not settling properly);
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body firm, until the blood increases within it;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer baths, and give joy and comfort;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then place lead on the member, so that the lead attracts great pain, and raise it often with cold water, until the pain subsides in the member.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	Both members twisted after health.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the member is twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural strength.
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	do not believe the fools who say one must break the member from the very beginning, and many foolish things have been done in our land.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and this work is blamed, causing great harm, and perhaps even death.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	However, if the nodulations and tortures are fresh, then they should be treated with hot water or cooked herbs that soften them, such as fennel leaves, roots, melilot, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and prepare a mollifying plaster, as is well-known, using fennel seeds, and preserve them in gelin grease or sesame oil, and apply the plaster.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	You take greasy figures (fat deposits), and crush them with fine collic (a tool or process) and similar medications that reduce inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the bone dislocated by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And allow the limb to move every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the swelling and hardness (edema and fibrosis) is like stone, and requires opening with iron, it is necessary to cut gently with a fine instrument up to the bone.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and apply compression and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations occur from a joint moving out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs due to no apparent cause, it is necessary to try to bring the limb back towards its normal position urgently.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if treatment is delayed, the limbs swell, and perhaps they return to their original position, but it tightens at the joint.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	Because it is not necessary to move it, as long as it is inflamed.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	often causes inflammation and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	nevertheless, when this occurs, if it makes the patient healthier, then let it be, until the abscess is completely healed.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then raise the affected limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as the cure comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the shoulder joint up to the foot.
des mandibules	and of the jaws.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	Soon, it happens that the jaws are dislocated, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	or they are slightly out of their place, and softened slightly;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are completely dislocated, hanging down towards the worst, and cutting the saliva from the mouth that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and he wraps his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns to its proper position through various dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is whole and complete, then it is necessary that you reset it hastily, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a way that the physician places his finger on the patient's head, and presses it deeply into the root of the dislocation of the lower jaw within the mouth, thus dislocating it by half.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two hands should be prepared, equal to each other;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instructs the patient to soften his jaws and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And balance them equally until they return to their proper place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if they return to their place, especially when both lower jaws are together, then apply hot water and oil, gently dislocating them again.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	We must not delay any longer, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are brought back evenly, and the patient's mouth is closed well without softening, place moistened lint wrapped in a cloth made of rose oil and wax, then gently bind it with soft bands.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and make the patient sleep on their back, with their legs between two pillows, so that they do not move to either side, and do not strive to move more, but gently press the flesh until the pain is gone and the jaws are relaxed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then massage it gently, and do not strain to open the mouth for eating or drinking, until the jaw is well closed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be brought back to their original position within an hour and do not return to their normal place, this causes fever and frequent sweating, and perhaps intestinal problems, and sometimes pure colic vomiting.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of harm;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and often causes the death of him who has it, within nine days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fork cannot be removed from the inside of the continuation of the bone, and the more it is pulled, the worse it feels. It is never right when taken out towards the outside, and one can feel this clearly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the recovery is that the patient lies on his back, and extends his arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the joint firmly in your palm, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then apply the splint and bandage it tightly.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the joint that is towards the neck cannot be dislocated.
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if it does not dislocate, and if it does not return to its place, as we have said, then you must reset it.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply the splint and bandage it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus, itself is brought back to the shoulder joint when it deviates from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	**Shoulder Dislocation**
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is misaligned through three manners:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one of which is that it deviates at the part of the shoulder blade towards the back;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the part where it joins the arm;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and occasionally it deviates at the upper part, and this is rare;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and do not dislocate it behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate it inside for the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and repeatedly dislocate towards the armpit, especially those with little flesh, for at these joints it pulls sharply.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	at these joints with enough flesh, it pulls sharply, and returns slowly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to no one that there is a bruise or fracture, and a hot abscess forms in the shoulder, and he thinks it is dislocated because of that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	You must therefore test it, as long as you are certain.
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And dislocation is recognized when it deviates towards the joint, and makes a distinction between the injured shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their differences manifest.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find at the top of the shoulder a socket, and by pressing on the joint, you will feel the top of the shoulder as if it were one.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring their hand back to its normal position, nor move it in any way.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated at the top and not properly hidden, for you can feel it clearly with your touch.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this method of dislocation is not to be used unless it is fresh, or if the patient is suffering from great pain.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	The method is that the healer places his hand on top of the patient's dislocated joint, then puts his palms beneath the joint, and pulls the joint upwards towards its proper place.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the healer lifts his hand, extending it upwards, then places it beneath.
si venra hastanment.	if sickness comes.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if sickness does not come as we have said, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and apply it gently and soothingly, such as with a decoction of althae, fennel, and melilot in water, and let it be applied.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then the patient should be placed on his back, and a soft cloth of equal thickness should be put under him, neither too soft nor too hard. Then the foot of the sore leg should be placed on the cloth, and gently lift the head of the affected shoulder, and draw the hand of the sick person.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and other assistants tie the patient's head so that it does not move below.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	the shoulder now returns, and if it is dislocated, reset it according to this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and make sure that this is done at home, which should be larger than the patient.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and be straight towards the side of the cost, and turn the patient's shoulder away from the dislocation, and lift the joint above, so that the patient hangs on the other side.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and other ministers take hold of the patient's hand below the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, and any heavy thing causes no pain, then the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And it is also adjusted in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and it is fixed with a long stick in the ground, so that the joint is also firm like a pistle, and not too thick or too thin.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it is placed beneath the patient, but with soft cloth above, and the patient should be stretched out long on the bed.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then his hand should be stretched out on the other side, forming a new shape, and the joint will return to its original place safely.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if she does not want to return due to all the things we have said, then do this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take a knife of great size and three fingers in width, which has its blade rounded off so that it can enter completely beneath the skin along this shape.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then lay on the patient's head two cloth strips below, so that they do not hurt the sick person, and insert them beneath the skin of the affected area.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extends one arm over the thigh lengthwise, and binds the shoulder to the thigh, and raises the arm from the elbow of the hand, then places the arm on the broad edge of a chisel, and lowers the hand downward, and lets the body hang from the other side.
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	the joint moves back now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is dislocated, in any way, it is necessary that you put beneath the joint a thread of equal wool, then apply the plaster with the apparatus, consisting of fine powder, incense, and egg yolk, over the entire shoulder and around, then pull the joint gently, and tie the bandage to the plaster, and press the hand against the collarbone, and let the hands remain in this position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he moves slightly, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it will heal more quickly.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then move more after two or three days, and continue to move it.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is stuck due to moisture or another cause, it is necessary that you administer cauterization at three points, as is described in the chapter on cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and after seven days the joint still does not hold, and the patient cannot raise their arm above their head, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is either compressed, extended, or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is towards the worst, and the joints, either in front or behind, are caused by a sudden movement, extension of the arms, and other similar actions; then another treatment is required.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal as long as he is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after healing, cracks may appear in the member, and delayed movement; if the patient uses it many times, as long as these cracks are light, they will be eased and return to their original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	regarding the dislocation cost
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	You know that the joint that is dislocated is damaged and moves in an incorrect way;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and is damaged from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not completely healed, because it is clearly visible and feels obvious.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and is damaged according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased part with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is stiff, preventing the arm from bending and touching the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary that you reset it in such a way that the abscess closes and does not reappear, because if the abscess reappears, it would be painful to reset it.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and by chance it cannot be reduced to its original state, especially when it is at the back.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	it is worse than other dislocations, causing greater pain, and there is a chance it could be fatal.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the reduction, when it is possible to return it to its original state, you should place your two hands on it.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and the arms should be spread out, and the hands turned towards the sides according to the direction of the joint, pulling them together at the elbows or the base of the palm, until it returns to its original position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his palm, and turning the root of the palm, which is out of place, according to the joint.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer a strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and this is the method to extend the arm: the healer should hold it tightly so that it does not move during the extension.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm in each direction, having wrapped it with a long and wide cloth.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when you see the joint connecting to the hand, if it is not lubricated with oil to soften the joint, then press on the formed joint until it returns to its original state.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, apply dry plaster with heat, and stretch the arm towards the collarbone of the afflicted person, and do not leave it for any days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	and if the joint is firmly in place, release the tension, and leave it.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint is not tightly held, reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for no days until it is firmly set.
puis le deslie.	then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if it feels painful after resetting the joint, and it becomes silent, then bathe and gently rub it, and press until it is soothed.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Place a grease-soaked sheep's fat on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make the patient take a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	And when it sweats, rub the joint gently, then put on the fat again, and then take a bath.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this process twice or three times until it is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see, place it on a hot stone with butter and stretch it.
si revenra a sa disposition.	it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand is misaligned, and its return to position is slight, more so than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place gently, at the same time that it is misaligned, so that the limb does not swell or an abscess forms hot.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the reset is such that you place the patient's hand on a table, extend their limbs, and ensure they are equal, so that they place their palm over the joint's appearance, and bend it until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Nevertheless, it is important that you check if it is correctly positioned.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	then place the patient's hand, palm down, on a table and extend it, then bend it back.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on a table, and look to see the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If, however, the strain of soothing plasters on abscesses is not eased, it will leave him thus without relief.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place for any number of days, then the joint will remain dislocated.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and do not harm the patient further, as long as his hand is swollen, and he cannot move any part of it.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	so then know that the nerves or arteries are cut.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If there is no other cure than to extract the condition by gentle cautery, then perhaps there is nothing else worth trying.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is dislocated, if you place the splint as we have said, then stretch it and leave it for a day, then release it and do so again.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cannot move it well, and there is no fracture, then apply hot water moistened cloth, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	on the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Never should the palm's two sides be disrespected, neither the back of the hand nor the palm's belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then they are dislocated, and the dislocation should be held at the patient's own pace until it returns, then support the head with both hands, and pull it towards the part where it is joined.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave it for two days, then set it equal to the other side that day.
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and hold it still as we have said, and loosen it from its socket, and make it move, and reset it in the nut.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, while it is still tight, and also do the following if it becomes distorted in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same when it is distorted from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	dislocation of the spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine or the neck is dislocated, and there is no cure, the patient often dies quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs of this are that the patient's legs jump involuntarily and he cannot hold them, and often the limbs become weak, both the two knees or the two arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often times the shoulder becomes silent from the third part.
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	The one that becomes silent at the back is called "gypsiness
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The cure is that you warm the place if the gypsiness has come from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	If there is no cure nor healing from it at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things, they speak of ancient cure methods with great words, but they do not bring any true benefit.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my understanding, and have fashioned instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the weakness that comes to the feet first, no one has ever been healthy.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also those that come directly to the second side, and one cannot cure outside unless the one properly coming to the back is treated first, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient should be extended on their side with both legs equal, and have pressure from below so they do not move.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then insert I push the splint into the flesh on the head in a curved shape, and another as pressure, and tie a loose band around the afflicted parts, and another across the hips, and knees, and ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and both ministers know the bands, one on the head and others on the feet, among the two splints;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they should be well secured, the splint as we have said, and the skilled person places their palms on the curved spine until it returns to its place.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a table three feet long, cut through the wall from the inside, place the patient on their side, and turn the head of the table away from the wall, then place the middle of the table over the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and place the mirror on the other side of the table's head and press firmly until it returns to its place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see, do it with the turn of the hand that returns to its original position.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And you should insert two splints into the head of the patient with a severe arm injury, and towards the feet, two others, and between each splint, from inside and outside, a palm-width of length.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and each splint should have an opening, or you turn them correctly, and the splints are firmly fixed in place so they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each pair of splints, there should be a turning splint, so they can twist, and at each twist, two small splints one palm-width long, to turn the twisted one.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then take the ligament that is among the attachments at the twist towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other twist, and each of the attendants twists their twist to the whole ligament, and the master makes the spike equal as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is equal, apply a drying plaster with much heat, then the stoppers, and then the steel of a tablet three fingers long, which preserves the joint from the stiffness and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a ligament as we have said, and use the patient's gentle rest until it is healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if any thing comes to an end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medications, with the intention that we have said before.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and never should a piece of bone be administered, and never should the appearance come in the rear spine of the back, and it is thought that this is dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone that opens, therefore one must not have any presumptions about it.
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	for fear it might bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of dislocations of the spine
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	You know that the joints of the spine and the joints of the shoulder only cause dislocations, not like the other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the spine joint is misaligned according to three parts.
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	inside and outside, and front and back.
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and deeper inside, then less misaligned front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of his dislocation is such that when you join the injured leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and the patient's knee opens wider than the healthy one, and he cannot bend his knee fully.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the inflamed abscess that causes the joint to be destroyed because the bone of the thigh comes close.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who experiences this at death, it is that this event is contrary to what has been said before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of someone experiencing this in front, it is that his leg is weak according to its strength.
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	however, do not bend the knee without pain, and if you want to make him walk, he cannot do so before, and he retains his urine, and the ankle swells, and when he tries to stand, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who experiences this afterward, it is that he cannot spread or bend his knee, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the pain is in the thigh instead of below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	They reset this appearance of dislocation if it is such that you reward it when the dislocation is ancient, and it lingers according to its disposition, otherwise there is no cure.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and there should be no presumption that it will not happen again.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in the case of a fresh dislocation, which is one of three types, if you hurry to reset the joint, it becomes stuck both inside and outside, and moves to the right or left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	so that it may not recur, and there is no need for other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong ointment, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or bind it tightly to the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and other assistants extend their hand over it in such a way that they press their hands down on the sore spot, then tightly bind it with a soft ligature on the calf.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another ties the head with a ligature.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they extend it upwards and downwards several times, until the patient is completely lifted off the ground once, and remains still.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to all four limbs, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this is not the case, then it is necessary to apply a remedy to his appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the shoulder joint, it is necessary to have the patient lie on his healthy side, then place a ligature on the root of the thigh, and the limb that is below the injury, then extend the ligature upwards towards the injury and downwards towards the stronger part.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then have other assistants place their hands on the patient's arms, embrace the larger limb of the injured thigh, and extend it to a wider opening.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in the manner we have described, then it is necessary to bind both feet of the patient together with a strong, soft ligament on the heels and knees, and let the injured leg be extended two more degrees than the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then it should be suspended from a post, and two arms' length above the ground.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then instruct the assistant to embrace the top of the foot, and have other assistants with the patient who gently embrace the foot, for the joint will now move more easily.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is external, if the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of a dislocated hip, then gently extract the ligament from the affected leg and also from the opposite side.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then place two sticks, one at the top and another at the bottom, then insert a stick between the patient's thighs, in the middle, in the shape of an arc.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and he should surround it with moist cloths, so that the patient does not feel pain, then stretch each limb towards him and arrange them equally in his hand to reset the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it does not return, place it on a table and press it as we have said in the previous section, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is present, it is necessary to stretch the diseased leg forcibly, as I have said above;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and place the mirrors to his pain on the diseased artery, then press with the other hand and stretch it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is on the outside, it is not necessary to stretch the patient downwards or lift him up, but rather he should remain as his hip was dislocated downwards, just as we have said gently on both hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and place it on his face, and stretch the ligament as we have said before, and he must press on the joint on the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and will be at the point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then fasten the hips, and apply the plaster, and wrap a bandage tightly so that the hip does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and rest for three or four days, then untie it, and apply the plaster again.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, hold them as they were before, and leave it for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then release it, and make it go gently, as long as the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From the dislocation of the knee.
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The limb is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	that is to say, inside and out, and behind;
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not return to its place at the knee, know that he is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place their face down on your lap, and rest their foot on top of yours.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take their knee in your palms, pull it between your fingers, and bend both sides of the knee forming a curve.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and other assistants extend their help until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it has recovered well its leg slightly bent.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and apply a poultice, and make the leg recover to the knee, and hold it together firmly for three or four days, then loosen it.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and the patient should not exert themselves until the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at all straight, apply firm extension as we have said in the treatment of the spine, as long as it is healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	On the dislocation of the talus bone.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The talus bone is neither perfectly aligned nor fully dislocated, being both inside and outside its proper position.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the sign of this is that the ankle is swollen, and it turns red at the site where it is dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	We reset it if it is slight, and one must gently extend their hands when they are seized only slightly.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated to a certain degree, one must ensure the patient lies straight and holds the limb firmly with a helper above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then take the foot in your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards, and gently pull the foot upwards.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it returns, that's good.
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	but if it does not return, the work must be restarted, for it comes back.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return in that way, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and insert a firm stick between their legs, and wrap cloth around them to prevent the patient from bleeding.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then attend to the patient's leg, and have another assistant extend the foot or hold it at the ankle, so that he lies down on his back with his foot elevated.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then stretch each limb evenly, and insert something between the legs of the patient to hold them still when they are pulled.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then apply heat evenly to the dislocation in both hands, and use other assistants to raise the healthy leg, and the dislocation will return steadily.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when the swelling has subsided, apply an ointment and compresses above, tighten the bandage, and tie the foot to the leg, and hold the stirrups behind the ankle, ensuring the bonds are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	then leave it for two or three days, and gently move it if it is strained.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	then disengage it on the third or fourth day, and for three days thereafter, the patient must be kept from strenuous activity.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if it goes beyond this point, it is not lucky that he does not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses form, it is necessary to soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, while they are fresh.
des dois	Of the two (parts/sides)
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both (sides) are dislocated, if they need to be rightly extended without effort, it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any other part of the leg or foot, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back or on a table, keeping his leg straight, and place your foot on what opens these joints, then press with your foot firmly until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when they are even and open nothing, he places the sole of the foot on a table with two joints, then pulls it firmly, and leaves it for three days, then loosens it.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and makes it rest until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	From wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with dislocation and one wishes to restore it, often the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in treatment, since you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for long, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow, do not be bold.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and at the beginning of things, apply hot poultices to the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you have no hope for healing.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and if you see hope, then immediately reset the member to its place, so that the abscesses that cause it to move cease.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the member is in place, apply hot poultices to the abscess, and treat the wound as appropriate, using dried herbs.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is a dislocation with broken bones and small fragments, as the bones are disjointed, then follow what we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and keep from falling into fear, according to what I have said, for it is your motion according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your arms and body.
