O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, my very dear children, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science, its fulfillment, and have finished it through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this for you with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And since the work of hands is closely guarded in our region and unknown everywhere, the knowledge has decayed and been lost, and there remains no stronger evidence than the small descriptions in old books about what the hands have done.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this, error and vanity have arisen, and thoughts are closed, and knowledge is separated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I want to revive this treatise entirely by ordering it according to the way of exposition and explanation, and in a concise manner.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will bring together the forms of cautery instruments and other tools for this work with their appropriate explanations and preparations, as is required.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who undertakes to master this science of anatomy, as Galen says, that he know the judgment of the members, and their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and blood vessels, and the number of them, and the movement and resting of veins and arteries, and from where they come.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And Hippocrates says that the name is not important, but the work is powerful.
et meismement en l’art de main.	and especially in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, risks falling into error and misleading others.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	for I have often seen many who delve into this science without any knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	Because I have seen a foolish craze that cauterizes the abscess of a woman's neck or collarbone, cauterizing the arteries of her neck.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	for this causes so much blood that the woman dies in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And he also showed me another wonder where he treated a stone from an old man, and the stone was great.
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	if it removes a piece of the bladder with it, and it became infected within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to remove it, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; I knew well that if they attempted to remove it, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another wonder where he took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg and with the break came an injury.
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the ignorant doctors tighten the break on the injury as if by strong force, and they do not leave any gap for the wound, and they leave it in that state.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he commands that he does not dislocate it again;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and waits until the leg is completely swollen and painful, and it comes to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I am called to come to him, and I hurry to come and dislocate the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I saw it dislocated, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But any attempt at correction was already confirmed or the member was beyond repair.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and does not cease the corruption of the limb as long as the member is completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I also saw another wonder that the abscess, which had been healed, suddenly became inflamed due to the wickedness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For the ulcer, when it is free from black bile, it does not need to be cut with iron unless it is in a part that can be entirely removed without leaving any corrupted tissue.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this reason, dear child, it is necessary for you to know that the art of healing is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, work where there is danger in many positions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show, in each part of this book, where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For this reason, it is important for you to guard against it, so that the foolish gaze cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take up your weapons in courage, and confront your enemies lightly but resolutely, and use the best method, through the grace of God, you will attain salvation and be happy.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave the fearful diseases of sorrow behind,
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and cast away your weapons that cause you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen does not speak of any of his warnings:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take any foul disease too seriously, unless you are called a fool for it.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatment according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters deal with fire cautery and medicinal remedies for ague (malaria), and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and the shapes of instruments, and the tools for cautery, and everything necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter deals with cutting and piercing, as well as the use of suction cups and incisions, and the extraction of arrows, and similar procedures.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and it details the ordering of chapters and the shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar conditions.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it details the order from the most severe cases down to milder ones, as well as the shapes of instruments used.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm or benefit of each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of aid and its harmful effects are the longest discourse and the most subtle science, with secret answers.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and of these things, many wise ones spoke and agreed.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and I will be content with few of my words, for I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cautery helps universally wherever it has matter, whether it is in two or more complexes:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	This is to know: a hot complexion due to material, and a dry complexion without material.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a hot and dry complexion, combining material, they devised nothing and said that fire treatment is great help.
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that fire treatment is not worth for ailments that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For nature of fire is hot, and it must not be treated with heat from a hot ailment through warmth or dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and it helps greatly to cure hot and dry diseases that come upon the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the color of fire, you perceive the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in every case, no one should intervene unless they have tried it themselves, and know from long experience the chapter of cautery, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the remedies and the passage of time.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	we have only fear of other complexions, especially for cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all agreed and consented to the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, child, that cauterization combines fire in a way that is part of healing secrets and, moreover, offers greater gentleness than medicinal burning.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not come from outside unless it affects a hot member, and it does not harm any other member at all.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Burning medications come from one part of the body to another, causing illnesses of sorrow without healing.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and by chance awakens the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	He does not waste it for its nobility and the goodness of its nature, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this is what I have found through experience and the length of my service and study in the art, and it was about the truth of the things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and for that I apologize for the length of the speech, because I do not like to deprive you of the secret that is revealed by fire, and the quality of the work, how it defeats bodily illnesses, as the philosopher demonstrates in proving.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	or receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agree on the time when cauterization must be performed, and carefully select the instruments.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm causing pain is removed by the help of cautery.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and indeed, cautery is for necessary and urgent pain, rather than waiting for greater harm to come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think, dear child, as they do the foolish ones;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	Because the disease which is healed by cautery has no recurrence;
et il le dient ensi;	and thus it should be done;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not always as they should care for it, because cautery is only a medicine that changes the complexion, dries up the humors which are the cause of pain, and acts more swiftly than other medicines because of its virtue and power.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And another powerful thing is that the disease comes according to the state of the patient and the place of the illness and its virtue;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and they are assembled within him the excesses through the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless cauterization is administered to him where there is little excess and moisture, as with cautery for dense pain and similar things, and such pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	but this rarely happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand at all why cautery is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cautery has any value after medicine, but their intent is false, for when we administer remedies in any illness and they are ineffective, then we resort to cautery, which does have value.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cautery is the last of medicine, not at all according to the opinion of wise men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that gold instruments for cautery are more powerful than those of iron, and they did not call them harsh except for the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that gold in cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true, as I have tested it, and I have found that it is indeed harmful to no one.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and gold cauterization is more effective than iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	However, when you heat gold instruments, you are not certain if it is heated by the color of gold, and it can cool down at any moment.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if he warms himself too much;
si font au feu;	if he does over a fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus he has enough obstruction.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use the fire cautery that we have equipped for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now therefore I have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, so that the path may be easier to follow.
dou cautere olivaire	olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Fire cautery should be applied to the head with moisture and cold, and there are many ailments caused by this method, known as "soda", due to the descent of humors from the head to the limbs and ears, and also due to dreams, toothaches, throat pain, and particularly, diseases arising from coldness, such as paralysis, soda (a term likely referring to a type of stroke), apoplexy, and similar ailments.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is such that the patient is purged with a solvent medicine, purifying the third or fourth nerve affected, according to the virtue and age, and the patient's tolerance of the pain.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then makes the patient's head relax.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make him sit crossed between your hands, placing his hands on some weight.
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and hold there with your two middle fingers; if blood comes out, then heat the cautery called "olive" whose shape is as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the dislocated joint marked with ink, and move your hand down and pull out gently, slightly disturbing it.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then gently take your hand away, and relax the joint if you see a small bone out of place.
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you can see the bone as I have told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	after taking a little string, fill it with hard and soft cotton, place it over the joint, and leave it for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	after that, apply soft cotton soaked in butter;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and let them grow until the burn is healed;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing, dress the wound with "tetra-formula" as long as it is clean.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the elders said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it will fester;
et por ce si aide mues.	and for this reason, help is sought.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one should not let the fire cautery burn off any part of the bone, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it will be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And he advised that the cautery should be left on for a long time, and to press so hard that one might even break the bone as women do when they give birth so that the humors are forced out.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one must leave the wound open for a long time.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	after that one must clean and dress it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cautery do not seem very good to me in every way, except for when they are used on people who have no choice.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I must leave it alone.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the flesh is weakened by continuous solutions of moisture, as we testify in other members.
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and also when the patient's shoulder is weak by nature, and the first appearance of treatment is more safe and gentle for me, and from this practice I achieve whole healing then together.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When chronic pain persists for a prolonged period, the patient should use herbs and pills known as "cough drops," as well as applications of heat and cold and compresses.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one performs the cauterization we have previously mentioned, it will not be effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care if the patient's shoulder is of strong constitution and not too cold.
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then cauterize it deeply, as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After that, cauterize each corner of the shoulder bone, as we have said before, and cauterize the one called "vasselz" (vasculature).
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and these are the veins where suction cups are placed.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and hold your hand so that you do not see it touch the bone.
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patient feels far greater pain from this cautery than from others, and I will speak of that later.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is necessary that the cautery of the horns be more subtle than that of the middle part of the head, and this is its form.
dou cautere dou chief	For fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When there is sudden pain in a part of the head and the disease spreads to the oil (or perhaps the brain), and the condition is purged with medicated treatments, and all other remedies as I have described in the division of diseases are tried, but they do not help.
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Then he performs cauterization according to two manners, that is to say, with hot medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	If he cauterizes with hot medicine, it is when you press a blistered area and remove the skin down to the flesh in small pieces, and then make an incision where the pain is located in such a way that you can replace the blister under the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it is replaced, if he tightens it well and leaves it thus for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	and then untie it and treat with sweet garlic, leaving the wound for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then place cotton soaked in butter over the wound until the pus stops.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the dressing, as long as it is clean;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see that any of the burning medicines I have written about or the dosages for treating with burning medicines are unsuitable, then adjust them as necessary.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the fire cautery with this tool:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a clamp where there is a little curve, and it has a small appearance.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it on the painful joint, hold your hand and gently twist it until half of the pain is gone.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and release your hand when the artery is no longer blocked, it is healed, and there is abundant blood flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After applying a bandage of twine, place it on the joint for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then I apply moist cotton in butter, and then treat the wound on the shoulder until it is healed;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare" (scalpel), be careful not to cut into the artery in this migraine that is not old.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a migraine as we have previously mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cautery mentioned above is inadequate for the medicine and does not help, then you must heat up the cautery called "cultellare" (scalpel) until it is white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and thus mark the afflicted joint with a line half as long as a finger, and with one hand make an incision, pulling gently so that you do not touch the artery and do not go beyond the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	guard the jaw that becomes mute when eating, and let the nerves pay no attention to anything but the muteness and lack of spasms in the patient, and be careful not to damage the blood flow from the artery once it is cut, as cutting it evokes great fear especially in those who do not know or have little experience.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and leave the wound half-healed;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to stop blood when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it clots in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cautery is not enough to heal the disease, and the patient suffers, then cauterize both joints as we have said, and treat the wound until it is clean.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter about the extraction of the artery, with a cautery having two blades.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this is the best cautery of them all and most helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	regarding the pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold, and various solvential medicines and other treatments as we have mentioned in the previous section have been applied, but the pain persists, use this cautery called "point," which has the following shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After marking around the painful ear or both ears where pain persists, move slightly upwards from the root of the ear, then mark the place where the joint is.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and make X marks around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing the joint, ensure it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	regarding the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	The torture that must be cured by cautery is limited to those that move with fluid, as we have said in the sections about disease.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not perform cautery on appearances that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you cure this appearance of torture that moves with fluid from dryness and purging from the head and gargling, then it is not effective. Therefore, you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, another slightly below the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and place the cautery on the part that opens a healthy wound, and make two cauterizations at the top of the ear, one slightly below the edge of the bone at the top, and another in the temple just as far away;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the cautery on until half of the heart is burned;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	and it resembles the knife we have placed in front, but it is a little more subtle, and it is necessary that the knife be slightly thicker.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing, the limb as I have said before, as long as it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said before, but the patient does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauterizations:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	On the two horns of the head, I bind the head, and I open the limb called "vassel" as we have said before, and do no cauterization on the opening of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and let them be treated as we have said above.
de litargie	It seems like there might be a slight error or missing context
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large doses of herbs that purify the mind.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	after examining the patient's entire head, place the plaster of mustard on the occiput as described in the treatise on plasters.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the method of cauterization:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if you do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If it is healthy thus, it is good.
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if it is not, perform three cauterizations with hot iron on the thigh down to the collarbone, and leave two large spaces between each cauterization.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and treat it as the others, and if you see it tighten, and the patient suffers, perform a cauterization in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it is necessary, two others on the two horns, and treat as long as it is healthy.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cautery be called "olive", as I have previously said.
de la froidor dou chief	from the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	The head should be cleansed with earth and water, as we have previously said.
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after cleansing the head with the patient's malady, then apply the cautery to the head and each horn, and behind, and three times on the spine of the column.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you need more skill, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly, and the illness is severe, then apply four cauteries on the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and let them grow until they are as long as possible, and gentle on the touch;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the cure while it is healed, and perform the cautery that is called "olive" which we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery unless they are phlegmatic; first, the brain must be purified with years and other treatments that we have discussed in the section on great suffering from prolonged medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a young child who cannot endure it, make them gargle and chew, often cleansing the brain with good meat.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	after the king has placed his head in the middle, perform the cautery as we have said before, and cauterize the veins, and on each horn.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is far and suffers, perform cautery on them as I have said to those with paralysis and softening of the flesh, on the spine of the back and neck, and cauterize them with olive oil according to the manner I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is ill, perform a delicate cautery on them according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When, due to melancholy, excessive or corrupt moisture and thick fluid are present, then perform cautery with hot iron as we have described for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if, due to melancholy, the excessive moisture declines into melancholia and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies the mind, as described in the previous section.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After removing the head of the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after making the torus of the well-made bandage, just as I have described, place it on the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the patient should be crossed and held firmly from all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	After applying this treatment, take some butter from an old goat;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and heat it gently over fire, so that it does not burn the patient;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after evacuating the ring from inside out near the base, and leaving it to cool down;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this to the patient once each week with another good remedy, as long as he is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you need to cauterize, make several incisions throughout the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cautery moistens the brain increasingly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then place a moist cotton wick in butter and goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes come first as signs of the conditions I described in the previous section, then begin and give to the patient something to drink that purifies the head, and guards against all moisture, and promotes sweating or a bath while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	Afterward, he commands the patient to raise their head, and applies heat to the head, performing two cauterizations on both temples if the headache descends from the brain, or on either side if it descends from one eye.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and seal all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, making the cauterization long according to the width of the temple.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and guard against the discharge of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, stop it by applying pressure as you have learned.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you, in the extraction of arteries and the cauterization of incisions, how to stop it.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and never cauterize or burn the skin between the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	two parts of the eye
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, cut the arteries that are visible just beneath the surface.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and we see that these are cold, phlegmatic superfluities, so he applies the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter to them:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I apply the cautery to the head, and I cauterize both temples, and I cauterize where the two bones join.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if it requires more, he cauterizes the eyelid carefully with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Let the body shed tears from its eyes.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you medicate it according to what we have said in the previous discussion, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three bitter herbs to drink.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After the king has taken the lead, and he performs the cauterization with olive oil as a mild cautery.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and performs cauterization with the "claw" cautery on the shoulders, slightly pulling the hairs.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and beware of the artery, do not block it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	This is the form of cauterization called 'clavilis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil becomes soft due to illness and moisture, then apply this cautery which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	Due to which the shape is:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	and if you see that the cauterizations on both shoulders are as long as the hairs on them,
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not let go of the hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that does not allow the oil to pass through
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	It never happens that the hair of the veins is turned to darkness, and they prick the vein, and cautery is performed according to two manners:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	that is to say, with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a healthy state;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	after signing on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as full of wonder, and it begins with the signs of the hairs.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then dip cotton in moist glaze of egg and musk from rose, then heat the cautery with which the shape is as follows:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing the affected area little by little, ensure the colors are burnt into the skin deeply.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of the work's effectiveness are that you see the skin retracting and the hairs standing on end at the touch of oil.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then take your hand away and leave it thus for three days, then apply moist cotton coated in butter until the burning is gone.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment, as long as it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And after this come the hairs, and the paper is softened, then begin again the cautery on that same place, as you did before.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs are burnt away, cauterize while the paper (skin) is raised to its natural state and even, and do not let the hairs prick the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The medicinal burning cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment shape of the leaf of myrtle.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	then take French soap and fresh charcoal, each one .5., and grind them together well;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and apply it gently, if it does not cool down, then with a light touch on the shape you have made as if from a leaf, and place some paper on top of it.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the disease persists only in one place, then surgery should be performed there, and also in both places.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and apply oil of cotton moistened with egg on it.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and the patient's joint should be in your healthy hand and place your finger over the medicine, and press lightly and move it every time the patient feels a burning sensation from the medicine, for it burns just like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your body.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the burning sensation has passed, if you raise the limb from below, and see that the paper is raised as if it were raised by constraint of fire or by incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If no, then apply more of the medicine to the limb or the medicine has not opened up yet, as long as your work is even and your joints are set correctly.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place a piece of moistened butter on it until the burning heat is extinguished, and afterward, treat the wound with the ointment called "dyafenis" or other remedies, as long as it remains clean.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you, guard yourself well with your work, taking great care that it does not neglect the medicine at all.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft afterward and the hairs poke in the oil, then repeat the treatment on that wound which has been softened with the paper, just as you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	afterward, treat it as long as it remains clean;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the form of the wound with great pain;
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that the bones of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to these constraints...
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and do not depart from the right way for those who have the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have explained in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then you should cauterize it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position.
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold the patient's head between your hands in this manner so that it does not move, nor do they wiggle their head.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	after moistening a cotton ball with hot or pepper juice on oil;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	after heating the cautery instrument that is half:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it should be shaped like the head of a quill, assembling the edge to form the cautery;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you look, it is pointed from one end to the other, and if you look, it is also like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but nevertheless, this being bald is worth moving for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the fistula, if it is open, drain the pus and dry it;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, if it can be opened, drain the bowel;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	after applying hot cautery, hold the hot iron over the affected area near the oil, so that your hand does not touch it.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and apply the cautery to the fat of the oil, and the corruption.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery near the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If this does not help, apply the cautery again, and if you need to, do so a third time, and leave it for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	after which you cover it with moist cotton in butter, and continue the treatment of the dry dressing until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then apply a corrosive medicine to the exposed bone.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and the treatment according to what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that no one from the past spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Grip the fistula tightly, and hold the place;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	After that, place a subtle, thin piece of material into the fissure to give it shape.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and make it the size of a drop of rain.
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand firm, so that the patient does not move, until the drop has melted and reached its natural state.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to place a soft, moist cotton cloth on the patient's wound for healing or in heat.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	He plunges himself into a deep sleep from the opening of the fistula, and the healthy flesh heals with wonderful health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by cautery as we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If this does not happen, then it is necessary to administer warmth or cold, and bring the fistula back to the body according to what is appropriate for its own place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks appear in the lips called "poil," especially on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds of which we have spoken in detail, and the treatment does not benefit, then heat a small surgical knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	and places the hospital bed into these crevices until it reaches the source.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treatment, the joint should be wrapped with cerate until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess appears at the root of the tongue or in the eye, or in the palate, or at the roots of teeth, after putting off healing and rot and becomes inflamed and turns into a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said in detail, but it does not help.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then it is necessary that you apply cautery according to the quantity of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the extraction or opening of the fistula, hold your hand firmly until the heat from the fire reaches the bottom, and do not move it afterward.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do so once or twice after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, as long as it is healed;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is treated thus, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if this does not help, it is necessary to discover the joint and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	no movement of the joints
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and treatment with medication does not help, then place the patient's dislocated joint in your healthy hand.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after heating the cautery, the shape that forms should be as follows, so you place a splint over the tooth.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and place the hot cautery instrument gently on the patient's hand, holding it firmly so that the patient feels the warmth spreading to the root of the tooth.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	after relaxing your hand, restart the cautery according to your desire.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	after filling the patient's mouth with salty water, leave it for an hour and then rinse with warm fire.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the teeth that were moving will be confirmed, and the softened gums restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried up.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When tooth pain arises due to cold or frost, and medical remedies are ineffective, then cautery should be applied according to these two methods:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and with butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	The butter cautery is such that you melt butter with heat, and apply it with the tip of a iron or silver spoon.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	after taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a rod, dip it in melted butter, and apply to the painful tooth gently and hold until it cools.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and thus often do until the virtue reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see that the moist cloth and cotton in melted butter is effective, apply to the painful tooth, and place a hot iron until the heat goes up to the gum.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	He performs fire cauterization by applying it in such a way that you press a piece of iron or steel into the patient's flesh, making it thick enough to prevent the heat from reaching the surface of the wound.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cauterization tool, the shape it forms should be as follows: he places it on the wound and holds his hand until the cauterization cools down.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	He does this often, as the pain will be most intense on the day it is performed or the following day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the haste of this cauterization, and then blows hard.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	and perform the cautery on the part of the body that you wish, according to what you are able to do;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the form of the instrument:
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrofula (swollen lymph nodes) are filled with cold moisture and do not respond to medication, then apply heat to the cautery cheveit (instrument), which afterwards takes this form, and it should have openings for the fumes to escape from the cautery to the other part.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and apply the hot cautery to the abscess once, as it is necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small due to applying the cautery according to the amount of the abscess, leave it thus for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and apply a moist cloth with butter until the burn is healed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing, bandage the wound and cover it until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the bone:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture conquers the channels of the body, especially when it arises from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be relieved first by solvent medications.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After performing cauterization at the root of the throat, be sure not to go near the throat afterward, and do not inhale strongly but only a little bit.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After that, perform another cauterization at the joint of the collarbone and the top of the spine, and it is this cauterization, known as "clavicle," which we have described above.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the limb as we have said before, as long as it is healthy.
de la toust	Of the burn
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and any disease of the prostate is due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or pain, and it is an old illness, then make .II cauteries on the strong parts of their will.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and make another cautery between the two mammary glands;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and this cautery, which is called "clavile" according to the shape as said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see it, perform cautery by pricking all the cautery points called "points" from which the shape is formed as seen in the ear disease.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and these points should be from 30 down, or as deep as needed.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment, reset the limb according to what is mentioned above, and make the cauterization in three stages according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because cautery is lighter, because you do it three times in turn.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	On the dislocation of the shoulder.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterwards, remember the patient on their back and sides;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	after that, open the incision inside the swelling with your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is disaligned, then apply the fire cautery gently so that it does not damage the form.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the heart as long as it feels hot, and the figure of the cautery should be three parts together.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and because of this, cauterization is done with a cautery that has three points, so the figure of cauterization has six parts.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerve is according to the sensitivity of a person, and this is the shape of cautery with three points.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never adjust against this nerve, for there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After placing the patient on the fire cautery bed, apply crushed salt with a cord.
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After resting the patient, do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comfortable.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated from above, this happens poorly, then apply cautery over the thick part with a hot iron or many cauterizations by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is withdrawn, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach while it is being stretched from its natural state, and catarrh multiplies within it, and conventional treatment methods do not help, then the patient should be placed on his back and stretch out his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	From this, after, perform three cauterizations removing the flesh with a knife, and make them as thin as possible, claving the cautery deep, and two cauterizations on both sides until the cautery marks form at three angles, and there is enough space between each that they do not stick together when they become infected.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and they should perform the cauterization so that it sears both parts of the heart, and the shape of the cauterizations should be according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	and if you are cauterized with a large cautery on the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and whoever is afraid of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and signing on the stomach at a point according to the amount you see fit;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize at the entire cautery that is called "point.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment we have previously described, as long as he is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	As for the liver, it hurts from fresh and moist pain and a great deal of phlegm, as long as it is strongly out of its natural condition due to excesses.
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patients should be treated as we have said in sections, and it does them no good if they do not rest on their heads.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and the signs of the third cautery according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, removing the hypochondria, where the pain in the side of man arises.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and say between each cautery the thickness of a finger.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and they should be cauterized with long burns, not pressing too hard with the hand on any part of the cautery;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and it should only burn the outer half of the heart, and the patient should be able to stand on their feet.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, lying down, stretch his legs, and ease his burns;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish, to cauterize these wounds with a knife, if you are subtle and wise in the art, be careful not to burn the entire heart, for you would cause great harm to the whole body.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and that it does not come to a boil, for the heart is very subtle in that place, and the wise ones to see it.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you need to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If he is on the bed, the patient feels great pain.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if he is on the stretcher, he feels excruciating pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And during this treatment when the mirrors are consulted, it is necessary that the patient rest with his head elevated.
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then apply a sigil over the wound or abscess, and then heat the iron that resembles a rose, from which this form is derived:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize until the colors are burned, and come just to the surface, as long as the inflammation is entirely gone.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment, according to the treatment of the wounds, as long as they are healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is not advisable for anyone to use this cautery unless they have studied extensively in the art of medicine and by whom these diseases have never been corrupted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can boldly operate, but still, I think it is better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	the cautery of tears
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should make cauterizations with the roots of aristologue, and in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a long root of aristologe (a herb), the largest you can find, dry it, and make it as thick and as long as your arm.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and moisten it in oil, and apply it over the fire, and cauterize the wound between the shoulder blade and the collarbone, and make small cauterizations slightly downward on the part below the beard.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and cauterize between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly declining behind.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and cauterize the heel, and another one on the stomach, and between the shoulders, and along both sides of the lower heels, removing the cauterization between the shoulders.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press my hand too tightly, but open it firmly as if smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And they say that no ancient tells of any man using fire cautery resembling a razor, and heating it and placing it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and suddenly intensifies the pain, as we have said about the abscess of the tender liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this case, the patients often die now, or there is a fistula that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse according to the divisions of treatment we have mentioned, and it does not benefit, then they (doctors) apply three methods of cautery, all of which are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Dislocate it in such a way that you make three cauterizations, or four, following the length of the bone, according to the shape of the cautery of the liver we have mentioned above.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press my hand to any part of the cautery, and let the patient be careful on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another way of cauterizing is to heat the instrument with fire, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and remove the bone that is in the way, or where the patient feels pain coming from the left side, and elevate it according to the direction of the bone, according to the length of the body, and cauterize according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After burning both sides of the flesh, until the colors are perceived on the other side, then apply fire cautery, and thus you will have three.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, cauterize the entire cautery on three sides.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has been putrefied for a long time, and this is more important than the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	From hydropsie (a condition marked by excessive fluid accumulation
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not effective for dropsy, except in the manner known as "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your cure is not beneficial, then you must make four cauterizations around the wound, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the heart, two behind the back on the spine, and one at the anus.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cauterization be close to the specific heart beat.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After leaving the cauterization open for a long time to allow pus to drain, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cauterization.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing will happen more quickly, and the two sides will be aligned with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the cauterization for the abdomen should be like the claw that we have shown before.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and make it olive-shaped, according to what is mentioned above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of stones
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in the hydroptic patient and filled with yellow pus, you should cauterize the back between the little finger and the ring finger.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and hold your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not press too deeply, so as to close the citrus-colored eyes, and perform the cauterization according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After that, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the scalpel;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cautery be long, one of the sockets of the knee in front and the other behind, on the leg.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauteries overlong without dressing, so that they heal in place.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the dressing of the other wounds that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the joint
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When abdominal distension arises from cold and moisture, the retention and digestion of virtues in the stomach and intestines is weakened, and it cannot be cured by any means.
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great pain, so make a strong cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken before, or a cautery for the circulatory system.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and I cauterize around the anus gently with a delicate cautery, and I cauterize the glands.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, apply a cautery to the wrist, one cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach to remove the excessive, for the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	On the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When hemorrhoids are at the base or in greater numbers, and they have been old, consisting of corrupted cold and moist humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and do not benefit, then make cauterization.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	On the spine of the back, those who are entirely devoid of strength should slowly and gradually stretch, and by cauterizing the roots of the nerves, they should ease the pain in two ways.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and swelling appears on the face, then great cauterization should be applied to the stomach, as mentioned before, and another on the liver, and another across every part of the cauterization with a clamp.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and leave the open cauterization for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, reset the joint as long as it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	from the fleshiness called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you are completely healed, if you feel the fire of cautery as sharp as a razor, and then apply it thoroughly over that entire area.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and let it stay until the cautery reaches the vein, from which comes the blood.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there is much tissue, cauterize each as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the beneficial treatment of wounds while they are clean;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a hot cautery on the raw flesh, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	From the badly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we shall relate in its place, a disease arises that can only be healed by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a vein becomes fistulated, inflamed, filled with putridity and corrupt moisture, you must try all sorts of subtle treatments, and be sure to understand the full effect of each one.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the cautery to a sharp point, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that has entered, and repeat the cauterization until the dead or corrupted flesh is completely burned, once, or twice, or three times, depending on the amount required.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and be careful not to burn the nerve that is sensitive, and great vessels.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the fistula is in the wall of the bladder and the intestine, be careful of these vessels, and do not make any fire except on fatty flesh, and think that it is not painful.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After healing the limb as long as it is healthy, and if its joints are flexible, and the bones are slowly pulled out, then you know that the joint is completely healed.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the bones are not slowly pulled out, know that the joint is damaged and corrupted deep within the bone.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus, as one of these would tell us about their joint.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When the pain of a fracture comes with heavy bleeding and cannot be managed by women, then you must perform cauterization on the wound on both sides using the cautery iron we have previously mentioned.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and so we cauterize it in the middle, if there are three cauterizations in a row, and they will provide greater aid.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then it should be cauterized in the upper part, just below where the urethra begins, with both hands, on the right and left sides, making each cauterization as long as our thumb.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and cauterize it further down the back if necessary.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and let the cautery be performed according to the shape mentioned above.
de la marris	From the sea
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the soil is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed.
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, they cause great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the wound, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and so the cautery of the bone, as we have said.
de la hainche	de la hainche" translates to "of the neck
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When sticky moisture descends into the chest cavity and for this reason it cannot move from its place, and the signs are that the affected limb is longer than the other when measured together.
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and it is found that the internal organs move strangely, so it is necessary to cauterize the patient over the chest cavity with a cautery in the shape of a circle, and mark around the joint as it moves, so that the chest remains within the circle.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if it is the cautery like those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cautery is not present to you, then make three cauterizations from the large olive, and let these cauterizations be as good as all the others.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as long as it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain arises in the chest due to cold and moisture, and the patient is afflicted with this condition for a long time, treatment as described in the previous section may not be effective, and the disease becomes chronic.
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	So it is necessary for you to purge the patient of bad humours from foul pills, or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	Afterwards, perform cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the method of cautery is according to two manners:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	this involves the use of burning medicines and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which some are as follows:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the wound of the neck with three cautery triangles, cauterizing them according to this form, making them deep and wide, and leaving enough space between each cautery for the thickness of two fingers, and they should be olive-shaped.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	one should never cauterize in the middle of the neck, which is why there are three according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	and if you see that cauterization with the circular cautery we have mentioned in the dislocation of the neck is not effective.
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but make it in such a way that the circles contain all the pain, and every part of the heart is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the method used for sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	and if it extends to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations below where the patient feels the pain, and one cauterization above the ankle on the left side slightly.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let it be a knife cauterization, and burn the thickness of the heart.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels the pain extending to both feet or near the anus, cauterize that area where it hurts three times or four with a point cauterization.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if it happens more, he must do so;
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is in the knee towards the thigh, he should perform cautery with a cutting or circular instrument, and be careful in all his cauterizations that he does not leave the cautery for too long, lest he burns the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I myself have seen many who have made cuts on the ankle of the foot and left them until the leg was completely swollen, and also the ankle, making it pierced and corrupted all over the ankle.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal solution, he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, apply cautery to one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise ones say about the cautery of the hainche (knee), which is the way, make the iron as thick as a new dime or slightly thinner, and twist it between them or intertwine them one after the other with a distance equal to the size of a thumb's nail.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and intertwine them over both parts, and make them as if they were new, and have a well-made iron of each.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	and heat it until it is completely red and exudes pus, then place it on the diseased haunch of the animal, and turn to the healthy side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and apply the cautery once the cauterization is complete, and leave it for three days.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then apply an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of the ointment as long as it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albuscasim says that we should use this cautery little because of the fear of its regard, and see little of those who use it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and nevertheless, these are good cauteries, which the patient can endure, and the place where it is performed.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	He uses the cautery of hot medicine, so make you an instrument to intertwine with which you lower the edge of the door, and it is of iron or steel on a long wall, and at its highest point there are two, and between each there is the quantity of thickness of a finger.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and they should be open above and below, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After that, place the board of the spine on the patient lying on their side, and quickly place your hand above the board of the spine.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After pouring between the two circles of hot awes (coals) that have been heated over fire, leave them for an hour while the patient endures the heat and burn.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	Because it has the same effect as fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the blisters have passed, take your hand with the instrument and lift the strip of soft awes, leaving it for three days, and apply butter until the blackening from the burn disappears;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and leave it for three more days until the putrefaction subsides;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this should be the last aid after the treatment of wounds as long as they are healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain extends to the thigh or the leg, use the instrument that suits according to what you have done in increasing the joint.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the method of hot air, which I have written about in treating rectal medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, both in equal amounts, grind them together, and put them into a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	or if he has a small opening, defuse it so that the point of a needle can enter.
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and place over it some well-beaten lead or other, and lay chalk and alum gently on top, as much as there are two layers of powder when you hold it in your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and leave it thus until all the water and mud have dried, then take all that water and pour it on chalk and alum as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And thus, it will be most effective and beneficial in many cases of medical emergencies and other cauterization of other limbs.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it performs the same action as fire, and if used with other medicines to cauterize the pain such as fennel, anise, and calamus mixed with soap, all these things combined.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment by which one noble was cured of the pain in his back and sciatic nerve, and he recovered completely, and they did not use any other treatment, and he remained well once this cure was performed, and he bathed as he teaches below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And prepare it in this manner: you press the fresh and dry verdigris and grind it finely with a little fat, then apply it to the pain, on the hip and thigh and leg, and bind it.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and leave it for three hours, or until the patient no longer feels the burn.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter a bath or water as long as the body is slightly warmed, and make him lie down, and the pain will disappear completely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery with such medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it provides great relief.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and the cautery should be performed in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lint and grease it with old oil, and apply it to the groove that is between the big toe and the one called the 'fossa'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking dried goat's dung, ignite it with fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the cloth, leaving it until it is stained.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and repeat this process, ceasing only when you believe through sense that the pain has ceased, reaching up to the waist.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and these kinds of cautery are called "fire cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	of the painful back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain arises in the back, whether from pulling or compression or excessive blood evacuation or some similar matter that appears expanded and cold, none of these appearances warrant cauterization, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary after the patient is freed of foul pills or other similar substances, that one makes three incisions on the back, where the pain resides, with each line marked with a sign, and in each line performs five cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and these cauterizations are performed according to the cautery called "point".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, make three or four cauterizations at the "key hole" according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This disease often afflicts young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight and painful throat when they swallow, and they feel weak.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you will feel in the last, most severe pain in the back and, appearing differently, it comes upon the other pains.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this, and you observe its cure, cauterize it with fire according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cauterization may heal each part of the wound equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see that the cauterization around the wound pierces with the cautery two or three lines, and the points are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the cure, hold the limb until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery to any numb areas that are affected by nerve damage.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When the pain in the joints is caused by moisture that spreads to each limb of the body, and when a sharp pain occurs, they call it "podagra" properly; and when it is due to a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicine, it is treated with cautery in this way:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make the mouth of cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary to pin the sole of the foot, make a cautery in the shape of a "dot".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this often happens, then make cautery on each knee with three or four cauterizations from each part, keeping the entire cautery olive-shaped.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need to do more, then do so, but don't hold your hand too tightly until the thickness of the heart is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and to the back, he should apply the cautery as we have said in his chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are intense, make points around the wound with two lines.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there is no pain remaining, make points on each joint and on the skin of the hand.
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come up to the neck or shoulders, cauterize each part and apply a good compress to the patient and take medications.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you govern it well and drain the moisture, it will be healed by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	From the rupture of the sinew.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When the wound becomes infected, and the boils descend to the joints, which is new, it is necessary that when you see him being cured, he does not move too much on that day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that he uses things which leave the stomach, so that the intestines descend from his stomach.
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after making him lie on his back between your hands, and commanding him to keep his breath until the boils are healed, arrange them in order at your will, and sign with your finger from inside the fracture on the arm bone, and make a mark that resembles half a circle above the body.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then heat the cautery instrument with this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and it sheds scales.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the bones to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the healer places his hand upon it, so that they do not return backwards;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and open well the thighs of the patient, and place beneath him cushions and supports on the thighs, and others on the pelvis that hold his hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then place the cautery instrument upon the sign with your entire hand, and hold it straight and firm until you reach the bone, and if you do not touch it the first time, repeat it again until you do, reaching as close to the bone as possible.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and guard carefully so that the boil does not burst when you perform the cauterization.
que tu ne le brulasses;	so that you do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and so that the patient does not die or suffer other evils.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is useless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to their size, and also for adults, as great according to their size.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days, treat the wound with butter until the burn is healed.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	After treating other wounds as long as they are healthy, and the patient lies on their back for forty days until the wound is well healed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary that these movements be held for a long time, so that the boils do not appear when he moves to his room.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, a well-made bandage is applied to him and left for another forty days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and have good rest, that he works little and guards himself from too much drinking and eating, and from excessive noise.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he gives this instruction, he heals them completely.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will now describe the treatment for cutting in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When ruptures occur in other organs and are known not to heal, you will see that they do not grow back. Therefore, apply fire cautery according to its quantity, burning the third part of the wound.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the treatment according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and no of the ancients said that it must be cauterized with fire at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first sign the skin with a sharp instrument and make a line across the width above the dislocation, and another one further away, and hold your hand firmly over the entire cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the initial cauterization is lighter and more gentle.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain arises in any member, either from weakness or an injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the medicine provides no relief, then it is necessary to cauterize the affected area with a instrument called "poins," and the cauterization should be done according to the length of the member, its smallness or largeness, its strength or weakness, its position, and the nature of the pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If he is sane after the first cautery, that's good.
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If this does not help, begin another cautery on that part, as it is customary for the limb to move on its own; therefore, you should perform cauteries until the patient is sane.
de meselerie	It seems like there might have been a slight error or missing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	These diseases are never helped by a single cautery, especially the illness that arises from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	As you cauterize, be mindful if the disease is in its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the previous section, without delay or movement, but if you doubt that the corruption might spread throughout the patient, then perform cautery on the head.
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I cut off the new hair at the root, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the beard.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and then on both horns, and behind on the scalp.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and I hold the patient's hand so that the fire cautery comes close to the bone, and until the skin is broken out so that the vapors of the thick humors can come out.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize the mouse according to what it needs.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the disorder is scattered everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it is evident that you need to apply these cauterizations that we have mentioned above: first, cauterize the new growths, second, cauterize on the spine of the nape, third, cauterize on the spine of the back, fourth, strongly on the hip joint and another delicate one, fifth, on both shoulders.
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and second, on the sides, and second, on the tendons of the foot, and first, on each joint of the hands and feet, and in the palm pits.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and guard the nerves that are above the deepest pressure, so as not to burn them.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never perform cautery on the bones of the fingers or other bones, such as those of the stomach or liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that the more cautery is done, the greater the benefit it brings, and the more it helps.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	and know that the patient feels no pain from cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be great or small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the manner of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, apply a poultice of meal with honey and other remedies until it is cleansed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling appears in any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but it does not heal, then one should perform cautery on the member according to its size and smallness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and the cautery should be slightly inserted into the heart's space.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure the wounds as long as they are healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And never should cautery be performed on the hand, foot, or back, at the end of the nerve that numbs the member, and thus is removed the swelling.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and nevertheless, no one should intervene unless they know the parts and the passages of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	Of alba (or white)
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is raging, and the medical art avails nothing, then cauterize with a hot iron a little bit, according to the extent of the pain, until the white (flesh) is removed, and it changes color.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then apply a remedy of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and collicul (a type of herb) and alder bark, each in its own portion.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and it should be mixed with all together, tied with a cloth, and moved towards the light as long as it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of the ulcer (chancre) by cauterization.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a ulcer (chancre) appears in its initial stages, and you wish to stop its progression, cauterize it with an iron that forms a circle around the entire ulcer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	Nevertheless, the wise say that one should also perform cautery in the middle of a ulcer;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and yet, this does not seem good to me, as I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it succeed before.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and there is a more correct practice that it should be cauterized around, in the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauterization methods.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	from the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When anyone has a disease called "adubelati," and it takes time to die, either because of the excess it produces or due to the great pain of the illness when the patient is old (that is, too much), and there is little blood, or because of the time;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see it hasten to die:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then cauterize around with small cauteries by pricking;
aprés le laisse ensi.	afterward leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce through entirely with the cautery, the heat of which is as follows:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the midst of this ill-named 'adubelati' (disease) while the cautery has pierced through, making it like the cautery so that the patient feels no further pain in such a way that the course of the rotting is halted.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure, until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment of fire with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease is called "corrodens," which is nothing other than a weakening of the limbs, as it affects the members just as fire does dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this illness in the body that can be treated with fire cautery, then heat the cautery tools slightly and thoroughly, according to what is suitable for the part or the illness.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After cauterizing all parts as long as you can see all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, ensure that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and place on the joints cauterized, suffering from burning with oil until all the scorches from the fire are healed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds that cause pain.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that healthy hair does not grow, it is good.
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if this is not the case, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted part.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this treatment is sometimes cured with a hot medicinal drink instead of fire cautery.
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but fire cautery is still of greater help, and I have already described the treatment with hot medicinal drinks in detail.
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	from the pieces which come as fragments
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that pieces due to deficiencies arise a disease called "close" according to our intention, and it is a great wrong that hurts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is according to two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	For fire cautery, you should be well-heated, just as if you were to sear with a brand, or a quill of hot iron, made to the appropriate size that it can pierce from all sides, and have sharp edges.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After heating everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail entirely until it reaches the bottom of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and leave it thus for three days until it begins to fester;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then make a poultice of sage leaves ground with silk, and leave the poultice on all night; then the nail will break off and be pulled out from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the wound with fresh, clean bandages until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are affected by fever and many times it occurs in hands and feet, then you should apply a hot water cautery;
et est en teil maniere:	and it is in this way:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take a cane of iron or wood, or a feather from a dove, and place the nail and the glue, that is to say, the wart remover.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and place the cane around it so that it embraces everything, then add a little hot oil, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while rotating so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and be able to find the hot water channel all the way to the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and the patient endures a little the biting of hot water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it alone, and it will pull out at the root entirely.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	First, make one after another, as you stretch all those that are in the body, then cure the wounds that cause pain.
li cure dou trembler	it cures the shaking of the body.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When anyone shivers from cold or trembles with quartan fever or another illness, it is necessary to make four cauterizations on the spine down the back, one cauterization between each spine.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and make one cauterization on the foot, and another cauterization on the stomach with an olive cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	if he lets it tremble, and hastens the health of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	from pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never is it apparent through external defects or pus-filled blisters that come from deeply corrupted, putrid matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	it is necessary at first, when they appear, to make cautery on each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a subtle cautery with fir wood, by which the point is seized in the fire, or with long roots of aristologe, or with a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And under no circumstances should cautery be performed at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow worse in advance, but the excesses from which they come are broken, and they are healed.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times, serious complications arise from the blood of an artery that is cut during treatment, whether it be when opening a vein, incising an abscess, cauterizing a member, or similar procedures.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is a great problem if it stinks.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	However, if this happens to anyone, you should hurry to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly until the pain is completely relieved from beneath your finger, and no more blood flows.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then place over the fire various small and large olive oil cauterizes until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then take, according to the size of the wound and the location of the artery, a large or small amount of salt, and place it with the cauterize on the vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cauterize until the blood stops flowing.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if a sudden spark flies when you cut your vein, and the cautery is extinguished, quickly take another from the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	and do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood stops flowing;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and ensure no other harm comes to the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and know that when there is no bleeding from the artery, it cannot be properly examined, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of the three methods we have mentioned.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by tightly binding threads, or by medications applied that have the power to stop blood.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and it becomes tightly bound and stretched.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers relief from a tight ligature by placing rags or burning items on it, or similar things, will not benefit unless he does so carefully.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to no one and they have no medication at hand, they should place their two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, tightly pressing until blood stops flowing from the wound and from the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move it, but apply cold moisture often as long as it is very cold until the flesh is frozen and swollen and numb.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and prepare, in advance, what is needed for cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	We begin the second book of surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter all about the diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicines, and we have explained their causes, tools, and forms of cauterization.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have placed this chapter on the most common ailments first, and I will follow the same path in subsequent chapters for those who want to find easier remedies.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, before we begin, it is necessary for you to know that this chapter involves greater risk and fear than the first one on cauterization; therefore, more caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things.
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to attempt folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	Because many ways of people come to healing.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	if they come from such who were so weakened by their illness that they died shortly due to the severity of the treatment they received for their illness and the magnitude of their suffering.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And of these, one must fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And of these, there are some who understand and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am confused.
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	You should not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more great care in your honor than in your profit, and act prudently, not fiercely, regarding what is certain to you and what you can safely acquire and lose.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use divination and indication in curing your patients so health may be restored.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you gain good reputation, glory, and long-lasting fame.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Most noble son, our lords grant you good understanding and rectitude, and if you desire the holy inspiration from his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordered this chapter for you, in considering by chapters, according to what is before or in the chapter of cautery, which I have devised from the head down to the feet, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	chief filled with water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when the head is squeezed too tightly during delivery.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and never comes from a known cause that we cannot explain.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this illness except in children, and to all those that I have seen, death comes quickly.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and for this, I seem to think that it is better for me to abandon the work in part for some treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw children whose joints were filled with water, and the head grew larger each day that it could not hold itself up.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture was so severe that it became gangrene, and this moisture is gathered below the bone onto the syphac, between the heart and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and if the dislocation is such that moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you must make a deep cut across the top with your knife.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and it should be as long as the moisture flows.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and here is the form of the dislocation:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the openings of the joints in each part widely open, and there is a sharp pain when you press it with your hand from inside, and it does not return to its place,
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If it is necessary for you to cut into the head, make three cuts according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After making the cuts, close them with patches and powders, and then apply wine and oil, leaving it thus for up to five days.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then unbind it, and dress the wound with bandages and poultices, leaving the head equally restrained, and give the patient dry meat from a bag of moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another method of incision is to observe the size of the abscess and the gathering of pus.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	because never is it before;
aucune fois derrier;	not at any time behind
aucune fois en destre;	never on the right side
et aucune fois en senestre.	and never on the left side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Then open the abscess wide and drain the pus, and cut the hole according to your ability.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and beware that you do not cover the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and let the blood flow freely from the wound, so that the patients do not die from the slow decomposition of the wound and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of the flame cautery, instruct the patient to
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone suffers from a disease called "cataract" in one or both eyes, and the illness is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the final remedy is the cautery with which they will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	So it is necessary, when you see them cover their eyes, that the patient turns his head back.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after rubbing the limb with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then carefully extract the patient's collar with all the cloth.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	then look at where the vein is located, and the joints on both sides are behind the ears, and they are properly repositioned.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	then mark the joints with a signet ring, then cut one and both with a sharp instrument from the second part of the vein, down to the bone, and this should be done across the wider portion.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, turn the spatula beneath the artery and cut through the tissue above, cutting just as it should go through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, it bleeds continuously unless held above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	and if the artery does not open when pressed, you should measure the quantity of space of three fingers' breadth, then mark it with a signet ring and cut through to the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and that one must apply heat to the wound if it is a sixth part deep, or possibly a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the flow of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	then examine the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if it remains on the bony point with a sharp edge, and no abscess forms, then strain the wound and bind it, and apply treatment for healing as long as it is clean.
de emigrainne	from migraine pain
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old migraine pain occurs, accompanied by catarrh due to moisture in the eyes and cheeks, and the persistent and similar symptoms of old age, it is treated with various medical cures, but often none of them help; then we must drain the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient pulls back the hairs from his temples, and finds the artery which opens in the temple, as it opens well with its pulse, and is little withdrawn outside, so that no one who is too quick can catch it.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is reduced, pull the limb away from the patient with some cloth, then rub the joint with a rough cloth and immerse it in hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spatula with its curved shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then gently scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then pinch it high up and pull out the threads that are attached to each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is thin, return it to the point of the hook and cut off that part according to the quantity of the two joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it will never stop causing pain entirely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And draw out the blood from the veins, up to six times, just until the third.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it with two strands of strong silk thread, to prevent any bleeding beforehand and to avoid complications from the wound.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	then cut off the excess between the two threads at that very moment, and then, if you see fit, use a surgical knife to cauterize just below the bone until the fragments are cut through.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and this is the mother work, if the patient has fever and is of hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	Because cautery is help for ending moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	for this is of greater help against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Or, for the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the wound with wool and apply well-made bandages.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are loosened, take care with dry medicines that cause heat and bandages, until it is healed.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and without any delay of the artery as you do it, if you quickly cover with cautery, or use the juice of vitriol and strain it in your hand so that the wound is cleansed.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you do not have this present, place ice on the wound until it is frozen, and raise the cold water as long as the wound continues, and strain it as appropriate.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and what is more mobile and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery cutting from both sides, but the cuts should be well spaced to preserve their heat for longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	Because when the instruments are too tight, they hold the heat less.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And it should have between the two knives a space of sufficient width, and then when you have marked with the knife both sides, and place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, cut the vein in two sides.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and be separated between the two sides, for this cautery is not firmly attached to either side at all.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes flow into the veins that are on the test of the head, and no remedy helps, you will see the face of the patient becoming pale, and feel a throbbing on their forehead as if from cold.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and its oil is warm and moist so that the hairs of the skin fall out, and the skin becomes shriveled and scorched from the heat of tears, then this remedy is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called it the "contused cure", and this is what you do for the patient who has this disease: he lets his hairs grow on his forehead, then you make three incisions on his forehead evenly according to its length.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and one of the incisions is also as deep as two others across the entire forehead, extending down to the nose, and the other two are made along the sides above the skin, but be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on the sides above the skin.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and move your hand away from the continuity of the two jaws, and each wound should have a quantity of three fingers' width across.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and take a piece of sponge and cloth to wipe the blood, then take the spatula sharp from both parts, which has this form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision that is made on the temple, up to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape all the flesh that is between the two cuts to the entire satisfaction that is on the bone, then make another cut from this one until the other second, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you insert the instrument called "cultele" into the first fissure, and it is very sharp on one side and soft on the other, this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	and place the cutting side towards the opposite edge at the heart, and the soft side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle fissure.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the vessels that descend from the top to the bottom until the incision is continuous up to where it opens towards the heart, and then make another slit in the middle until it reaches the other side.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then extract the blood equally, and press the region for the blood taken;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then place a thin layer of old cotton in each slit, and cover with moistened linen cloths in wine and oil and wool, and ensure that no abscesses form.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and apply a strong compression of cold water, then the basic treatment with rose oil and other remedies to heal wounds, as long as he is healed.
dou reume des eulz	your head
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When there is a sudden severe catarrh, and you see the eyes become cloudy and small, weakening vision, and the pupils burned.
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair becomes matted, and the head feels intensely painful, and the patient sneezes.
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Then you will know from these accidents that these matters and this purification come only from many veins, and the moving cure that is, it is this one.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And instruct the patient to bend their forehead backward, then make a deep cut across the forehead, and another one quite wide.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin from the split in the left temple to the right temple, and make the cut up to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and move your hand away from the muscles of the temple that move with contraction;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood out with a sponge, and then separate the two edges of the split and insert old cotton and linen.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then place him on a moistened sheet with wine and oil, and keep him from getting an infection;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until it begins to heal, then apply things that dry out, which help healing.
En teil maniere:	In the same manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	take two parts of flour of wheat, and three parts of cologne, and make a paste.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and administer to these wounds to heal them completely.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	ear inflammation
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	Everyone who hears these words is one of the three things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or seeds, or animals, or stones from my mine or similar things as if to do:
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seeds, as in beans, peas, or other similar seeds:
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or things that flow away like water, smooth and clear, and similar objects.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When anything, whether it's a stone or another object that does not fit properly in the ear, causes pain or does not grow inside the ear, place the affected ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see a stone, and it exudes any little drop of purple oil or sesame oil, then proceed with its removal.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and it causes sneezing due to condition, and it stops the nostrils when sneezing comes, and places around the ear pieces of cloth or wool.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and stretches the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times this treatment brings fever.
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come out, apply an extraction with subtle pincers, from which comes this form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	if it jumps out into the pincers, that is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if it does not, apply an extraction with a subtle, small-toothed forceps;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it still does not come out, make a thread and twist the head of the thread or punch a hole in the ear with great force, and plug up what is around the thread with soft wax so that the air cannot enter with the thread.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then take it off again as it was before, for many times it comes back just as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come back in this way, take plenty of care to prepare the instrument sharply for this purpose, and place a little cotton around it.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then press the pressure against the stone or anything else, and take it off again.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	and if none of these things that we have said work, then quickly split the ear so that the abscess hardens and stops moving.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the method of the incision is such that you first make the patient from the cephalica whole and extract the blood according to its virtue, then place the patient between your hands and bring the ear back upwards, and make a small incision at the base of the ear where the fat or tissue is attached;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and make the incision as wide as a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it gently with your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if there are grains present and they swell, then administer an extraction.
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot be extracted, then administer the mildest spatula according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make sure to perform a careful incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not attempt this if you believe the grains are moistened by earwax, as long as you have made many attempts.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract it gently with pincers and suck, as we have said, so that the extraction is light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case where you extract something from the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use a strong sneeze immediately afterward and open the ear with cotton wool.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lay something on that same ear, whether there is moisture or not.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps through fire, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	if this does not help, take many needles according to the length of your finger, and heat them slightly over fire.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and then place the patient in a position where one of their feet is raised, and try to open the ear by inserting another needle from the other side, and use a third needle to press against the one inside the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and continue this process of needle against needle until the pain disappears completely, and thus it will disappear entirely.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see, take a thin wire, and insert one end into the ear, and twist the other end gently over fire until the thinner wire is burned.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then make other adjustments of other joints until the pain completely disappears, as we said previously.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	When extracting a small creature, such as a bug or similar small object, treat it as we described in the previous section.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is large and one can feel it, use pincers for its extraction.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and it is the easiest thing to remove, which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	During the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the section and how to deal with discharge, the treatment is not effective, so you must examine the ear in sunlight.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If no worm opens, if you treat them with fine tweezers, and they do not open, take the cane from which this form is,
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be tight from below and wide from above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then suck on the cane until it forms a complete seal.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Make sure often until all the veins are open.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey to come out, then pinch the cotton around the vein as I have said before.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not protrude as we have said, then administer distills that the ancients have tested in the extraction of worms, and you will find them discussed in the treatment of distills.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and distill your oils and medications into the ear with all these instruments, in this way as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And whether it is of silver or gold, make thin plates from small openings to distill.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press for distillation using a well-made silver instrument, and if you see, take a razor and wrap it around the tip with cotton.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the pan, and the fire should be in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then put the razor into the cotton and press with your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and it makes the patient feel deep pain, and so the distilings appear as if they are burning in the fire, just as they distill into the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and ensure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	ear inflammation
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born with any perforation in their ears.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and the same thing happens to adults due to a sudden wound or a foreign object in the ear, and this obstruction never completely blocks the ear if it cannot be seen.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and never let the wound become infected, and see that it heals well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	When it happens that the wound does not heal properly, if one cannot see it, it requires different treatments, and in this case, where one can see, it is necessary to place the patient's ear towards the sun.
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the inflammation clearly, and the work has all these symptoms, then this is how it looks:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And make incisions and cuts all around and behind, so that the ear is not damaged.
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the operation is on the cartilage or edge of the ear, use fine tweezers and gently pull, while ensuring that all the cartilage is completely cut through.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the inflammations are completely in the ear, take a fine, sharp razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then insert it into the ear canal.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you sense that the patient experiences great pain during the operation, gently perforate and be careful not to damage the edges of the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then place a plug according to the width of the perforation and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Make no movement as long as the wound is fresh, or take a cloth and dampen it in rosewater, and sprinkle vitriol powder on it.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary that you take the cloth and use another moistened cloth in cerate made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it as long as it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other remedies to remove the bleeding which are treated through distillation.
de la char des papieres	on the subject of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	Consider that when hairs come out in papers from the skin when moist and then dry, it is necessary that you extend them with tweezers and pliers, and cut off the tip with a spatula from its roots.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then place the cold glass on the inflamed joint.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if, after removing the skin, you cauterize with a delicate lenticular cautery, and the healer after incision moves it;
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and often they heal, but nothing stays in its place;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized with fire, their roots are burned and do not grow back.
de la gresle	of frost
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times come to paper one thing that seems twisted in its form and hardness, and for this reason, this disease is called "frost," and it is a gathering of great moisture on the paper from above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	The work is as follows:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	take care that the frost is silent on both sides, and this is a slight thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	make the cut deep, then scrape gently from each part, then take it with pincers and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	if you cannot cover it without piercing the paper a little, it will not harm the patient.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if the fracture is large, with an open wound, treat it until it heals.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, make no great effort, for the inflammations will soon restore it and cause harm.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the pain descends into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper against it, and use tweezers to pull out the pain, cutting and pressing from both sides.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is removed by incision, it causes no harm.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the frost is broken, leave the oil of salt water, and heal the wound of those who have been afflicted until they are well.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Gripes are a fat that is caused by threads on paper above it, and this happens more often in children than adults, causing them great pain, and they experience catarrh in the mornings, and cannot bear the light of the sun because tears flow to their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and for this reason, they lie on their faces again, and sleep with their eyes closed, and their eyelids are moist from the tears that fill them up, which change their appearance due to the pain that opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel the pain between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the method of the operation is that the patient places their head on the healthy side.
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take the linen cloth, and prepare a tent in a circular manner according to the amount of discharge from each part, and place it over them.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press your hands on both sides so that the bones come together in line with the circle.
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then making a groove in the middle of the moisture with a sharp knife, not wider than the wound made in a vein.
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and stitching the skin perfectly until you reach the bones;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and from the groove, pulling with various arrangements, according to the shape of a white fat piece.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Take then from this a whole piece of cloth, dipped in fire, between your fingers and move your hand to the right and to the left until it is dispersed.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and ensure that you do not plug the gap, that you reach all of the grime up to the oil, and do not blow on it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the gap does not open at the beginning, gently widen the gap a little bit.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	then remove it as we have said, then moisten cloth with oil and water, apply to the joint, and stretch in all directions.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such people who grind and apply something to corrupt the moisture that is lingering.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat him as long as he is sane.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the hot abscess, treat it with external applications as long as he is sane.
des poilz des papieres	hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When on paper grow hairs that are arranged differently from nature, they become inflamed, causing just as much harm as if they were stones, and bring about types of illnesses such as tears, softening of the papers, and albugine, as long as it is due to the destruction of the hairs.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and the treatment is according to four manners:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	or by cautery with fire, or by remedy according to what is present, or in the chapter of cautery; it is done either by incision and stitching, or by binding, according as I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your healthy hand, then turn the paper from the oil to your left hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	if it turns out, that is good.
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if it does not turn out, then if he pushes an needle through all the threads above.
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and be sure to cut the edge of the paper where the hairs grow, and pull the thread from above all the way through the paper, and turn it towards the razor.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then making a cut in the skin, adjusting the hairs, smoothing them out completely, from the large tear to the small one.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then pull out the thread and place under the paper a small piece of cotton and cloth, then sign on the paper a figure of a cross, like the shape of a yew branch, and nonetheless it is important that the figure be according to the quantity that you see the paper rise, which is measured in all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if at this part, one skilled in the craft uses a great quantity of paper according to how soft the paper is.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then make incisions throughout all the spatium on both lines that you have marked, starting with a large tear down to a small one.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and it should have one of the splits near the natural hairs thick as a root, then bend the knife in one of the two angles towards the heart, and then peel it completely.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then join the two lips with a stitch using a fine needle and thread, wipe away the blood, and allow the excess tissue to drain from the two edges, without any sticky substances, if you are able to do this.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if this does not help, then leave the stitch and threads for three or four days.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then treat the wound without stitches using dry and constricting things, because the paper will be relieved at the healing of the wound and the gathering of it, but the stitch is moved (as the ancients said), and these are painful tasks.
et si a une autre maniere:	and if in another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is like the seal of myrrh, as we have said, at three points, according to the shape that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then take hold of what overcomes the small forces equally according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the pincers, and the task is not even, take a needle where there is thread, and tie it around the shape.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and tie the other thread through the larger tear, and the second thread through the smaller one, and gather the threads equally between your fingers.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then gently apply equal pressure with your hand, to the entire skin where you have marked it, as we have said, then gather the two edges of the wound together with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess forms at your incision, it can be soothed with wax and similar remedies.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and no time passes when the paper fibers are changed.
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	it is necessary that you use what we have said about incisions;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but sewing in one direction and another is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of fractures is as follows:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and it is that you convert the paper and make it inside according to what I said, and then make two strings by art, and also fine liens as long as the paper and as wide as the spatula.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and cut as much as the parts where you hold the strings;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then carefully join both together above what is over the paper of oil, and pull the two strings from the two parts formed.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and leave it thus for no days, and the skin that is pulled will die and wither and fall off as long as it adheres to him.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it is delayed, if the wound reaches a certain force, then treat it as long as it is healthy.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and if the wound is infected and pus forms, and when it becomes raised and the paper-like skin does not allow the hair to grow.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and this is the shape of the two lines you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	the work involves piercing with a fine needle, and threading soft and delicate silk thread.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then join the pieces together gently, one to the other, so that the length of the bones is a palm's length.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then order in the wound another thin thread of silk briefly, and tie the ends securely with the thread.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	then place the patient's head in a healthy position.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and make sure the wound is free from dirt so that the work can be revealed, for it is a delicate and small task, then insert the needle into the entire wound at its root where the hair is attached, and slowly pierce the paper-thin skin until you reach the natural hair beneath.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	then extract the hair all the way up to the root, and push the hair back into the root if there are one or two or three or more of them.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	then extend your hand until the hairs come out completely from the root in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the root is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the root completely from the inside along the line that you have ordered, until the root comes out fully and you see it through your eye's vision.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	So then, if you remove the wound and the thread, and close it with oil and leave it for two or three days, until the hair returns to its place and the scar heals.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	and if the hairs are small, then accompany them with long natural hair, and either raise it with the one you leave, as long as it is elongated, and then gently lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the putrefaction of the wound
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this illness called "aleacrati" or putrefaction occurs in the oil, it has two manners:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	One is natural, and the other is unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it occurs suddenly from wounds, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the method of performing this in the case that you split open the wound, separate the lips of it, and place linen inside, binding it as long as it remains healthy;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and it is not advisable that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the illness will return worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but I work with softening substances, such as fenum (fenugreek).
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the rosewater of water or flaxseed is cooked, and the diaquiled onions melted in any of the oils, it envelops a bandage, and applies it to this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the true treasure of your cure is that you must be careful, so that it does not harden according to its former shape.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and these works that we have spoken are not only remedies for this illness, but to prevent it from returning according to its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the grease that comes from oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness which is dislocation, truly called "fracture," is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident arises from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the path of the procedure is such that if you press an needle, it has a double thread, and thread it into the wound, and pierce from the left tear (eye) towards the right, so that the thread comes out in two parts of the wound.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then the wound is covered with everything, with the needle above, and the pad has a wide spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	and if the shape of the paper returns according to what is necessary, it is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If this is not done, take a razor and place it in the crevice, turn the paper, and make two cuts on either side within the paper.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and let the cuts of the two slits be at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and make them at an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter 'G'.
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then remove the one that is according to the thickness of its sides from the paper, then adjust the two parts carefully and sew them with a thread of flax.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply the treatment for what we have mentioned about softening and warming medicines, as long as he is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the illness comes from a wound or stitching or cauterization, then you must make a clean slit beneath the skin and paper-like hairs, according to what is mentioned before.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then separate between the two parts of a tent, as I have said before;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one must perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is much diverse in form, and skilled masters have devised all sorts of devices to bring back the appearance to its natural state;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for the work and the use of various instruments in many arrangements.
dou soudement de la papiere	The phrase "dou soudement de la papiere" does not have a clear meaning in
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this suture is performed by unskilled hands in such a way that the paper (bandage) on top is smooth with oil and cannot move or perform its natural functions, it is then necessary for you to insert the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it slightly from above.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and stretch it with pincers, as you remove what is hard in the delicate spatula, neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient does not suffer from the spatula being too sharp and cutting through the oil.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and so your incision, from which you have peeled away the assembled part, should be gentle, so that the skin returns to its natural form.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and it heals completely, without ever mixing with foul oil, but rather with clear water and collars.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then place between the skin and oil a thin cloth of linen, and above the oil lay a moistened wool in abundance.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after the third day, use warm collars and suds until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	from the nail of the finger
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	You know that the nail is according to two manners:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	it is nervous and seems hard and dry, and another that is not nervous at all, but seems like white, frozen moisture, which, when touched with iron and treated with pincers, cannot be done by anyone.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and both of them begin to extend towards the great tear duct, growing smaller and smaller until they cover the entire vision and all the light and motion of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the method of incision is that the patient places his head on a healthy side, then opens his eyes.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and take the paper in your hand, then curl the finger like small pliers, and stretch it above.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and put a horse's, or deer's, or cow's hair in it, and tie a strong thread.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the finger, and pierce through the entire length of the needle, and tie the finger with thread, extending it above, and scrape all the hair around the side of the nail, immediately after pruning the cuticle and the silk of the hair up to the head, then carefully cut off the remainder at the root with a delicate scalpel or small forceps, leaving the natural shape of the nail intact, so that through the incision no tears come to the habitually sensitive skin.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and never stretch the fingers at the joint solely, and with thread, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then the skin is scraped off the entire soft part, which takes the shape of:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	and be sure that the soft part does not touch the flesh and tear it, and that the knife is not pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision, pour a little bit of broth into the wound, and then apply a collar made of litargire (a type of metal) and leave it until the next day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then focus on the treatment of it until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	If the nail is not firmly attached and you cannot push the needle through, or the hooks cannot enter, this condition of the nail often requires treatment with various medications.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow as I have described in the dissection, and if you see it covered, open gently for the sick person, and take a light spatula according to this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And gently remove the nail from above, and if you see that it shrinks slightly and the pain intensifies, mix a drop of collar (an ancient term for a medicinal substance) made from lightning stone and red string, and apply the oil to the affected area until the next day.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then begin the other task according to this same work, as long as it is entirely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing in the oil contradicts you, such as a hot abscess, then apply it and treat the hot abscess first until it is healed, and then continue the work as before until it is completely cured.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh causes pain in the eye due to great damage, suspend it at the corner and cut off a part, not all of it, so that no more tears flow.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	then distill into the eye a red collar made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	on the flesh that is born on the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	Some men's eyes never turn red, they cover the pupil and rest on papers, twisting them in the fire, and look like a ball of rosin.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the work consists of the patient placing their head on a healthy surface, then opening them up, and applying all the appropriate hooks, and supporting it with strength.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then take the first hook, and go on applying them one by one until the end, taking care not to hurt yourself during the work.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and let the incision be smooth and delicate, as we have said in cutting a fingernail and with small movements, thus removing the nail as the shape demonstrates after this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is completed and all the charcoal is removed, apply to it the oil of crushed silk or distil a red collar and similar corrosive medicines, and cover with hot cotton soaked in oil so that it is assuredly hot.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if it does not improve and the pain intensifies, and you doubt that the abscess is hot, leave the oil and treat the abscess with calming remedies for a hot abscess.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus make similar cuts adjusted in the oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But nevertheless, it is necessary that you pay attention to each weak joint in the natural way;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and of the unnatural way, in the work of doing;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand into any of these works as long as you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These are the red veins that are covered over the eye, they obscure the sight of their work and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	The first task is to look at which joint is affected, for it is severe and out of place, and there is no other disease outside of the joint.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	Then instruct him in this manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position, then suspend the veins at every point according to his wisdom, and let the veins be fine and double according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And there should be two incisions by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then gently compress the veins, and drain the blood hour after hour, until you see the veins disappear from the skin.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and be careful not to puncture the skin with the forceps, and perform this task at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you only succeed in draining the veins.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you have done this, slowly drip the green and red collyrium into the oil to dissolve what is lingering in the wound.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	If you cannot gather all of these at that hour, make a poultice over the oil with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for no days until the pain is relieved and the inflammation of the hot eye is assured, then continue in this manner as before until it is healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	and this is the form of strength:
de la fistule de l’oil	From the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	They call these "arrested" fistules:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	As you treat it by cautery and medicine for the burning pain as I have previously mentioned, if it does not heal, there is an infection in the abscess where he must die, and remove all moisture from it until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, take all the instruments mentioned here and shape them accordingly.
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called the "sharp point", and it should be made of iron from the base to the tip, and pointed like a lime as it is in the current shape.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then twist it between your fingers, and press with your hand as much as you know that corruption is gone.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this again, then return to the use of drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the joints are fused and it grows, and the bowels' wall is fused and remains that way for 40 days, and it does not renew or become abscessed, and no bad accidents come, know that it is healed.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If there is no other remedy but to bring the fistula back to the opening of the cold according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and it is that you discover the bone a second time by iron or medicine, and when it is discovered, take the foresight according to this form, and let the instrument have three angles, and make the cut reach up to the top as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then place it on the delicate bone, remove your hand from the oil, and return to the entire instrument until it pierces the bone and the patient feels the pain because if he keeps his hand on his cold,
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the joint with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the pain subsides and the joints harden, then consider the matter anew.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the wound
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes are fully open and there is no disturbance or pain, it is necessary to keep the patient still.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then apply heat, then use suction cups or a hot compress without causing injury, then apply the oil made of mullein, aloe, incense, and dragon's blood, and then strain the oil, and wrap it with bands and cloth.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the method of bands: if you bind bands soft enough, doubling them in three (or four), and then placing one over the other according to their respective needs;
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then stretch from above with a firm band, and restart the poultices to suck without causing harm;
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the poultices and leave the compression for day and night, and if it becomes too tight, it is good to gently stretch it;
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	then remove the compression after day and night, and if you see the skin repairing itself, that is good;
se ce non;	if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	if the splint, bandages, and bindings, and the leeches are reapplied while he is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	breakage of the woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruptions occur in the wound covering, it opens up and fills with small pieces like grains of resin, and it is encouraging to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then if you see it covered, the work is such that you push a needle into the base of the lower part, then another needle where there is a double thread in the upper part.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and pierce it, leaving the first needle according to the arrangement;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then cut the skin with a double-threaded needle and tie one part of the edge around it, tightening well, then extract the needle and apply the other moist lint in abundance.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it until the thread disintegrates with the edge, then treat the wound with comforting things until it heals.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and never should the wound be restrained by any part of a circular bandage until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the joint appears to be well-formed, pierce it with a delicate needle that comes from oil, draw out the white moisture and lower the joint, and it will enter again immediately.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then extract it as long as it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bow of the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease called "alcunnati" is only from moisture that is gathered in the oil, resembling clear water flowing down, but it is not clear water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of the work is that you place the patient on a seat with their legs raised and straight, then take the head in both hands from two sides, and move it until you see the moisture rising towards your fingers.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	Then it is fixed, and the bandage does not descend or become loose, and the patient can see clearly as before.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not come loose, know that it is urgent, and if the bowel descends, it must be treated as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	if you delay the patient in your hands, then take a fine spatula and make incisions on the corny tissue through the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corny tissue and the cornea, while the bowel is still there.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it comes out, it should be distilled in hot honey or mixed with honey, or boiled water and honey, then treated with another remedy until it is clean.
des aigues de l’oil	The phrase "des aigues de l’oil" translates directly to "of the waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have seen the signs of water in the division, and what is needed to pierce them.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if it is opened according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	You should place the patient between your hands crossed, away from direct sunlight, and tie the healthy oil tightly to them.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then place the paper from oil in your left hand if the joints are on the left, or in your right hand if the joints are on the right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then, in your right hand if the joints are on the left, take the instrument called "almagda," or in your left hand if the joints are on the right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	then, with the tip of the instrument, cut through the crown carefully along the thinnest part near the meatus, then twist the instrument called "almagda" vigorously and move your hand as it pierces into the meatus, feeling that the "almagda" reaches the empty space.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and it is necessary that the length of the magical way be exactly the same as the measure of the space from the base to the end of the shadow.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and this is the crown of the oil;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	if you will see the bone on this paper for the clarity of the cornea, then place the instrument exactly there where the water is, and press it from one way to another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he lowers it now, he will see the patient before him and the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After resting, let the water take the second way, place force with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not rise, slowly extract the magical oil by turning your hand a little at a time.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put back in acute a little bit of silk string, and remove from these the oil inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply heat to the affected oil with hot wax or any other moist oily substance, and wrap it in clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, place a hot poultice on it with plenty of fire.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the foreign body cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are some people whose eyelids are too tight, it is necessary that you press the instrument called 'alberit', which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then pierce only the outer joint, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then apply almagda, as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and upon completion of the work, prepare for the patient a comfortable place to sleep, so that he sleeps on his back in a dark place;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and be careful of all movements, and feed him with light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his condition for three days.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then dislocate it in the same dark place, test its sight, and make it see nothing, and then put a bandage on it for seven days.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and it is not appropriate that you do this during treatment or after incision now, but it is necessary to lighten it, because the acute pain has increased.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	if an abscess forms after seven days, dislocate it on the seventh day and apply the remedies for a soothing abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is calmed, he should open his eyes and place a side on his face to cover the light, and be in that dark house again.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	and then he leaves the house little by little and returns to his own affairs.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and he should know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And then came to us one from Iran who told us that in their peaceful lands they had a method of perceiving things unseen, from which they drew water, but I have never seen anyone like this in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and by chance, this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the appearances of the shapes of alchemy, so that those who do not know them will see them.
et soient d’arain proprement:	and let them be of pure gold:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And the center of this same subtlety should be in the middle, and the three corners sharp.
de la char sor le neis	Of the pain near the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	No creature is born or grows with diverse joints, so that there is none that resembles a scorpion in its multitude of limbs.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if it has such a creature, enriched with beautiful fur, and if its flesh is of a good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In this case where the pain is severe and not chronic, it is necessary that you make the patient lie between your hands facing the sun.
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open the patient's nostrils, and pour the liquid into those that are blocked, and treat them vigorously.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then hold what you can support with the delicate spatula from one side, as long as you know that this blockage is completely opened.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open it with all the delicate and light instruments until nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and without letting your mind wander, if an abscess forms, cut it as necessary;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if these are malignant abscesses, act quickly and cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the debris is removed, then apply fresh, clean, and warm compresses or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the abscess opens and moisture reaches the palate, knowing that it is healthy;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if the moisture does not drain as necessary, knowing that there is debris in the bone above, preventing the instruments from cutting.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Then it is necessary that you insert a thread somewhat thick into it, and be careful with your hands, and leave between each a little space as needed.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and place the patient's tooth with the thread in its socket as much as possible, and pull gently until it comes out through the gum.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and often children are taught this way, and it is a light task for him who wishes to do so.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head that comes through the gum in one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth in the other hand, and pull one after the other as we who are holding thread do.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do as you know, that the new wound is corrupted, then treat the child, wipe off the blood, and moisten the wound with Egyptian ointment, and put it back on the body as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that is remaining of the wound.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put a bandage on the wound for no more than days until it is healed, and if it needs further treatment with dry medications, then use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, from which they distill oils and medications:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	and it should be of silver or gold, resembling an open lamp, like a candle, and lead it accordingly;
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you make a closed candle, it becomes an instrument full of medications to purge the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and it should have many parts on the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Of the pain near the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a sickness appears in the head near the eyes, called "tul" (or possibly "ulcer"), it grows and becomes great, as long as it is a visible thing to behold.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and for this reason, it is necessary that you catch it at the beginning, remove all the bone, and then apply fire or hot medicine to the joint.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if it is delayed in being treated until it becomes great, be careful if it is hard, of pale color, and lacks sensation.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	if he does not let the wound touch any iron because it is an inflamed abscess, for when one treats it, great harm comes to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is of a soft consistency, not hard like an arrowhead, and you can easily open it, draining the patient without harm, then treat the wound with dry and cooling things to heal it.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the continuance of a bone breaks into one of these powerful cartilages, it profits little, for no man.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	One should therefore watch that this does not happen to anyone, if you consider whether the wound is fresh and full of blood.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then adjust the two lips to one stitch, and treat it until it is healed;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are dislocated on both sides, it is necessary to cauterize all parts of their healing place until they heal, then adjust the two lips to one stitch and tighten it, and apply powdered dragon's blood and incense dust.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and place a piece of strong glue or other adhesive binding on the powders and leave it until it dries, then treat the wound with medicine until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The method of stitching is such that you join the parts together:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	using needles, as we said in the stitching of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	At home, there occurs within the lips an abscess hard as grains of corn, both smaller and larger.
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	then you must turn the lips and make an incision on each one, taking them with pincers and cutting into each part.
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then use the lever after the incision of vitriole powder, until the wound is stained;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then the lever from silk, and dry the wound with clean things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	from the work of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times it occurs on the gums, tightly stuck together, which the old call "albulus";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	so it is necessary that you hold it with pliers and cut at its root, leaving the bow or the vein to flow.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then place a hot compress on the affected area, or other powders that restrain and desiccate;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if the wound returns after incision, and this happens many times, if the cautery is performed a second time,
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after the cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of the instruments for cauterizing.
des sordens	from disorders
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Never should they be assembled at the base of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, or on the rough, unpleasant scales.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and never are the teeth black and yellow and rotten, as long as the corruption comes to the gums, and they stink.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	it is necessary that you hold the patient in your hands, and their teeth or gums be in your possession, and pull out any visible roots, as long as nothing remains.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and do the same for black, green, yellow, and other hues, as long as they are infected.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if that which is at the first reason is removed, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	If this does not work, start again from the second day and the third, as long as you have everything under control.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that teeth require various tools to extract, as the operation shows, because the pliers used to pull out teeth have different shapes from those used to space them.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these shapes and others should be with you, prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	When treating a tooth that is causing pain, take your time to gently extract it as much as you can, for no one should do otherwise.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	For it is a very powerful substance, so there is no excuse for cutting it off.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then, when the patient is in great pain, it is important that you be certain about which tooth is painful.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the patient feels great pain, and thinks it is from a tooth infection, and extracts the painful tooth.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	But the pain does not leave them despite this, as long as the evil tooth is extracted, for we have seen this happen to these saints.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are certain of the painful tooth, it is necessary that you cut around the tooth with a very sharp knife to protect the gums from all sides.
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then move your fingers or use the fine tweezers on the first slight movement, as long as they are well dislocated, then firmly hold the tweezers.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and place the patient's dislocated joint gently between your knees, holding it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, if it doesn't come out, take none of these instruments and push them gently from every side, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the bone is broken and pierced, it is necessary to fill the space with cloth, either in the wound or the opening.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if it is squeezed gently with tweezers, so that it does not break when squeezed.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And one must speak very clearly around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Be very careful so as not to break it, and if a part breaks off, return the remaining piece to the patient, for due to the evil of the root, he will experience greater pain than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And be wary that you do not act like the ignorant healers who, in their haste and foolishness, break the treatment at every turn and do not follow what we have described.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but they bring about this great disease because of the roots that they do not address, or because of the treatment that they break, just as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is loose, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and it causes bleeding, which often occurs, if one uses the place of vitriol ground;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if this does not help, then cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shapes of the instruments, with which one should first mute the teeth, should be long and blunt, not doubling when pulling the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let the members be of good size so they do not bend when pulled, and well-forged of iron, and toothed for proper movement.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains stuck, it is necessary to place a moistened cotton ball with butter on it for one or two days, until the joint loosens, then use pliers called "algefri" to carefully extract it, making the patient feel relieved.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and they should also be made like a file, and this is their shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to emerge from these clutches, it is necessary that you uncover the skin all around the root, and place the instrument called "althali", which is a pliers, in this way:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And it should be firm and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out on its own, that is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	if no, even with all the tools, the shapes come as follows:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument with two prongs, the shape is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are used in the reason of teeth, and this instrument that seems like great pliers, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let this instrument be strong so it cannot break, and know that many instruments of iron are.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not mentioned.
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the most skilled surgeons create their own instruments, according to what their works and the illnesses they encounter demonstrate, for there are many diseases that the ancients did not teach about due to the diversity of symptoms; if one breaks a bone or another part, and it becomes stuck, or if it cannot be moved, then if he seeks the appropriate instruments I have mentioned, and uses gestures as an aid, this is how the process goes.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And they should be thick and well gripped to hold the bone, so that it does not escape but can be held and removed.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then return to the patient the appropriate medicine for this, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, small or large, use all these instruments.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural shape of the body, and its form is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth has grown after the original one, and is not in its proper place, and cannot be filed or smoothed.
adonques lou raie;	then cut it;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is caught with a tooth, take this instrument whose shape is like a small beak, and let it be made of hard steel.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the surgeon should hold the tooth firmly in his hands day after day for its hardness, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it from one side as the shape requires.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	it is also like the lime from which they make needles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and in the lime, press the tooth gently with your fingers, so that it does not move until it falls out on its own.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	Then the surface at the end is entirely smooth, and if the cut is too deep it damages the tongue; therefore, it is necessary to file the sharpness until it is even so that it does not damage the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth aches.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the teeth are loose due to biting or pulling, and the patients cannot bite down on anything without pain, they take restrictive medications but that does not help.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	if they need to restrict it with a golden thread, for the silver thread turns green and decays, but gold never changes.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and so the son's hair should neither be too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you need to direct the teeth, take the thread and wrap it twice between the two healthy teeth, then place the fragments between the loose teeth, as many as there are, until you reach precisely the healthy tooth on the other side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then restart the covering up to the point where you tied it, and gently but firmly pull your hand, until it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the pieces of thread with pliers, assemble them, and insert them between the healthy tooth and the one with the abscess, so as not to damage the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then leave it so tight as it can stay, and if it loosens, the threads will pull out, if released from another thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if it stays tight for a long time, it will serve thus throughout all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and the two molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth is dislocated, put it back into its place, freshening it as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and do not allow anyone who is not skilled and patient to intervene; and never should the shape of a tooth made from a bone of a deer be used, but rather place it in its missing position and hold it tight as we have said, and wait and serve thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cut off the language's loose ends.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Never should these ties that come from beneath the tongue or nature be considered, for thus we are born.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	because of an accidental deep wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the work involves opening the mouth of the patient with pain, placing his head in your hands, and extracting his tongue.
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cut the thick nervous ligament, as much as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is stiffness or resistance, and it suddenly opens a wound, then draw the hook and cut through that ligament.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and be careful that the cut does not go too deep, to avoid damaging the artery beneath.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done that, lift up the limb with hot water and oil, or cold water, then place a thin strip of linen under the tongue.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and each night, the patient suffers from a condition that prevents their limbs from healing.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if the infection from blood comes, then put a hot compress on the limb made from crushed vitriol.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the pain from the infection goes away, then cauterize it with a hot iron, which is good for healing.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then treat with another remedy as long as he is healed,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see it is of any red, black, or hard color, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it turns to white and there is moisture, cut the tumor with a fine blade, and remove it from both sides.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if the wound does not heal under your care, grind vitriol until it is well soaked, then return to your task until you have treated everything thoroughly.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then raise the limb from rest and from weight, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	from the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	No matter how often holes appear in the throat, which are called "godath", and we properly call them "two amandres", when you treat them, as we have said in the previous section, and they remain unsanitized, be careful.
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	if they are small abscesses with a hard, pale surface, do not try to pierce them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red with a thick root, do not pierce it with iron, also because of the discharge of pus.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let it grow as long as it is strong, and then you will remove it, or it would break by itself.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if it is of a white color and the roots are subtle, then prepare the instrument to extract it, but first ensure that the abscess is calm and at rest.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient face the sun, and ensure their bowels are in good health. Open the mouth and press the jaws between their hands, pressing the tongue down with the instrument to form this shape.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and it should be of silver or fine gold, just like our knives.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	You cannot press the tongue against all these instruments and see the abscess, so take the needle and drive it into the sore, and pull it out from above as much as you can.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and do not pull anything from the wound with it, then cut with the instrument, which forms something that looks like strength.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	but nevertheless, the head is bent, one way or another, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, if you make it with pliers, like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And make incisions on one side, and on the other leave them untouched;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have treated one of the abscesses, treat the other in the same way, and afterwards gargle the patient with hot water and clean, cool water, and the discharge of pus will occur, if the patient is gargled with hot water, or with cooked pomegranate skins, or myrtle leaves, or similar things, until the pus is cleared.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure it while it is still healthy;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And never does another abscess form in the throat other than the two glands, so bind them as tightly as the two glands.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was newly formed inside her throat, namely the small abscess.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and had tightly closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, and could not eat or drink, and would have died if left thus for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so swollen that it had forced two ribs through the two openings in the throat where it entered.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I hasten to do so, and insert one pin, then pull it forcibly, and take a large portion of the bowel.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I repeat the process on the other side of the opening, and open the mouth and press the tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	after inserting the pin into these abscesses, and taking out a portion, I pull only a little bit of blood.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and thus the throat of the woman is opened, and she begins to drink water and then wine, and does not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and it (the abscess) repeatedly reopens, filling up again the space that I had emptied out, as long as it is very large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	then I secured it and cauterized (the wound) inside the throat.
ensi demora sens croistre;	so it delays without growth.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and I separated these parts, and let God do His work after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the eye returns to its socket, and it is swollen and distant, it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is so large and round, then it is called a "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have described in the previous section, but the treatment does not help, and you notice that the abscess has subsided, and it appears subtle, then it is necessary to drain it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and the one that is round and compact, not distant.
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is red or of a dark color, then it is necessary to carefully perform the incision on it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the sick person.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is necessary, when you see this, according to the manner I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument we spoke of earlier.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then insert the hook into the eye and pull it out, and cut it with one of the instruments I mentioned in incising the two mandrils.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not cut off more than the excess beyond the natural limit.
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you continue doing this, it will grieve your voice and words.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use what we have said about incising the two mandles, and heal it as long as it is clean.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you use an instrument for cauterizing the sensitive parts.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The method of cauterization is very acute.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient places his head on a healthy surface, and then presses his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter of cautery, and immerses it in hot water, not too thick or too clear.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and with the use of this instrument, which gives it the following shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And let the physician have a comb, as if it were a spoon's handle, and place the instrument over all the medicine on the wound.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and have the patient lying on their side, so that saliva and mucus from their mouth can drain the medicine without going down to the throat, and thus healing.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then take your hand and press the medicine onto the wound for about half an hour, until you see it cease to hurt and the pain from the medicine subsides.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument all the way into the hole in the cotton, until the cotton is saturated with the liquid.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often, as long as the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and remove after three or four days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to repeat the cauterization with the medicine, when repeating it, after cauterizing, wipe around the eye with cotton soaked in butter, and clean everything around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and he should be raised with cold water, and he should be cured with gargles until he is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incision, rather than cauterization.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take cayenne pepper and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and similar herbs, and combine all of them or any of them in a pot, and add water, and boil.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot should be tightly sealed with strong clay, and on top of the pot, use a lid according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And whether it is of silver or gold, and if one of the joints is closed in the mouth of the patient, so that the vapour rises to the eye through the chain, until the eye becomes numb.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	after the recurrence often, while the eye dries and heals, be sure not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of the abscess, as many complications arise.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not make any movements except during the decline of the hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not available, take a chain and put a piece of cloth in the mouth of the patient, so that it is not too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	because the heat of fire does not allow moisture to accumulate in the mouth, and this is a good remedy for overall health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	often there is a burning sensation in the throat from bone or fish spine, or any such thing;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	so it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the tool, so that you may observe the thing move.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and if it does not open and is swallowed into the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit so that the food may be cooked in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	by chance if this thing turns around through vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patients swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of cucumber, or a lettuce root, or a dry crust of bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and hold the sponge in its mouth and then swallow it;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it arrives at the stomach, if it is hard, then pull it out forcefully;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come from what we have said, take a plunger tool according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	and let the instrument be curved towards the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and hold the head slightly raised.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, so that nothing comes out, and do not push the bone inside.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and it is important that the patient pushes the instrument, because if he does not move it, the object inside will be stuck.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	if the bottle sinks, pull it out with all the tools equally, until it is completely empty.
de la sansue de la gorge	regarding the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	No treatment should be administered without considering the symptoms, as I mentioned in the previous section, through the use of medicines.
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and if it does not help, then look into the throat of the patient with the sun, and press their tongue with the tool I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the vein, draw it out with all its small pins, or subtle pliers that are fit for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a sheep's gut, insert it into the throat of the patient with the disease, then twist or lift the gut in hot water and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient suffers from fever all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it into both cheeks, moving it with your hand frequently.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and if at any time he feels pain, then it is certain.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not give way as we have said, then the patient should be treated with the instrument used in the fumigation of the eye with ash, to dislodge the foreign body.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	do this many times, for it will come out without resistance.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	The method of fumigation is as follows: you take a pot with a hole in the middle, lined with a perforated cover, and place the instrument to be fumigated inside.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	then pour the smoke treatment, and have the patient put the tip of the cane in their mouth and close it tightly, so that no smoke escapes, but it comes up to the throat.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the blood will now flow, and if it does not come out, repeat the smoke treatment many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and the patient suffers from thirst, and chews salty and sour things, but does not drink water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then it will be easier for her to speak without this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound, if it can be seen, resembles twisted pliers designed to enter the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and it resembles the beak of a bird of prey, and has the roughness of limestone, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go.
et vez ci la forme:	and here is the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many appearances of abscesses are, according to the memory that comes to mind after reading this book, and they differ in penetration and size.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and this is through two manners, one being just like its own image, and of those that are held by moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for the joints where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess on the upper part of the body is different from that at its base, and the abscess of the fleshy parts of the limb is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if there is no need to pierce an abscess, as long as the bowel remains dead according to its completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if they are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are hard, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses which are in healthy joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from damaged joints, and it is left until it becomes gangrenous around, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Or, the abscess is in the main member, and if you delay the piercing until it is dead, it will harm the principal member.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	if he has a wound in the fundament, pierce it in such a way that it becomes dead.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is not advisable that you pierce an abscess without completing the healing process, otherwise, if he has a wound in the fundament, it will not heal completely and become fistulated.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and it will not heal fully in the long term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is important that you know the right time for piercing an abscess when it is dead, according to its completion, and this is when the pain is soothed, and the fever leaves, and the swelling diminishes in the affected area, and the abscess becomes smooth and well-shaped, and other signs appear.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is necessary that you make the piercing sit more dependent on the abscess, where it opens movement.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and the piercing should be as long as the body, and if the abscess is in the hand or foot, or in the joints and tendons and arteries, and everywhere it is even without any curvature.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when there are abscesses in the fatty parts of the body, it is better to leave the incision until the swelling has subsided after the digestive process, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it in front of this one, the body's veins will be stretched from the pressure, and it will be filled with much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance they harden the lips and deepen the wound within him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if at any abscess that is pierced according to the thickness of the body, as needed by the member.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	and it is necessary that you heal small wounds, small openings;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large wounds, large openings, and many cracks according to the size of the wound;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if for such wounds it is necessary to pull the heart, and cover;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it becomes as dry as cloth and is numbed, then it must be treated as we do with blisters.
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if they are split in three angles, or such as we cut like the fur of myrtle, or abscesses from attacks;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if it is such that we make a deep cut, and other sizes and similar cuts.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those that have no head, like a soft, superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce them deeply.
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is necessary when the abscess is large and has a strong bow, and you pierce it, if you cannot draw out all the bow in that moment, but only part of it.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw out something from it;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	do this many times with great effort, until the bow completely draws out;
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	most often the patients are of weak constitution, or pregnant women, or very young children, or old, frail people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For often the patient jumps with fear at the sound of the bow, which may cause the sick to die, and you will not be blamed.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, if the wound is cleaned, and observe whether the wound of the abscess is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a deep wound, then apply linen or fresh cotton.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess with many openings, then you should insert a tent into each one so that they come together.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have a portion of hard skin in the abscess and it is closed around it, then you should fill it with dry cotton or linen raspings without moisture and bind it for three days.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the bone, and the treatment of the wound until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood flow occurs due to the operation, apply cold water and ice, and moisten the compress, and place it over the bleeding joint repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the blood poisoning persists, with appropriate governance and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter, and the eyes or the abscesses are very sensitive, then you must place these and cover them with moist cloths of wine and hot oil.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in summer and the eye is fleshy, then you must place moist cloths of water and oil, or wine and fresh oil, for three days, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then remove the abscess and clean it and treat it as appropriate while it is still fresh.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	or as told to you, how one should proceed before the treatment of abscesses, read this chapter now.
des soros	from sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or sometimes the chief sickness comes from small abscesses, and they are like threads, also like the sinew of a goose, and there are many similar ones.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are large and soft, as well as those with moisture also containing pulsations;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and if it is of such as are hard and resistant to cutting, and there is no doubt that the arteries do not act against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the trunk is such that you should try all instruments called "intrusive", from which the shape below comes, something it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they make a hole from above down long.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is evacuated, if scraping leaves no skin containing the moisture, for it repeatedly returns when nothing is left.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, with water and string, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and they will correct what is delayed from moving.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then begin the treatment again, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you are sure that it does not delay from moving.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then dress the wound with suitable medicine as long as it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess persists for a long time, following this form, then cut it deeply.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and he should soak the wounds, scrape them from all sides, and use all your care to draw out the pus from the wound where it lies.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the arteries react against it, do as I have told you.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do the same for an abscess that is persistent and hard, cutting and treating it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And make an incision above the abscess and around it, if it is softer, because they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if none of these abscesses or joints have any moisture, and it is one of these deep abscesses that I incised on an old woman's shoulder;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess as hard as a sharp, white stone that cannot be broken.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if none of these helps, one would also make a wound as deep as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other cases, when the pain comes in the upper parts, such as the top of the head and the roots of the ears, keep the opening closed for several days so that the bowels can move.
et les cure si com il covient.	and treat it as appropriate.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess appears in the neck, and dissolves the adhesions, and attacks the angles, and never occurs elsewhere on the body, and it is painful, and twisted upon itself.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each ulcer is properly inside its bone, just as the sore and abscess on the head, as we have said before.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the appearances of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	Some of them contain moisture, and there are others that are malicious and refuse to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that case, when you see a good disposition for touch, and it resembles the healthy color of the skin, and is quiet from every side, and not rigid at the joint nor in the tendon, or too deep.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	you must then lift it from above, and peel the skin from every part, and the two lips of the heart should be at once, if necessary, as we have said in the chapter of the head.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	And move it little by little, and be sure not to touch the nerve or the vein, nor be too aggressive with the knife, so that your hand does not slip, and do not look too far ahead, lest you miss what you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you hit the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work, apply vitriol or any powder that stops blood flow, and close the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and leave it until the abscess is calmed down, and the wound becomes softer, and begins to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the wound is stained with blood, it returns to your work, as long as you complete it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then seek your finger's subtle indications if there remain no small lumps, if it scrapes and cleans.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein in the root of the lump, it is not enough that you only scrape off this lump at its root, but tie a double strand of thread around it and leave it hanging without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	then apply the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then dress it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut off the entire sore, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, so that there is no delay due to the size of the sore.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you need to understand how to deal with the root of the issue, pull it out forcefully, and cut it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrofulas that hold an excess, cut them where they appear to be closing;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and make the cut in the same way as that mentioned above, depending on the case, then apply these remedies and similar things, so that it corrupts those who are stuck in the corruption.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well cleaned, if the healing remedy causes pain, as long as it heals.
de squinance	squinance (n.) - squint or cross-
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients spoke and wrote about the treatment of the throat.
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is the writing of their word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those with a squint, it is necessary that the fold in the throat, called the epiglottis, be avoided.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and no help is done through this, because all the veins and the pores of the sick person are close in those who have an abscess in the mouth, or throat, or intestines.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the tongue, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we wish to divide the epiglottis, we should do so in three or four small cuts across, between the two circles, or according to the depth of the cut, not into the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if these muscles are suitable for cutting the epiglottis, then there is no risk, and the vessels are long and thin.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary to stretch the throat skin to its fullest extent, and cut the heart open until it reaches the chest.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the syphilis as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated through the cutting of the chest's blood vessel that bursts from the place which is broken, and by the loss of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a time.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed and there is doubt about the strangulation, gather the two edges of the wound together with care, and cut through them all the way to the cartilage.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medications that induce warmth, as long as they are healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albuscasim understands that one must not proceed until the throat is completely sealed, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, lacking all hope.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot strain, and they will breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and for this, the ancients command to keep the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat, as long as it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a damsel took a knife, and stabbed it into her throat, and cut part of the tongue from the gums.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to heal her, and I found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was coming from it; I realized that there was no proper vein or channel leading to the throat, but the veins were emerging from the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and treated it until it was clean;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and having restored the damsel's voice, which had been hoarse, she returned to her previous state.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I say that there should be no fear in the operation of the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	from the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	Cysts in the throat are called "neck hernias", and they are large apertures colored like an arrow, and they are common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and this is according to two manners:
naturez, et accidens;	natural and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	in nature, there is no mechanism.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	and the accidental is according to two manners: one is similar to a tumor, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that arises from an artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and it causes fear, and one should not attempt to make fire outside in a large place; rather, they should test and examine the entry point carefully.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you let it grow out as much as a new grass, and it does not give way to any force, if it is broken, just as we break our bones, and treat it with all your care, if there is no pain.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and wrap it tightly, and treat it as appropriate, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	From us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of which I will describe all their similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is necessary that I explain all the differences between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that the origin is heat and fever holding, as long as the ebullition has not passed, and completion of the putrefaction.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then rest the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the new heat, there is neither fever nor pain, and it contains satisfaction, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins as a wound, and becomes swollen.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to their appearances, whether oily, moist, or of a certain color, as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	You should, when you come to the treatment of a new patient, first try and inquire about all the instruments called "entromissory", according to their form, as described in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of questioning abscesses is that you press more moistly where you feel the abscess, and move your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has reached the center, according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then extract the instrument, and be careful of any sudden jumps.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture is running through the flesh, what color it has, do as I have said for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if moisture does not come from the instrument, know that it is full, then do crosswise and take it as tongs, scraping gently from each side and taking care of the cloth where it lies so you draw out the pus with the new.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot pull it out whole, then pull it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if nothing remains, it will return to the body many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if a small amount remains and does not disturb you, apply some corrosive powders or hot compresses to the wound, treat it with cooling things, and use other remedies until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the wound is large, cut both edges of the wound and treat it with remedies to promote healing.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the pain is intense or persistent, apply a poultice of crushed vitriol and leave it for two or three days, until the wound heals and the blood flow subsides.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to covering what has been dislocated from the new.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See the shapes of the instruments used for dislocation, which are of three types:
grans et moien et petit;	large, medium, and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and then take three squares that are called "albaret," and one that is called "breb," and there are three ways to do this:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	cut, fine, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and are also like needles used to cut sorceries, made of gold, or iron, or silver, and the ones that are yellow in color are more effective for encircling the abscesses of fistulas;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the opening's size.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the incisions are much alike, as you can see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	great, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if the incisions have two curves in three ways as well;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if they are once which have three curves, and are also of three manners;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if they are once which have two curves, and once only one curve, and are of three manners;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all this is necessary for their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these [instruments] must be sharp, and there are some that do not cut well from both sides, which scrape the skin, so that one does not cut into the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and from these intrusions, the splinters are removed from many parts, so that the patient does not lose them when opening the abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	great, small, and medium, as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and do not use any more force than necessary, especially with fleshy parts like legs, arms, mammary glands, and similar areas.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and never use any other small instrument resembling the edges of fingers, according to this form, to stop blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it should never be placed in a place that severs veins and arteries, and never according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	never inflame the breasts of any man when they begin to be corrupted, as long as they appear like a woman's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and become pale and swollen, and anyone who wants to cure them should do so according to this form from this line b until g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape off the fat, and apply medicinal fire to the wound, then bring together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and heal it as long as it is clean.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and it holds the eye downward, and is loosened by its size, as happens with women, when they give birth in two places, through two similar openings.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one holds the other at the end of each, and the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line. b. to the next line. g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then strip the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have mentioned about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment, as long as it is healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if he is not healthy, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood flow, it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive dressing.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until it absorbs the moisture and fat, then dress it as long as it remains healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	from the abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that come from beneath the armpits are hard scrofulous nodules or they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, apply clean cotton to the wound and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with suitable medicine until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, then it should be treated as we have said about the cuts in scrofula, and if the wound gapes, then apply cautery as we have previously stated.
de la routure de l’artere	from the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is blocked and the skin above it is sealed, many abscesses form, and this also occurs in the vein with an inflammation and abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if you recognize it thus when it is for the artery, then cut deep enough to reach the abscess;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your hands, if it feels strange;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is for the vein, then there should be a strong appearance of redness;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is madness to cover this abscess, especially when it is deep in the flesh and filled with anger and other substances, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary to avoid iron cure, and he who has the main problem should also be cautious, and in the case of an artery exposed through the skin, make a long cut above it.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then open the wound in small incisions, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues, while it is exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then insert a needle from the inside and pierce it to the other side, gripping the artery with a double thread in two parts, according to what I have taught you regarding the extraction of both arteries located in the temple.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then mark the place between the two joints of an instrument as long as there is no pain from it, and release the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then administer the treatment as needed, as long as the ligaments remain strong.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply this treatment as long as it is healthy.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is as large as a vein, it is necessary that you hold in your hand what you can reach of the abscess all around, then insert the needle through the skin and pierce it, and pass the thread double, so that you draw it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then, as I have told you, take the abscess, or one of the parts of the thread to the shoulder;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, if it rebounds another needle through all the abscess, from the base to the incision of the first needle, and pulls the threads in four directions;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut the abscess until the excess is gone, then cut off the excess with a cure, and leave what is tied.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place a damp cloth of wine and oil on it, and administer treatments with bandages and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	from the abscess of the nail
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly to how abscesses occur in arteries and veins, nails can also develop abscesses when they are injured or subjected to excessive work, among other things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this occurs more often with dislocations and joints in all parts where there are articulations, and it is a sharp abscess, and its appearance resembles the colour of the flesh, and it is in various positions causing pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when they tighten it, the patient feels pain, and is not completely healed of the injury, but the heart remains weak.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and it must be completely still from all sides, and does not move forward or backward, neither down nor up, and the one in joints should not be covered with metal.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	perhaps they have a spasm;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those who have a head or forehead, make the skin smooth with the scalpel.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	if the abscess is small, use tweezers to grasp it and cut it at its base;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, suspend it with a hook, and scrape off the skin, then cut through the bone and sew up the wound until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	The phrase "des grosses boces pendans" translates roughly to "hanging large
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	No such thing occurs in bellies or anywhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its appearance, and it has subtle roots, and large excrements.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and it has both small and large ones.
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I have seen at home those who had them in the belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, had a fine root, were well-split, and always secreted moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I gathered them and found one weighing XVIII ounces, and another VI З., and the work of the incision is such that if you look at the patient, their moisture is evident, and the color of the articular surface is white and moist with a delicate root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if you remove them with a broad spatula, they should be in your presence for fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For cutting often brings great danger of blood loss, and if without your notice, then hasten to cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the incision to be made, take a well-prepared thread, and with it tie the wound as we have said, and leave it for a day.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	then restrain them, and do not cease to tighten the thread until it pulls the wound closed without effort.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are thick, be afraid to close them especially for the belly, but you can well close half of them, then cauterize it so that it does not reopen.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then treat the wound, and ensure you do not cover the part that is red, pale, and lacks sensation and milk-white.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess enhanced, and I will come to the treatment of cancer hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the wound is closed due to crusting.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the bump is due to cautery or an opening in a syphilis wound, and it is on the belly and not in any of the bowels, as is the case with other ruptures, or pus that drains from veins or arteries according to what is above, or from flatulence;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is from the rupture of syphilis and the discharge from the bowels, then the abscess has a color similar to that of the skin, and it causes little pain, and opens up with various discharges.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to an intestinal issue, then it is more complex, and when pressed at the patient's will, it rebounds, and sometimes becomes tightened, greatly constricting the entry to the bath and causing much effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, it does not constrain.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it is due to blood, it opens up through these signs: the abscess is large and hard, and it is fixed in place according to its quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to wind (or gas), it feels soft upon touching, and the work required is such that you must observe whether its appearance indicates blood from an artery, a vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary, you must leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter about abscesses, both for the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowels, then you must instruct the patient to keep quiet and lie entirely still, and then tie a cloth around the entire area.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then command the patient to gently move it between their hands, then enter the area you have marked with a cloth, and stretch half of the abscess above all the sharp edges.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie it with a strong thread or a firm cord of strong silk, and make sure the knot is tight.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then open half of the abscess extended over the bandage, and press your index finger into it, seeking the inner organs.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you feel it grip the ligament, release it, and press the intestine out through the opening in the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the swelling, take it at the point, and cut off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery or vein runs counter to your work, then return to your task and take two needles, press them firmly, and push both needles back in the same way you made the incision.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then stretch the abscess in four directions over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, leaving the place to heal, and seek death by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	where it is tender and possible, then treat it as appropriate, and heal the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place as appropriate, and bind the wound.
dou chancre	A cancer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have spoken in the previous section about the signs of an abscess, and how it must be treated with medicine, and how one should avoid iron treatment.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	And let us speak of the ulcer that invades the wound, and take great care in its cure, and say to the ancients that when an ulcer is present or can be cut out like an ulcer on the mammary gland, or the thigh, or similar places, then it must all be removed when it first appears.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and old, then you should not approach it, for I can never heal it.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	no one has ever healed it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And for the work, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, it is that you repeatedly clean the patient of black bile.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make it healthier if there is visible improvement, then operate on the patient in a good place to perform the work.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then pour onces or chancres, and wash all parts, and clean all parts without leaving any residue;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow completely, and carefully press the place with your hand or any object, and if the bleeding continues after the treatment of the wound, cauterize it until the blood is stopped.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply other remedies as long as he is healthy.
de ydropisie	From hydropsie (a condition marked by excessive fluid accumulation
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have previously discussed the similarities of edema, and how the gathering of fluid is formed, the signs of each condition, and the treatments using medications, as well as those treated with iron.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is only slightly swollen;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one should not use iron for these two conditions:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	This is to know, namely, tympanitis and impetigo, for it is a mortal thing.
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	So then, when you treat this appearance of dropsy, which is called 'edema', and the cure does not benefit, consider if the patient is weak or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as intestinal ailments or similar conditions.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	if they do not allow iron to touch them, for there is doubt.
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient with great strength and they have no other illness but dropsy alone, and they are neither too weak nor too strong, then thus should you proceed:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Place the patient upright on your hands, and the minister presses the belly towards the end, pointing the water to the lowest part of the pain, then take the spiny spatula according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And make incisions from the second part.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	at the tip, but not so deeply that it can reach the intestines when inserted, and cannot be broken.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then check if there is any inflammation towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if it is necessary, you must cut through the bowel three times straight down from the top of the finger.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the dislocation is due to a weak liver, it occurs on the left side of the hip three joints down.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is due to moisture, it occurs on the right side, and it is not appropriate for the patient to lie on the dislocated joint so that excess fluid does not flow to the weak liver.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then cut through all the skin with the instrument, and press, and apply your hand to the entire area between the skin and the muscle just as if you were peeling it, in the quantity of a fingernail or around that area.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then pierce the soft flesh until the knife reaches the bone, and it is the white of the wound, then pull out this instrument, and with it, form the shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	and it resembles a thin silver chain, made of fine gold or silver, and in the middle part there is a small hole.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on one side, three holes.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on the other side, and one on yet another.
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and it is the shoulder cut as if with a quill, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes make with the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top of it there is a wound, so that when the instrument comes into contact with water, it sinks straight down onto the instrument.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	then empty it, taking half or a third, for if you remove more than is necessary at that moment, the patient may die due to the dissipation of their spirit from the weapon, or they may lose consciousness, or they may draw close to death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the disposition of the virtue in the sick person signifies, and its pulse.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then take the instrument and hold the water, and it is now held by the force that stops the opening above the sinus, of which I have spoken, so that you pierce according to this manner.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering, and take a small quantity of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Take no action, and guard against any sudden movements as long as it does not cause any pain but a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave too much water, treat the wound with dry soil or hot sand, and use sweat or a bath and sunlight, and color it with wine.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and treat with drying medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after draining the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	from the obstruction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary at any time for him not to pierce through all the very subtle particles according to this form.
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then make or find a subtle hole in the bladder, and close it and hold it thus for three days or four, and when he wants to urinate, open the closure, let him urinate, then close it again.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and if by chance he doesn't remember, because the strong flow of urine does not allow the closure to be kept closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the closure is small, it is a sign of a weak bladder, as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have a hole in their bladder are blighted, because no one is born with a hole at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they close their penis.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot move because the material cannot reach the joint, and this is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the method of the operation is that the patient lies on their back, then the head of the bone and the neck are extended as if they were a quill, so that the opening to the middle is created as it should be.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be careful of the discharge of blood which comes many times, and if it happens, apply pressure to stop the bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	from the pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times this illness comes to the tree (limb), and it appears as a ugly deformity;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and it has malignant and benign forms;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	you must then press them gently, and wash and clean them all, then place moist cotton in an Egyptian dressing;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then continue the treatment with the dressing until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the affliction is malignant, with a putrid and foul appearance, it requires cautery treatment.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have achieved it, and if the splint is in a state of rest on the bone, with part of it inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary to remove the splint that is inside first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and if it is sewn shut, then open it.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	Because when you bind it together, unless the pieces of the bone are perfectly aligned, it will cause discoloration and corruption in the bone and limb.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	so it is necessary to remove all black and corrupt parts, then apply a paste made of honey and flour from red apple bark and leaves, and continue to treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a blood clot comes, then instruct the lunar cauterizer according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cauterization helps if it follows the combined dispositions:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	that is to say, at the discharge of pus, and at the corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the tip of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, it is necessary that you drive or guide a stick into the pus and drain the patient;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the hair is dried at the tip of the rod that has happened to those who have not been circumcised, or it becomes a wound or an abscess, it is then necessary that you scrape it with a sharp instrument, until the cords are loosened and the part from the rod is freed;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is a difficult thing to devise, then you should cut it with a sharp instrument at the base of the stick and the blade.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then separate the pieces gently, and place a thin cloth soaked in cold water between them, so they do not stick together again.
de la circoncision	On circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a complete healing process like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	however, when we perform this operation of our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best and most gentle work for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have observed most of the masters and elders who performed circumcision near the anus, and how they use force, and all sorts of new tools.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	if the threads were to break because there are two of them, and by chance one is cut above and the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	or he might cover it again, and the pain becomes doubled, and the purification, which should be near the anus, is not assured for the point of the member.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and to the purification of the nail, if by chance the fire escapes and runs away, the work will be ruined, and often times they grow like this, needing no purification, which I have seen.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleansing that is done with force on all the fibrous threads, I have found the benefit of experience, for the forces cut exactly as well from above as from below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if it is cut evenly throughout, then you release all tension.
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but ensure the thread is well wrapped around the skin.
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and be sure of the method in the first attempt so that if the child hears you and understands that you are only tightly winding the thread around the stick, then afterward, make it relax in all ways as much as possible.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then stretch it straight between your hands and restore the strength in your hands or beneath your feet so that the demon does not see any of these.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then take your hand to the staff and blow through your nostrils, holding it up until the end of the staff is covered.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then cleanse it well of the dirt that is gathered on it, then tie the limb with a double thread, and bind it to another bandage.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it at the second joint with your two fingers and thumb, and cut between the two bands, then gently lift the end of the staff.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow drop by drop, for it is the cause of pain.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on it and on the powder I apply a glue made from egg whites cooked in rose water, mixed with oil of roses, good and fresh, and leave it until the next day, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The way to purify the body is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	Both feet should be clean and cut, and the toes also, as equal as possible to the rest:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error in purification is when the veins inside bleed during the incision:
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Then you must extend your finger, so that the joint creates an abscess.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and hold it even, and if you cannot hold your finger, with pincers if you have them, then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they remain for three days, and the skin beneath the arrow is swollen, leave it until the abscess heals, and gently peel away the scabs.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	if the abscess heals as well as you can see, and it protects the part of the arrow, it will not harm anything.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Cure therefore the place suddenly wounded by powder, which we have spoken of treating in the section on powders, and if one takes too much heart, and it goes above, then it will not harm;
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure it therefore, as we have said, while it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is an indication of a stone or frozen blood, or bowels or a chronic illness, or similar conditions, as we have spoken of in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	and if the urine cannot be released, and you see a retention due to a stone in the bladder or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient bend over on their knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and place them incorrectly on the back, extending their belly from above the back and restraining the patient in any way possible.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then they constrict the collar of the bladder to the position of the stone above, causing the urine to flow freely.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer an extraction with all the instruments called "syringes", which have this form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and let them be fine, light silvered hairs, like the feathers of a bird.
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and the blade should be one palm length and a half, and fine at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the method for urination is that you take a double thread, tie it around the base with a wool or cotton ball, and then insert the thread into the syringe.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut off the excess thread, then insert it all into the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit down, and drain the bladder using moist oil and olive oil and lukewarm water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently insert the syringe into the shaft, until it reaches the base of the shaft, then bend the shaft upwards towards the opening.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	then squeeze the syringe before reaching the bladder, and feel the patient's pain until it reaches the empty space, and this is not done according to these orders because the direction in which it is guided is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then gently pull the thread through the wool little by little, and the urine follows the thread, then extract it firmly, and stop the flow of urine.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and begin the syringing as soon as the bladder is empty, and arrange the patient comfortably.
des maladies de la vessie	Of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scabs or pus comes to the bladder, where putrefaction is assembled, you should view it distill water and medicines, by using the entire instrument called 'clepsydra', and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if it opens again:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	from one side, and from the other, as you can see.
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the hair roots, by which the compresses cut well the wound without added harm, if we can drain the moisture and press as much as necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see your medicines moving in the bladder, place the keen-edged knife into the moisture, and pull gently until it comes out.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	if you pull out the moisture with the knife, then quickly twist the limb firmly again;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	if the moisture goes deep inside, reaching the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of a gentle enema, whereby the bladder is enemaized;
si est ci:	If there is a burn:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is of silver or gold, and the joint is higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and takes it out from within the chest where the joint is attached;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you intend to use for a warm bath, then wrap it between the two breasts, forming a good double-layered seal, and heat the moisture over fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then insert the catheter into the urethra and press your hand against the bladder to expel all the moisture until the patient feels that the bladder is empty.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle of it, and punch it through with a round hole.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then insert a strong thread into these openings, and reassemble the circle as if you were closing it, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and secure it with the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do the same as you did with the bladder, pressing it with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already discussed the methods of stone and arrow extraction, along with various medications.
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and we have also spoken of the distinction between stones that cause pain and all their signs, and in what type of stone one must perform surgery.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that stones in the bladder occur more often in children, and this is a sign of acute urinary retention, similar to water in its subtlety.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and open the wound wide, and greatly ease the patient of their pain, and probe many times, and then it heals;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and at the mouth of these sores, we destroy their foundations;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and the healing of children is gentle until they are four years old, and it is much more difficult for the elderly, and it is halfway between for those who are between youth and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and the treatment is lighter for those who have great stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with a enema, in order to expel all feces from the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often gets stuck when trying to pass a stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, and straighten them, and move them from side to side, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and never moves up again.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then have him sit between your hands with his legs apart, so that the bladder is tilted downward.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then take the stone and touch it inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	if you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not give way to the touch at all, dampen your index finger with oil from your left hand, and if the patient is old, or your middle finger with oil from your right hand, and if the patient is young and fully grown;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and press it into its base, and hold the stone, and when you feel it in your hand, if there is an infection at the base of the bladder.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press with your finger, and the stone will come out from where you see it cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the physician to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend the testicles with his right hand, and with his left hand remove the skin that covers them in the area where the incision is made.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	then he extracts the spatule, which gives it this form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make an opening between the testicles and the base, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and it should be straight on the stone, and your fingers close together or at the base, and make the cut across so that it is wide enough to accommodate the stone, but narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	In case the pressure becomes so great that it has to leave its place, allowing it to depart without effort.
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and knows that there is a hard part where it has corners or edges.
si est griés a issir;	if it is caught trying to escape.
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if it is in a part that is smooth, resembling a ball, and round, with a light opening.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	At such points where it has corners and edges, make the size larger.
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not fall, you must use pliers that are like a file on the head to extract the stone so that it does not escape.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	you then use a small, curved instrument on the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot do it this way, if the hole is wide, and the stone is large, then extract it with a strong pull like vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there are multiple stones, first extract the largest one from the bladder's neck, then cut it out, and afterward, pull out the smaller ones if there are any others.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, you must cut it out carefully, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For there are two things that happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	or he dies, or the urination returns immediately, as the muscles cannot contract.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but nevertheless, make every effort to gently pull or remove debris with tweezers, as long as you treat it piece by piece.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, compress it, and place a moist cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then resolve the patient's pain on their collarbone, and do not loosen the bandage for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, if a lot of hot and cold oil and water arises, then apply curative ointment and basic ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if abscesses form in the wound and cause corrosion, and blood clots in the bladder, and due to this the urine is retained, which is known in this manner as without warning with the urine.
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	so press your finger on the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and rot.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then open the wound with fire and hot oil, and draw out any debris, and aid it in every way you can, as long as it is clean.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and it is necessary that all the hours you treat him, you bind both thighs to him, and gather the medications on the joint.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, it is caught in the urethra, and stuck in place, and the urine cannot pass through.
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if you treat it as I say, cutting many times, then the size of the cut is an excuse for the size due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tried this myself.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take the first piece of iron according to this form and insert it at three angles into one tisson.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	then take a thread and tie it around the urethra beyond the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then gently twist the drill in the wood until it reaches the stone.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the drill back to your hand in the stone little by little, as you can drill through the stone from another side.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	if urine comes, then press your hand against the part that is stuck inside the wood.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	if it is broken and bursts with the urine, and the patient is in pain;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this for any reason, then pull the stone out from inside and another from above, then make the stick go around the stone between the two bones, then extract it strongly, and loosen the ligament, and clean the frozen blood in the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it while it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stones" (a reference to kidney stones)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It is rare for stones to occur in women, and if they do, the treatment is difficult, and it is hindered by three things:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin.
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second reason is that it is difficult to find a woman who is well-versed and reveals herself to men, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third way is that, by chance, one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of healing.
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth way is that the stone in women's bodies is often harder than in men, so it requires deeper incision and much fear. If this situation arises, you should seek a knowledgeable midwife, and if you cannot find one, do not hesitate to use this subtle knowledge on a chaste woman.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and it presents a wise dance in the life of women, where a woman who knows a part of the art, and instructs her to do what you command regarding the examination of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and carefully observe if this woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then she must remove her hand or finger and seek the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, by stretching her hand down her finger, and restraining it from moving, she should instruct the patient to remove their finger or hand with the pain, and press and squeeze their left hand on the swollen bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If it is cut, it is necessary to move it slowly and gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to the thigh root.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then cut into the stone at the thigh root, near the middle of the hard mass, where it is most mobile and feels the pain in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move the stone from above or below, but make the first cut small.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then insert the saw into the cut, feeling the stone so deeply in the wound that it can come out fully, and know that there are many ways of cutting stones.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	This is to know, small and large and sharp and smooth, long and round, and which have roots.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	knowing these similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the wound does not heal, mix vinegar and apply it to the place, and keep it for an hour until the pain is relieved.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your task, as long as the stone is hard, and have the tools I told you for removing stones from people to help you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if the wound persists, and it is an artery that has been cut, apply powder to the place and press with bandages and bends, and do not repeat this, leave the stone and do not extract it again, unless the patient dies.
puis cure la plaie.	then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the swelling goes down, then return to your work while the stone is still firm.
de hernie carnouse	herniated cartilage
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Ripe water is nothing other than the assembly of moisture or white mucus, which is detached from the heart of things, containing the fire.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and it is called "syfac" and never properly in the web of fire, if one believes that it is another fire.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it is the skin around the thing between the white mucus that we have spoken of;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and this happens no more.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this rice is due to weakness in the skin, which causes it to spread and accumulate matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And it never happens from striking the testicles, and this moisture takes many forms.
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it changes to jaundice, or has no red, or black, or clear white, and this happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is as white as we have said, then the abscesses are red, very long, like a snake's figure, and do not open the testicles, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the affected skin, the abscesses are red with a part of the flesh, and for that reason one thinks it is another flesh.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white part, one should feel it well.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	then when you see to know the color of the moisture, try to pull out all the intrusive matter, from which the form is as it is above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows, judge of what is inside after the introduction.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cure it with iron, the patient must be healed according to their strength and the replenishment of their body.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then lie down on your back, on one thing a little high, and place under him several sheets of cloth.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on your left side, and instruct the helper to sit on your right, and stretch the rod towards one of the two ribs at the heart's edge.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the scalpel, and cut through the skin of the ribs from top to bottom, making a slit entirely straight by dividing the rib cage tissue until it turns white, and carefully remove it according to each rib's power.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	then pierce the swollen part with a sharp tool into a wide opening, and extract all the fluid, then place your fingers, and the swelling will subside.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the center of the swelling, but only the affected area.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	cut it all or in pieces along its side carefully, for if you do not cut it cleanly and sharply, the fluid will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the air bubble rises to your work, then return it to its place when you have completed the work with the swelling.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then gather the two books of the heart's edges together with a stitch, and treat it as other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the heart corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary that you bind the vessels that are suspended, in doubt of the flow of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	then cut the edge at all the suspension, and extract the heart, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the vein is gathered into two parts together, knowing that these are two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	if you treat the other part just as you did the first, then wipe off the blood, and apply a fresh, moistened lint cloth with rose oil to the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and apply another moistened cloth with wine and oil, and place two cushions on it, and cover them with doubled cloths, and bind it to all parts according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths, make them of shredded wool according to this shape and join them together by sewing in the groin of the breeches, one at the front leg root up to the back, and the other at the hand joint.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two joints on both sides of the shoulder, gathering all the restrictions in the loop of the collarbone;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and never apply this cautery with a red-hot iron, but rather use a delicate surgical knife to make the incision, and cut through the flesh of the joints, and keep it warm as we have said before, so that the white part containing the blood is exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce this white part in small incisions, and then apply this hot cautery gently:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And the doctor, in every way you can, as long as you stretch everything out.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is safer;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and be careful about the decay of pus, and monitor for signs of infection from the work of great size;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything goes against you, whether it's an abscess or pus discharge or any other issue, treat what contradicts you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then administer a perforation, as I have told you, and make sure that when you are certain through the signs we have mentioned that the dislocation is caused by moisture, you keep the patient in a raised seat.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	perce the abscess at the bottom of the socket, throughout the entire gumline, and make the perforation as deep as possible.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and make the perforation wide enough for all the pus to flow out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then place cotton on the joint, bind it, and let it heal until the remaining water has dissipated, then treat the wound until it is clean.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	if the white cloth does not allow water to drain from the wound, it is necessary that you insert a needle or the instrument used to remove water from dropsical wounds, in the shape as mentioned above.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and thoroughly clean the wound, and know that the water returns, and is gathered after six months or so, and when it is gathered as before, then the patient will spend his days in healing.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the intestines
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	You know that in the division of this branch, it causes greater pain in various ways, which is why I think it is better to leave it alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and appearances of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I therefore say that many abscesses come where there is inflammation, especially in the bowels.
et c’est par mout de cas.	and this is the case in many instances.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is to know, by way of superfluous acidity and ague, which is spread through veins or by percussion.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the colour of the abscess depends on the colour of the flesh.
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and it causes no pain, but the abscess is severe.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and sometimes there are many abscesses, dark and black, and of a purplish colour, which do not come from new veins or the opening of arteries.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is due to a lack of artery, if it is blocked by the hot arrangement of an abscess when you press on it with your hands;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it is not advisable that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	What is made of vein inflammation is blocked by its arrangement at the expression of gentle pressure with the fingers, and it can be carefully cut along this model, and on other parts.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the heart of the veins, then heat rises above, and the pain comes strongly white satisfying, and releases the suspension from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the bone is already healed with these new scars, then it is necessary that you treat the bone, and the joint.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is stuck in the sinus or inside the veins, it is then necessary that you release all of this material, and treat the joint appropriately.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the shoulder's birth is at the back, it is necessary that you dislocate it completely, and extract the bone, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, apply a moist woolen compress with rose oil and wine to the wound, then use other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the intestines
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess enveloped in a similar wrapping to the bowstring, with the softening of the joints, and it severely restricts the patient when it forms.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and the treatment for this disease is also very careful, just as with the previous one, and we will tell you about its work according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you make the patient lie on a clean bed, then squeeze the suspension of the parts below your hands, to all the vessels close to the wound, and wash them with masters (possibly referring to a type of medicine or solution) and spread them open.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	then use a sharp spade to cut widely across the vessels, as they are uncovered, and then peel from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then he inserts an needle with a double thread, and fastens it to the first place where the vis (possibly a bone or fragment) has come out, and then fastens it again to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then arrange them straight in the middle, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as with others, so that no vessel leaks and neither of the parts is corrupted.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For if no harm comes from it, and all the vessels come together, then it is necessary to drain the parts of every vessel.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the eggs do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, dry up, and cannot help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	From the rupture of the sinew.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The remedies of this branch are obtained through amputation or satisfying it by extending the abdomen in the area of the angles, so that the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the openings.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this rupture is either from satisfaction or extension, and these two ways of occurrence have many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or from impact, or jumping, or shouting, or lifting heavy weights, and similar actions;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is from satisfaction, if it occurs little by little, over a long period of time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and it makes the abscess even up to the healthy side, because the pus pushes the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the incision that a sudden pain arises at the beginning, and various abscesses appear beneath the skin close to the bone, due to the discharge of the intestine and the blood from the syphilis.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never drain the pus with the intestine, as it becomes trapped and causes great pain to the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these painful treatments with iron, for which one must be cautious.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of the operation is that you command the patient to straighten the intestine back into its natural position inside the wound, if it can be done.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then hold it above his collarbone between your hands, and press the hips.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then apply heat above, and cut off all the skin from the legs down to the long hairs.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then insert into the books of the side, according to your need, to open the wound, and be sure that it does not close.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then strip off the skin that is beneath the muscle, exposing the white flesh completely from all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then place your two fingers as follows: after the white flesh that is beneath the skin of the thigh, and between the second flesh, and from behind the muscle, and between the second flesh.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then move the right hand down towards the heart, and make it white with pleasure on your left hand's top, and ease the tension throughout all the pleasure towards the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the practitioner to extend the pleasure upwards, and release that which is behind the ligament;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and cut between your fingers if any of the intestines are wrapped or hardened with pleasure, and if you pull out anything, it will come up to the stomach from inside.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle or a thick thread made of X threads, and insert it into the back part of the pleasure, which is after the skin of the hairs.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	After shaving, cut the shoulders that appear from the hairs, as long as there are four hairs.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind it tightly there, as we have said that it removes the skin from the bones with a strong bond from both parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the shoulders with the hairs and bind them in such a way that no foreign objects can enter inside, preventing abscesses from forming.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and then from there, place the bandage according to the first long bond, and after these two bonds, leave free the space between the bones of the joint, as large as one finger.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and after all, according to the shape that the affected part has.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut into the part that is beneath the skin of the joints, as far as it is possible to reach without damaging, and bend, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply moist wool soaked in oil, and dress the wounds, and wrap it with the bandage that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never should the white skin be cauterized as we have said, after incision, out of fear of bloodletting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens often, and leaves the scar as it pleases;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it takes time to heal, then apply hot water and continue with what we have said until it heals.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another remedy until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	herniated cartilage
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, one never sees anyone dare to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the elders say that it is made like a gear that fits together, in such a way that you bind the vessels after cutting them lightly from the inside.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cut me open, and treat the abscess of him who opens, as long as the vessels bleed.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	no rupture should occur from the wound, as we have said, and open the vessels.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and do not let any intestines protrude like lumps, and if they do, it is an emergency, and repair them every hour.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and still if it lingers too long at this point, he believes there is a wound or ulcer, until the intestines descend.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this occurs due to the extension of the ulcer, which is aggressive, as we have said, because it extends, then softens and inflames the limbs and opens them.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before.
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and it is never treated with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and it is that the patient lies on their back with their feet in your hands, then take the joint of the dislocation and insert a plug firmly according to the amount of three fingers.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the beneficial substance that is under the skin, take a thread and insert it into the visible joint.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it deeply into the belly, then cut the two visible joints of the dislocation on the side of the thread, and do one after the other.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the side of the thread, and do not cover the dislocation with any beneficial substance or extend it in any other way, as I have told you in the treatment of the intestinal root.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then treat it with wound care.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you treat the wounds, if they become dirty and the wound is clean, do so.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The treatment is difficult, and it has no appearance in the rupture, but cauterization on this limb is more mobile and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the thick skin of the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Often, the skin of animals becomes soft in no men, because the flesh that is inside is softened, and it becomes visible.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, to make the patient lie on their back, and cut the skin that has become softened on the natural skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then bring the two edges together with a stitch, and if you see, first sew the surplus of the softened skin at three stitches or four firmly.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then cut between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds, as long as they are healed, and pull out the thread.
dou chastrement	Dou chastrement (Double cautery)
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Knowing that castration is forbidden in our law, and for this reason, I would prefer not to speak of it in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is not necessary for two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one is that it should answer honestly when asked, and know the treatment.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often need to castrate some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say, therefore, that castration is performed according to two manners:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	or by attraction, or by division.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the method we perform by attraction, we should make the animal rest in hot water until the scrotum is softened and relaxed.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then press with your hand until they are healed and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	On the castration of the penis:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	It is necessary that you hold the animal, and press the hide of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut each one separately, when you have well scorched them.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and do not leave any pain or unpleasantness, the subtle pleasure that is on the vessels.
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this manner of castration is preferable to that which is done by attraction, because in attraction, perhaps something of the testicles remains, causing the animal to desire luxury.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then treat the wound as long as it is clean.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphroditism exists in two ways among humans:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	One is when the two openings are so similar to the features of a woman's nature, with hair and never urinates in public.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, who have hair on their lower limbs as well as a phallus and two vagina-like openings.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment for both men and women is that you apply the adjusted compresses to all wounds and treat them like other injuries.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second manner, of men whose urine passes through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Of the rash
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tendons are a tightly adjusted char on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see.
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and no woman has it either as much as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	You should remove the excess of tendons from your hand or fingers, and cut it lightly.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not harm me too much with your cuts, so that complications from bleeding do not come, then apply another remedy until he is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and there is another affliction that is born in the mouth of a mare, and it spreads, and perhaps suddenly leaps, and it resembles a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to take care of it, as we have said concerning the wound, and treat it until it is healthy.
de erratique	de erratique" translates to "erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erroneous is the judgment when the nature of women is not properly perceived, or the opening (wound) is small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is either by nature from birth, or accident through illness that comes to be;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is through a slight or specific affliction, and is done perfectly in the middle, or on the side, or underneath, or wherever it may be.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and clearly discern conception, childbirth, and perhaps even the flowers of youth.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of these is through the art of dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the dislocation is recent, it appears soon either on its own or through movement.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is a delicate pleasure, and it is close to the heart, if you hurry, then it will be thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	with both of your index fingers assembled, have the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs.
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then form the two leaves into a shape, as long as the delicate pleasure is complete, and be sure to close the opening.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	then take wool and soak it in oil, place it on the wound, and have the woman lie still each day so that it cannot heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the dislocation is hard and complex, it is necessary to use a scalpel-like instrument resembling a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the dislocation is from a bone fracture, then suspend it at the joint and the bone.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and use medicinal substances to stop blood, such as hawthorn, dragon's blood, incense, and plenty of eggs.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then apply a wide bandage, so that the wound cannot heal.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and do this for a long time, and apply a dry linen tent to it.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then he shall be cured of other ailments as long as he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is swelling from heat, if it is not an abscessed wound, it needs to be treated in this way:
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscessed swelling in the heat, it should not be probed or punctured.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that, without usual care, become enlarged and when hemorrhoids have been present for a long time, they thus become involved.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have previously described in the division the similarities and signs, and I will now say those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and their complications, when they are in the advanced stage during pregnancy, are not easily detected, unless they require treatment with heat.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the opening of the vagina can be felt; these are those that can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is therefore necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then stretch the other as pliers, and squeeze it at its roots, then apply powders of medicinal herbs to stop the blood, such as witch hazel and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then he immerses his feet in the wall for an hour, then places them in cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if the fever persists, one should apply a poultice of sumac and bark from pomegranates and gall nuts and similar things, and then take flour from barley, mix it with honey and lard, and make an ointment to apply on his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it is still wet, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If this does not help, apply suction cups on the back without injuring the nipples;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	then take linen, and soak it in juice of plantain or in juice of olive with old wine, and place it on the joint.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess has subsided, continue the treatment with the wound as long as it is healed;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles a sharp point, so it should be covered as I have said in the previous text.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then continue the treatment until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	about abscesses of the breast
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses occur in the body, such as cancer and previous abscesses, and sores and ulcers and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is therefore necessary that I tell in this treatise the hot abscess which comes in the margin, which is not at all an abscess that draws bow-shaped.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you want to know the work of iron, look if the abscesses are active at the beginning of their appearance, and are full of heat and fever, and if they turn red, then you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then do not hasten to pierce, but let it die as long as the pain is calmed;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then make the patient lie down, and have him take a few small positions where he bends, supports himself on his back, and brings his feet closer to the affected leg.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and spread his thighs apart, and place his arms below his knees, and bind them tightly with a strong band.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then turn the patient towards the right side, and bring the instrument used to open the wound, which afterward forms the shape.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you bring the instrument to perform this procedure, you first insert the tip to determine the depth of the wound, so that when you insert the instrument afterward, it does not go further than required, and does not harm the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with fine cloth, so that the instrument does not hurt.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary that he places the cone of the instrument above and shades the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess opens, and it is done gently with the hand, it is necessary to cover the head and guide the spatula.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the bowel is empty, it is necessary that you place in the wound moist tents soaked in rose oil or dry green oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and place the clean tent over the wound directly on the breast, and put over the wound and the lying hand a moist cloth dipped in water or mullein;
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound after two days of healing have passed, as long as it is healed;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and never raise the wound and the breast with a enema of water and honey, and then water or cooked roots of lily and long aristology.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to the wound dressing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is healed in the ulcer, it is necessary to avoid heating with iron, but treat it as we have said in the preceding section.
de l’enfantement	from childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	Trade is most important in birth than she knows the shape of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman struggling down, and desires to smell the air.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then the child should be hastened to be born.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	then know that these children are according to the natural shape, and their heads come first, followed by the rest of their bodies.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press the belly, so that the child is born quickly.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	because when it descends towards its head, it accompanies him, and it empties the marrow of its excesses through good cleansing.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this, which comes otherwise, does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it never comes upon its feet, but rather pierces the body or limb, or comes up onto the belly, or back, and turns by chance upon its neck, or takes other malicious forms;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	so it is necessary to be skilled in movement so that it is wise and subtle in these matters, casting aside error and disappointment, and I will show you all the forms of how one should assist it.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the fever comes upon the head through natural causes, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her strength is weak, making her rest on a saddle, or as women hold it;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and if its nature is of oil or fennel, cooked, then take a small spatula in the shape of which we have spoken and apply it between his teeth.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and split the second layer, cutting with his fingernail as deep as the moisture that is embedded within.
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and press the woman's belly as the child descends, and if it does not descend, it is necessary to enemas the woman with fennel mucilage mixed with sesame oil.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then make him sneeze and cough from a cold condition, and hold his mouth and nose for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	if now the child is born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands rise up, it is necessary that you gently reset them little by little;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, place the woman on her side, and raise her feet up;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then stand him up on the ground, and tie the woman so she does not try to stand;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if his hands cannot enter, and the child dies, if he cuts them with a knife placed before him, and extracts the child, then reset them equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the exit of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes onto its feet, it is necessary to push it upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it slightly and slightly until it is even;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then press from the feet and extend little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	He can jump as high as his feet allow, if he is commanded to press, and the act makes him sneeze due to the condition.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if he jumps, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not happen as we have said, if it is turned little by little, according to its natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it becomes slightly easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come as we have said, take some moss from a high place, and oil of hawthorn, and melted resin, and grind all in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and place it on the nature of the woman inside and outside this treatment, then make her lie in hot water up to beneath the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened, she should be given a collar of myrrh, placed upon her, and left for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her lie upon a seat, then have her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose closed, and gently press on her stomach, for the baby is now ready to be born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the emergence of the child onto its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the baby is in this position, he will gently move his hands little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then it must be rested on his collarbone, with the weight hanging down, and he lies on his side.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	he bends his hands little by little and then grabs the patient's belly, removing the cushions from below until it is completely relaxed.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if it is not successful, he takes hold of the feet and moves them, then moves the belly up, and finally pulls with his hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and gently pulls the child.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instruct the woman to press until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the birth of the child who comes out with a large hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I wish to learn how to bring back the hand.
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be brought back, then raise the woman and let her go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot go, then lay her on the bed and straighten her legs.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then apply the musk as I have described.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, hold her on a seat, then try to bring the hand back.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and deliver the child according to nature, make her sneeze, and instruct her to push as hard as possible until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the birth of the child on its mother's chest, with its hands spread and its face turned towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I know that the pain takes hold of her hand, then she squeezes it little by little and gently.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, apply the natural muscles and oil as we have said, then instruct her to move little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, let the fire rest on the seat, and command it to inflame.
et la fai esternuer.	and make it sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner, throughout all of this.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes about in this manner at regular intervals, if the moisture is removed with your finger, as long as it empties.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and bind it firmly to his face and neck, if you remove the bandage, let it not be restrained, and the child will die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then turn the child inside, as long as you have placed it properly, and instruct the woman to never press down.
adonques si istra legierement.	then gently pull it.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the opening of the eyes
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that many times twins are born, and never three or four.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not an unusual thing, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	These are strange things, and they do not live long, being called thus.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they multiply, and are devoured by the pleasure which creates them, which is connected to the bow.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and they never leave as naturally as all of us, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they become serious, if the cure is as we have said, and there are subtle symptoms, making them too sudden and light in their effect.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do it so that it is moved towards health.
de plusors enfans	from many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	No joints are formed in the human body as in I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than XV, and they are all shaped like a child according to the measure of his noble wisdom, and it is necessary for the skilled surgeon to know all this, for perhaps something similar may happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	it is done according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you cure a woman with a dead child in her womb, as I have said in the previous section, and it will not come out, and you are forced to use manual force;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	If it is necessary for you to know if the woman is of sound mind and does not fear death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	It is necessary for the woman to be lying on her back, and her legs inclined downwards.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife should apply the remedy from the second part, keeping her lying in bed so she is not treated for the descent of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the wife's mouth with moist oil mixed with althae and fennel seed and linseed, then anoint her private parts with these oils and musk.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then stretch it slightly in the mare, then seek the place where it twists, so that it is suitable for this, and be careful that the cord does not descend on its head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if it sticks in its own place or in its neck or in its mouth or on its palate or under the beard or by force or near the sides, and if its descent is on the ground, then insert or hold it at the joints;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that he holds the twist in his right hand, and places the curve between his fingers of his left hand, and stretches it slightly with all his hand, and inserts the twist into any of these joints we have said, as long as it reaches the empty space.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the shape of the bone:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then find another bone, where the third one is missing, so that the extraction is even.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stretch it equally from one side to the other, to pull out, and let the bones bite so that they hold, just like this shape:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if part of it remains stuck, take neither oil nor any tool to it, but press the other part and pull;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if it persists, lower this incise or raise it higher, and do until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes forward before the other and cannot return due to tightness, it is necessary that you wrap it with a cloth until it releases completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	then cut at the joint of the foot or the knee, and it is necessary that you do the same with the other hand, and hold both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the baby's head is large and stuck in the birth canal, or it has a sharp, bent assembly, it is necessary that you press the spiny forceps between your fingers, and do so until the head emerges and extract the water.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	You use the instrument called an "almidach" to shape it with the tools and chapter that follow this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus, I myself make it attach naturally at a great cost.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull the bones with pincers, and the joints jump out and are constrained by force, if they are broken, until all the moisture that is inside comes out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces at the limit that you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the abdomen or under the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture is drained.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the fever is on his feet, it is a light attraction, and the direction towards the mouth of the wound is mild.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	and if it is twisted in the stomach or the bowels, you must extract it at the drape (or fold) wrapped around the hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and making the stomach or bowels empty, until the moisture inside is drained;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if any other parts are broken and the feces remain, then press the hand into the wound from the anus, and pull it towards the mouth of the wound.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then I press the bone deeply, and pull it out;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the opening of the wound has narrowed due to hot abscess that formed, it is not advisable to work on it at all, but instead one should apply moist and greasy things.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and apply them wetly, using gentle water that softens and moistens.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the limb is on its side, and you can make it even, apply what we have said for the living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if he cannot move it, even if it is cut into pieces, he should not leave any of the secondine behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when this is done, he should be given what we have said about the incisions in the abscesses that come near the mare.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if the bleeding from the abscess comes, it should be treated with immediate restraint, and other remedies should be administered.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose stomach had been cut, and another doctor had treated it, and prevented further harm.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, a swelling appears in the cheek, it swells up so much that it opens, and it begins to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called upon for treatment, and I thought for a long time, but I could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong poultice, and an egg came out, and after a few days, others followed.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed because that belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought this was a bone from a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I examine the wound, and pull out the bones as much as possible, until the woman is in better condition.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and examine the woman long tens thus, and then withdraw a little bow from its place.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not recorded this chapter for any other reason than that, when the master encounters a strange thing, he knows how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the woman back to her place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	After this comes the form of pressure, with which one binds the books.
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and at the second turn, as the second joint of the limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle in their tightening, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth should be wide enough to fit two fingers' width and the edge of the tree trunk, about one palm and a half long;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and also adjust both limbs to the same tension of this same horn, firmly joined together, about half a palm's length or slightly more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and this dual adjustment is screwed into the mouth of the horn to open it when you turn both horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling tweezers.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and it should have two adjustments, as you see, of one palm length, and two fingers width;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see the vagina opening fully to the instrument, have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread and her knees bent, then carefully adjust the two adjustments together in the vagina, and hold the end of the instrument from below between her thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then use your hand to handle all the instruments, just as you did with the pliers evenly, according to the amount that you see open the mouth of the wound, until the pain ceases to do what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	all these instruments are skillfully crafted, and there are many of their kinds, each resembling the other;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	and when you see them properly equipped, the work is done more quickly, and with greater ease for the practitioner due to their quality.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not disregard the instrument even if you have not arranged it, for the necessity does not excuse the lack of preparation.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second stage of labor is reached, it is important that you instruct the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze gently, while holding her hands at the mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she jumps from there, that's fine.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If the bone does not come out, I will take a sharp tool or an opening, and insert herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calament, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all of these herbs, or none of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then insert a cane or an opening into the pot, and put the other end in the mouth of the wound, and hold it until the vapor goes inside the wound;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make him sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the treatment does not help, then proceed with the next step.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if after this treatment she remains weak, and is not strong, she is instructed to wet her left hand with oil of sesame or musk, then wrap it in a cloth and leave it in that state, and seek the second treatment.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she has found it, she should press and stretch it little by little straight, so that the marble does not break during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but it is necessary to move slightly to the right and left, and then pull.
si venra et se desaerdra.	if it comes and goes.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	and if the mouth of the wound is tightly closed, we have said the remedy of sneezing and inhalation of herbal fumes.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not from any of the things we have said, be careful not to follow a false lead.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is important that what is in the mouth of the wound, you bind to the woman's thigh, then cleanse it with a four-ingredient remedy.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if the bone goes out of place and is put back, it will come again.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but nevertheless, when it comes out so that there is a bad smell in the stomach and head, and the patient becomes sick.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Therefore, it is necessary to use suitable fumigants:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	no one has tried the fumigation of parsley and dried figs before.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated to stop the flow of blood and the bleeding so is this one.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it resembles a tube, similar to a cane, and one places the head gently in the earth, and the wide end over the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let there be fumigations over the coals, and the scurvy until it is cured, and then another begins.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who have not yet had their foundations perceived; instead, they are wrapped in subtle cloth.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	So it is necessary in the bath that he perceives this subtlety at its proper place, and does not pierce it with a sharp object, and holds back the tightening so that it does not touch.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place it on a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not heal, insert a plug of wool or cloth, and leave it for several days, and when the child is strong enough to move around in rooms, then remove it.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And at no time does this sudden stop of a wound or abscess occur.
si covient coper celui soudement:	if it is necessary to cover this sudden stop:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	if it is cured, as we have said about the pain of the wound.
de la fistule dou fondement	regarding the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that originate from beneath the foundation are called nodosities, and those that come from above the foundation are larger, or in the space between the two parts, if there is a fistula or multiple fistulas.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when this node is old, if it opens again, and the moisture causes a white or subtle bow, and these fistules do not persist.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and they are known because of what arises from it or discharge when the patient has discharge, and by chance, one jumps up.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if the fistules pierce through to the bladder, and through to half of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach up to the joint of the thigh, and up to the other part of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus recognize the present fistula in the fundament, and not elsewhere.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you insert your index finger or fundament, and push a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is curvature, if you insert a fine point or a horsehair, as long as you feel the tent or hair with your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out through curvature or expulsion or pus, as we have said;
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	says that she does not feel any pain;
si te haste dou curer.	if you hurry with the cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula persists up to the bladder or up to the urethra, if it lets go of the urine, and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is felt just at the joint of the thigh, then there is danger that the vein becomes blocked.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting or sudden pain around it, and if it bends at all, then there is no need for sudden medication or dressing.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and for these persistent fistulas, there is no sure cure but toil and the vain efforts of ignorant practitioners.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In those that are neither persistent nor ancient, there is hope for healing by fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies on their back between your hands.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and holds the legs up to their thighs, with their thighs bent towards their belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then apply a bandage of yarn, or cloth if there is flexibility, as long as you know where the bandage should go.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels pain deep within, it is necessary to insert your index finger, then they will feel that the pain is being pierced.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and if you feel it exposed between your thumb and index finger, where the pain or discomfort is felt, then know that it is present.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if it cannot be treated with any effort, then it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One can nonetheless do everything one can to heal it, but this rarely happens.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and with this aid, it is necessary to apply a gentle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as mentioned above.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and heat the entire area of the fistula until it removes the source of the problem;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charred marks are healed, which resemble the quill of an eye;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then apply moist bandages made of butter until the charred marks are healed, and subsequently use a healing dressing that is hot and soothing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healthy, that's good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this cannot otherwise be healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if it attempts to enter, and does not pierce through the flesh or the foundation, and between your finger and the attempt, place a thick covering of cloth or something similar, and you will see the fistula through the covering where the warmth is.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you remove the cover from the beginning of the fistula and pull it back before attempting to treat it, and then apply heat afterwards, as long as it reaches the tip of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the tent will be delivered and removed.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	Then disfigure those bones that look like a bird's feather, and leave nothing intact.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pain strikes you, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For fire cautery joins two bones together:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, the burning of these adjusted bones, and the inflammation of blood and the dryness of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then treat the damp wounds with butter or ground herbs, as long as the bones are bowed, and push the burned bones back into their place.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound with hot, hard, burning coals, and these are dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	Because once it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula appears all the way to the bottom of the foundation and is removed from the body, if you press on its root or foundation, it hurts.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the pulse, and it is between the pulse or the throbbing or the pain, and it is ready to pierce, if there is no other way of salvation and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it out completely, or if you can, apply tent and treat it first.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not push too hard, so that you do not disturb the structure that holds the foundation, and let the eliminations happen on their own without force.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then apply the cure, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	in case it turns out to be healthy, remove that covering and clean it, then apply pressure until it heals from the root, either with a bandage or another suitable instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then remove all foreign bodies in the wound as much as possible;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then study to restore the wound, and hold the fistula in check in the area where the foundation is lacking.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And never are fistulas like this:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you press on the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation through the skin above, then take a needle sharp at the tip according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And push the wire crookedly inside, pushing the tent all along the fistula as far as it will go at the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is persistent at the edge of the foundation inside, then pull the thread from that hole, so you secure your finger or foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and take the thread from the joint, and bring together both parts, tighten one on the other, and leave it for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and do not loosen it, as long as the thread breaks through these three parts between them and moves.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then dress the wound as long as it is sealed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If you cannot pierce the fistula, no matter how much you try, it is not pierced deeply enough.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not appropriate to make the closure too tight, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	It is a form of sharp, spiky tissue from which one makes the fistula if it is very thick and hard, cutting through its parts.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand, for if one cannot do it, or should not do it, as you see here:
des emorroydes	Of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	There are two kinds of hemorrhoids:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	or they are inside the anus, resembling grains of resin, both small and large, and sometimes there is blood, and sometimes many, extending from the anus to the opening, deep into the anus or near its opening.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are too dry have little moisture, and still remain, or a bit of clear water or some blood, and have the colour of fresh flesh.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those who have them deep within the foundation: so instruct the patient to stretch and move about in rooms, as long as the foundation remains firm, until the children are born.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you act quickly, and have a pince, or hold it with your finger, then cut it at the roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if they cannot hold them for their moisture, if they take them in the draping or cotton or a piece of chamoix;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and extract them at their roots, then cut them and cover with any hot powders that are suitable for cauterizing;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as is said in the chapter of cautery, and apply other remedies until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot be removed, then wash the patient with a sharp and strong enema to clean what is in the foundation, so that it can come out easily;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	Let the patients take care, and if their pain is strong at the root, it is a light cure.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and if you press them with your thumb or pliers, cut them, then heal them as we have said, while they are healthy, and they fear the incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	It is necessary that you administer the stitch according to this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	take a thin thread, twist it into a needle, then pass the thread through from above and pierce the needle from below, and bring both ends of the thread back under the needle, making them wide.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and holds the thread tight, then ties it off, extracts the needle, and does thus with all the others, leaving some to drain off the excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then places a moist cloth or oil-soaked compress on the affected area and commands the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and leaves it until it heals, and once fallen, applies curative treatments and other remedies until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Carefully and thoroughly from herbs or foundations
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is a drying up of herbs in the intestine, due to constraints of nature, and when the illness is old and no medicine avails.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you remove the skin with a scalpel or your finger, preventing it from moistening.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat it as long as it is sound, as it should be;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be sound, then begin the razor again more strongly than before, as long as it is still moist, and it will be cut.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it as long as it is healed.
dou fremit	He trembles.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	a flea is a small, hairy appearance before the skin, and it goes into the flesh very deeply.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and never does the fire touch it, and he feels as if he is dying from trembling, and it spreads throughout the body, and there are more pains in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a feather from an goose, or a strong feather from a falcon, and place that feather on the trembling, until the red circles cover the trembling entirely.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand over the entire feather until it covers all around the trembling, and press it firmly, and extract the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make this of an iron or steel cable according to this form, and be subtle from below and draw from above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	I do not understand, for it makes me weak, and I must hold firm.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, if cauterization pricks, as it is in front or at the beginning of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a dish
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Never use silver or gold enemas, or molten iron or brass wire.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and never use these small and large instruments, according to those who are accustomed to them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	He who thus administers treatment to children and those who are weak and afflicted, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the enema is small and wide at the top, or the abdomen is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and he should have a desire or the belly should be tied, as you see, and the feces should be perceived inside.
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and he has a hole on one side of the ribcage, and on the other side, one.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and the belly or womb should be filled with medicines from a bladder of a beast or parchment, and perceived around all the small holes, and between each hole there should be a distance of space, then thread through these holes a strong thread made of twisted crisscrossed fiber in X or any other way, and tighten the abdomen as if it were a bowstring.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is prepared, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then rinse.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and it takes the form of a soft circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and apply a warm compress to the head with oil or egg yolk or similar, then wrap it gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then the healer should massage it with both hands together, until it is completely warm, then remove the compress and ask the patient to lean against the wall, lifting their legs slightly, allowing the medicine to exit as best it can.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps soundly through the night, it is greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use the enema for a stomach disorder and the medicine quickly escapes, then it returns as soon as it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoid is at the foundation or an abscess, then the enema should be as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the subtle enema where the skin is tightened:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have spoken about the treatment of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	or we will tell you the treatments of hands and medicine, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the place where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by the use of stone, and sword and knife, or spear or axe or arrow, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that breaks through the skin, or the head, or the leg, or the belly, or the liver, and similar parts;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, as the memory of their treatment will come in their chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, be careful if it's due to a blow from a stone or similar things, and the skin is nonetheless torn and the wound is deep, and you slightly doubt an abscess forming.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if it quickly becomes healthier from the cephalic wound, especially if there is little blood from the wound, and on the contrary, if the healing is in the affected part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and patients should avoid wine and rich meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to get better, his flesh will waste away, and he should not drink wine or eat meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and apply a poultice to the wound, if it is an abscess, then use cotton moistened only in rose oil or strict wine;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, then apply to the wound, as long as it has fresh blood and is not moved by air or powder, I will say a little bit later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it burns him, as long as he does not put any bandages, he will be healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, such as the size of a sword or similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by tenting, then bring them together with stitching, as I will say about abdominal wounds, from the suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is open, raw, and does not heal but only lasts for a short time, then it must be treated.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	then treat the wound with medicine and restore hard skin in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat hearty meats, such as beef and cooked wheat, as well as poultry and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find putrid flesh, not reaching the bone, and treat it immediately, cutting out all decay and applying a poultice.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which without cut, cannot be stopped by medications, if you wish to cut it, and if you dislocate it, hold it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and it is that you put this powder which hardens so that the fire moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the method of the powder is thus:
pren encens une partie;	take a portion of the incense
sanc de dragon II parties;	dragon's blood, two parts
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	fresh salt, three parts, and mix the powder subtly, apply to the wound, and form it tightly, until it disperses well and joins all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then pack it well, and leave it to loosen, if it doesn't swell.
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	because one cannot have medicine as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never should charcoal be used alone if you do not have incense or dragon's blood, but the fire has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the fire has moved the wound, especially if it is deep, unless someone puts this powder on it;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply no hot compresses or poultices made of ground oats mixed with water and honey while it is still fresh.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply other remedies as long as it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if a bone fracture occurs with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with delicate pincers.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you after that about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the collar (or neck).
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound occurs on the collarbone and it is simple, with no distinction between it and any other part of the bone, but there is damage to the nerves or arteries in the collarbone.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerves, there is no other treatment but to let them heal, and put nothing restrictive, for it harms the nerves and causes them to retract.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not apply anything sharp to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuity extends to the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be prepared, as if it were washed in clear water and mixed with rose oil, and also washed in clear water, and other herbs according to this manner, and moist plasters.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, cutting it open and binding it with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	and if the wounds are deep and infected and full of pus, then pierce them or deeper still.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and blood flow stops, then disregard it, and apply heat, and cauterize the wound.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the colors, and the breath is preserved, so that the flesh goes, as much as the heart on the edge of the throat, and do not touch the throat but return it according to its natural form;
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then the strict fasting, and leave it for no days, and then apply remedies of treatment until it is healed;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then the latter;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are pieces of bone, if you can remove them all, then do so; but if you cannot obtain them, leave it until the wound suppures and heals on its own;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones or a fistula in the wound, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a blow from a spear or a knife, and the wound is very deep, then pay attention to whether any air escapes from the wound; have the patient breathe normally.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	you then know that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not very deep, and the blood flow is fresh, do not apply the powder immediately; do not bind it tightly for the bleeding will return to the body and cause the patient more harm.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but I apply an attractive remedy, and bind it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you have no remedy, place a piece of cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and let the patient lie on the wound for three or four days, or even longer.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if no spasm, no shaking or pain in the body occurs;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the bones returning to their proper place, then you know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Cure the wound with various remedies and others, as long as it is healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, dig deeper until you find a fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	if the treatment is as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is shallow or deep, on the front or back, then treat it as follows;
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is great, by stitching;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, by powder, and if it is tightly pressed into the bone, and has broken parts, then it may clean the wound, and strengthen it if they are defective.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not defective, then leave it to heal, and lighten the extraction.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds in other members, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	disruption of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures in the belly are great, medium, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the great wound never let any intestinal tissues protrude, or the nerves of the intestines, which causes external infection;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the stitching is more delicate, and no smaller wound is as bad as a large one, because one does not apply pressure to the intestines when stitching them up, unless they are sewed together tightly from both sides.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	because the intestines quickly swell and feel painful if pressure is applied when they are not yet healed, and because it is better to move slightly with smaller wounds, so one must first reset the intestine to its original position before applying pressure like with other wounds.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common stitches are used in the stomach stitch, and the stitch for other wounds of the body, and there are two other specific stitches that are common to other wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Nevertheless, the stomach stitch is more precise, and I will describe each one and explain them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine protrudes, and it is an easy matter to close, this is according to one of the four manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	for because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to injury.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it up in this way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	soak a sponge or soft cloth in hot water alone, or boil water with vinegar, lemon, and spices, and wrap the intestine while it is still swollen.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and never use constricting wines, but rather heat it gently until it is deflated.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling depart, if you have a moist or hot and bad wound, then it becomes easier for things to enter, a little at a time.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a slight cut with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment is to move the bone, that we must not cut without great need;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument for the fracture:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if it cuts into the couch (or bed) and does not divert, then look at its shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound has enlarged and the intestine bursts out, if you can return it to its natural position in its proper place, do so, for that is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is large and located on the lower abdomen, it is necessary to have the patient lie on their back and elevate their legs higher than their head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then put the head and heels higher than the affected parts, and also, when there is a rupture in the abdomen, place your attention so that the wounded part is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus we must administer what I say to large and deep wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds, make them as if you were equipped, then take in your hands a gentle medicine that heals all the rupture with its touch, and close the lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and this is the common method of stitching: you pierce a needle or several, according to the amount of space in the wound, then leave two spaces at the top of the wound, and insert a needle with strong thread into it.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce both joints of the skin with the two points of the scalpel, which is to go through the skin from inside, as long as you make it pierce from this part, and bring together the two points of the scalpel in three parts.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then stretch a double thread around the needle from both parts, then bring together the two joints of the wound properly, and then leave two spaces, and insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to your need for needles, until all the wound is constrained.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and let the needles be of medium thickness, between subtle and thick, for the subtle needles take hold of all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter properly.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	because they need to be medium;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and do not push the needles too far through the flesh and skin, that they do not puncture and open the wound before the suture.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then remove the needles, so that they do not disturb the patient when sleeping, and put bands or cloth over the wounds to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is sutured.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this stitching method with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as it requires only one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitching is common and consists of assembling the two pieces of skin and the two pieces of cloth together with a needle using a strong, medium thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have stitched these four pieces together, return the needle to the beginning point where you started, in the manner one sews clothes.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and leave a space between each stitch the thickness of a minor thread.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This suture opens the wound, and I sewed a wound that had been cut by a knife on the stomach, which was more than one palm wide, and it extended from the intestines another two palms, and the wound was in the stomach.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine to its place after it had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed completely within fifteen days, and he was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And they marveled that he was alive, and it was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not cure him with any treatment, for I was in a place where none could be found, neither any remedies.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and apply a warm compress to the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it is healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Now I shall tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and the thread from the healthier part, just up to this one inside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the center precisely, if you want to close or stitch or wherever you have pulled out the needle, and then pierce from the other side inside up to this one outside.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as a tailor sews the fur, and once you have satisfied one side, you take up the other until the stitch is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second way of stitching, which Galen rightly calls "the natural join," is like what others do who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the principal satisfactions to the other principal part in this manner.
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	stitch a needle or a thread of wonder nearby, and make the single prong pierce only through one side, leaving both satisfactions' threads.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	then turn the needle and make it pierce from the weaker part until it reaches the inside, just as much as is necessary.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce both parts from the weaker side until it reaches the inside, in two other places where there is a miracle on the other side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the most effective method of stitching and the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	These words should be heeded, and no one testifies otherwise; the belly must be sewn with needle and thread.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must push a needle from one side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew corsets.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, it is the most difficult to sew compared to other openings in the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you open a fresh wound and all its blood, so that the flesh has moved, it is necessary to close the intestines and stitch it.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then apply the burning powder, and the fire will move it, but if you place any dressing on it while the wound is still open;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and take the thread, and make it secure, and close the wound;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as you would any other, until it is healed;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you have no medicine, then apply, as soon as it begins to move again, a clean cloth, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	Because you do not need other medicines for more complex conditions when the wounds are simple.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound does not extend to the principal members, it is necessary to apply a light bandage in hot oil or rose oil, and place it around the affected area, and under the armpits.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if it causes pain or cramping in the bowels, and this often happens, then give them enemas of red wine, especially if the inflammation reaches the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and he pierces it from within, and knows that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestinal organ, called "jeun" (fasting), cannot heal when it is inflamed, and this is due to the weakness of the veins, and the subtlety of the whole body, and the nearness of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the wound gushes with blood, it should be pressed back as soon as possible, just like the intestine, while it is still fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and has turned black, it is necessary to keep the dark part still, so that no more blood comes out, because there are veins and arteries there.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then cut off what is between the bones, and hang both feet down from the opposite side of the wound until it opens up to facilitate the extraction when the blood lets go.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the bowels
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in no man, for I have seen a nobleman wounded in his belly by a spear;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it was a wound on the right side of the stomach, which festered and became a fistula, from which emerged excretion and flatulence.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied the treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to be subtle until he was healthy, and his limbs were healed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him healed, I doubted that the patient would not have pain in his stomach;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there is no harm, but it requires better dispositions, diets, and beverages;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and they should not attempt any experiments when there is a small wound in the intestine, but rather tie it in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take a large piece of cloth, then gather the edges of the wound, and when the cloth has opened its mouth, place it between the two lips so that it pulls the mouth open.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then cut off the head of the cloth, and this should hold so that it cannot be released, then place another piece of cloth in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely sealed.
et cout la plaie.	and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If the pain is sharp in the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, one can tie the intestine with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in such a way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	take the end of this intestine thread, which is well spun, and then tie it to the end of this fine linen thread twisted, then wind the thread on the needle, and sew the intestine, and rearrange it in the rupture;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this method of stitching with stitches is no exception but according to the path of destiny and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it affects one of the vital organs, there is no treatment effective unless it be extremely subtle.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	or whether it is a fistula, wherever it may be.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	You know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, is generally called a "fistula," especially when it is covered with hair and deeply seated.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula appears according to the truth of its nature, hard and white, where there is no pain, and it is also smooth like the feathers of a bird.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and it never becomes clear or open, sometimes thick and other times thin.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	never too cold, and sometimes too hot;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken of the division of wounds; that every wound which is not clean, and there is no fever, it is only out of one of the nine causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, from the smallness of blood or pus;
ou por sa malice;	or because of its evil nature;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is a hard fever inside, and on the lips, which does not allow any healing;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	you have too much bowel wind;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	your bowels are overfull, and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	this medicine is not good for treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	because this corruption is a way of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	because the sluggishness of the region causes delayed digestion, delays health, and is innately bloated;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	You have veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already described all these causes, signs, and medicinal treatments in the relevant sections.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of a fistula which is performed by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that affect large veins, arteries, and nerves, or the liver, intestines, bladder, any of the ribs, or the spine in the back, or any joint in the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it occurs at a part that belongs to the main member, and has similar joints.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas of this nature are difficult to heal, and there is nothing but hard work and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is no fistula that does not come to the place I mentioned, and you have confidence in the cure and understand it, then take a piece of iron or steel, if the fistula is directly in line with it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is twisted, try to insert a thin piece of cloth or a small tool with flexibility, as the plug will bend and move around the curvature.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if it has open wounds and you cannot close them tightly with bandages, then wash it through one of the openings, for moisture flows from one opening to another and cleanses it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then squeeze it firmly in your power, knowing if there are bones or nerves, and feel it completely, and ask the patient with pain where they feel it and the location.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you truly know the location, and it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or any of the places I told you, then cut according to what I said, and remove the inflammation and the corrupt flesh that is inside.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then the cure as long as it is clean, and if the fistula is well dug out in the right place, it is necessary that you fill it completely, as much as possible, and then apply moist bandages with a medicinal ague, and keep them on the top of the fistula until the medicine corrodes the excess that is left at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then apply hot compresses with healthy garlic, as long as it is clean;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not clean with that method, as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve does not affect your principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackening, remove it as soon as the corruption is gone, then treat the wounds with care until they are healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not healed, and the bone remains bowed as before, know that you are not allowed to proceed further.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if it becomes exposed and you want to go deeper, removing all the corruption, then restore the joint.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if he is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If this is not the case, know that the corruption is too great, and you cannot repair it.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other force than to leave it to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small corrupt bone that you can pull out with tweezers, and if it is extracted with a suitable tool, and if there are many bones, then pull them all out, leaving none behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if moisture makes it contrary, there is no error or fear, if hot and humid and cold, and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them for an hour, then place something purifying over the wound, and let it stay until the bones are rotten around them, and then they will become lighter on the bones.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is a large bone, like the leg or thigh, then remove as much of the corruption as possible until all the blackness is gone from the bone, and then close the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large amount of decay within, it extends to close to the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it is necessary, cover it gently and protect it until the decay is healed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you about a fistula that occurs in a person's leg, so that you may take an example from it and receive aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	It was a young man around 30 years old who had pain in his leg due to something within the body, causing materials to gather at the leg, and he suffered from a large abscess that would not open.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the excess because of their foolishness increased so much over the abscesses that they corrupted many matters, and became fistulas, and there were many ruptures throughout the body, causing bowing and moisture within.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many more cases I witnessed over two years, and there was no wise man in the art of healing, until I was called to it, and saw his leg and the remedies by which he was cured, and what corrupted through the ruptures within the body.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the skin of the young people became red, and had the color of a citron.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these gaps, and then I examined all the gaps, and I found that some came together against each other in every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I quickly prepared a tool, and chiselled into one of the gaps until I discovered a portion of the bone, which I found corrupted and pierced, and the corruption reached down to the bone itself.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I examined what I had discovered as the corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption, except for the one I had found.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to heal the wound with potent medications for a long time, but it would not close.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I began to recognize and discover the bone as it was before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and healed it, and then I secured it, and focused on fusing the joint.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not until I had completely healed the bone, and gently pulled it to its original place, then treated it with medications.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it healed soundly and securely, and never wanted to repeat the operation again, except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had from him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For in the evacuation of blood, it often becomes completely healed, and a hard callus forms in its place, and is of good disposition and causes no harm or pain at all, neither going away nor coming back.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be handled in this way:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take hold of the ligaments, and strain the end of the bone that opens, and command anyone to extend it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and tie another, thicker thread to the first one, and attach it to the bone that is now detached, and pull the bone upwards, until you remove the broken piece, and expose the bone at its natural position.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place I a piece of wood between the bone to keep the corrupted flesh from opening.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to examine carefully as one can see and feel the corruption, and sometimes another way.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted and will not open, and the corruption is in one place or throughout, then expose the flesh entirely.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then place wood between it and then gently open from one side to the other of the corruption, leaving the bandage tight around the corruption as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, remove the corrupted joint, and the bone it contains from the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, and there is no other way to remove it;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or the ankle, and it is very strong, but nevertheless you must inquire into this corruption how it affects you.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and purify it in every way that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve contradict you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and knows that the saw and the threads to cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason, it is necessary to have the right tool for each task.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and knows that the work will show you the tool you will need, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of illness.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you think of the instrument you need according to what is necessary.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The joint dislocates either due to pressure from within or due to external force;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have treated that corruption with medicinal remedies, and they are ineffective, it is necessary to immobilize that member until the corruption disappears, so that the patient may be saved from death or from the greater evil of permanent damage to the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs of this are that the limb turns black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackening, the corruption spreads from member to member, affecting the entire body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you hastily cover it, and if it is due to the penetration of some venomous creatures, such as a sea scorpion, a snake, or similar, and the wound is deep in the head, if you do not allow enough time for it to heal, do not let it come near your hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes near the hand, if you dislocate the joint, so that the wound does not reach the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it reaches the arm, if the dislocation is at the shoulder.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes through the knife, it is death, and there is no cure stronger than the quantity of its virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and thus do the same when rust or stone comes into contact with it.
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes in the first joint, then cut after the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes from rust, cut off all of it.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it ascends the leg, cut at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other cause but to bring the patient to death.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the method of binding or wrapping the member: if you fasten it above and below, extend one minister from below upwards and another from above downwards, and you loosen the band that is between the two liens with a broad spatula, until the bone is exposed.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then bind or wrap it, and place each side with a cloth, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy tissue, and cause further injury and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if the bleeding occurs when you open, cauterize the wound harshly, or place any restrictive powders upon it;
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then return to the treatment until it is complete, then bind the injured limb with a strong ligature, and heal it as long as it remains healthy;
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you if it returns to the same place as before;
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	it will have a blackness that seems burnt from fire, and this decay begins first in its two big toes, spreading throughout the entire foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the bone feels the heat, it covers itself with a protective covering, and becomes healthy.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and after a long time, the corrosion or pain from the hand returns, and it comes to me, and I place things that repel upon the purification of the body, but the corrosion cannot cease.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and it seemed to me that I should cover the hand, but I did not want to hope for repelling the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I also doubted that if he cut off his hand, he would not die, as the strength of the man was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he becomes completely desperate, returns to his land, covers his hand, and is healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have no other objection than that which is done otherwise, if it is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	No abscess forms in the fat tissue, and it lingers so long that it causes great gathering of bowels.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it bursts and pierces, causing the bowels to rupture and remaining in the body as if they were a vessel.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin that is above is as delicate as fine cloth, and it does not adhere to the bone or nerve, and such a condition is called "healthy," and is not called "fistula.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so long that it extends to the bone in a curved shape, it is called "fistula.
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is such that you must strip off all the skin around it, especially when it is delicate, just like a fine cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not hesitate because of its putrefaction.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you believe that the flesh hesitates, and the corruption is not entirely removed, and the flesh is dry and hard, then treat it with a warm bath.
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	examine if the breasts are swollen and the bowels emit a foul odor, then give them a cleansing with Egyptian medicine prepared as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take equal amounts of ash, oil, and litharge, and heat them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take according to your need, and make it in water and honey, and enemas the breast, and extracts the gap.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	leave the medicine on for two hours, then extract it while squeezing.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this several times, until the breast is cleansed and the pus is extracted.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and never use enemas with water and ashes when this medicine is not present, and take ashes from the vine trunk, pour water over them, then strain it, and use it for enemas, as long as you know that the breast is well cleansed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot bear it, neither Egyptian medicine nor water from ashes can help, if he is enemaed with water and honey, or has a little bit of litharge ground in it.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you should enema him with honey and sweet wine, for honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and the wine helps to aerate the health.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you are sure that the sins are well cleansed, then he should be enemaed with what causes a certain plant to grow in him, and you should press it carefully, and apply it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	you should cleanse it with certain medications and remedies, whose properties I have discussed in treating wounds.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the opening of the wound is too small, and the canal of the clister cannot enter, you should widen it slightly with a hot iron and apply a poultice of Egyptian or basilicon medicine until it is widened.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too wide, so much so that it causes great suffering to the patient or prevents the clister from entering, and if the opening curves downward or upward, then the bandage should be applied higher or lower accordingly.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bowel is completely relaxed, it does not allow anything to enter.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bowel moves to its lowest position, for when the bowel is completely relaxed, it does not allow anything to enter, and if you cannot cover the wound as you see appropriate, arrange it thusly:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	so that the bowel moves slightly downwards, and does not leave any part of the bowel behind.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidating medicines to apply to the wound, and lay them on the linen cloth that covers all the wound.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then take a smaller force near the hole in the chest where it is wider, and apply gentle dressing on another cloth according to the size of the hole, and place it over the wound hole in the chest to ease pressure, and do not remove the large outer cloth for several days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and the one who is over the chest wound often removes it to ease pressure, and knows what comes from the wound, whether it's blood or pus or something else, or digestion, or undigestion.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when the medicine has been applied in this way and you see the nature that springs up at the wound, then know that the healing has begun, and bring it closer to health.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then undress the wound in the morning or on the third day, and when you dress the wound, change to another bandage, and renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast is bent downward due to indigestion after many days, knowing that the breast will not open.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons manifest after a long time, do not despair of health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are people who late at night put their wounds to bed, and others who do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if he has an indigestion or a sharp pain in his side after many days, knowing that it will not go away.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if he cannot bring his side to heal, and it is distant, then apply medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue as a final treatment, for there is much vitriol within it, and this is the last medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take the final treatment, and apply it with rose oil, and mix it with old wine of equal substance;
puis le confit et en use;	then confirm it and use it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and this same mixture, when cooled and thickened, without the presence of garlic, you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it over honey while it is still hot.
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then I wrap it in cloth and place it over the breast, and never administer without first mixing with long roots of licorice, which is also like flour from oats and chamomile.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and use of simples or compounds:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	Break them, and make a powder, and add the honey I mentioned, and use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the cure is lengthy, and this cure does not heal it, then know that the corruption has taken hold, and it presses on the bone, or makes the joints hard, or damages the limbs.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the cure for the fistula, as we have mentioned above.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	A gangrene is an abscess that forms under a nail of the hand or foot, or occasionally in other areas.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is neglected and left unattended, an abscess forms, and it oozes and flows below until the root of the nail runs out, or perhaps it oozes everywhere.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and it brings corrosion up to the bone, causing intense foul-smelling pain, and the wound becomes broad and has a purple color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	If, as we have mentioned in the previous discussion, you treat it but the treatment is ineffective, then you must remove any excess debris from under the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	Cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is uninjured.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail quickly turns black and begins to prickle, then you must immediately place a stick under the nail that is pricking, lifting it up, and gently squeezing it out, applying burning and corrosive medications on top to remove everything.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wounds as long as they are clean.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it off and remove it, for as long as the bone is corrupt, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see both bones corrupted, cut them as described above, and treat them as long as they are clean.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is twisted and contorted, and it causes great pain, then you must treat it first.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the nail with a sharp tool diagonally from above, and be sure that the cut does not reach the skin underneath the nail, as the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, put something cold on it to soothe the pain.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain should be so severe as to paralyze the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	He who is born without hands, or has them extremely fleshy, and perhaps has part of his bones missing, and never any fingers, and none are born in the root of the joint—in such cases, birth must take place elsewhere.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	He who is born with no pain should not be silent, and he who is born with pain in the joints may remain silent.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the incision on the fleshy part should be light, in this way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	if it keeps you covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For he who is born with or develops a deformity, it is necessary that you first hold the joint firmly up to the bone, then dislocate the bone to a suitable position, and finally treat it as long as it remains healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The deformities that come at will affect the entire body, either from birth, or from wound healing, or from a burn by fire, or similar conditions.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary to cover the closed one, then it must be repaired according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place between two moistened cloths or sheets soaked in rose oil, so that they do not adhere;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	You should insert between two delicate pieces of cloth, as long as the wound is sealed properly.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If dislocation occurs at any of its joints with the palm, handle that wound as appropriate.
des vils	Des vils" translates to "from the
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Their veins are thickly enveloped, filled with melancholy excesses that affect several parts of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more often occurs in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry things, than with others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary for you to administer purging of the bowels, and then clean the wound in the temple.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The treatment for this is according to two manners:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is with cautery, and draw out the black blood.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and another way is that you open the vein and draw it out completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The procedure is as follows:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	first, raise the affected leg with hot water, until the pain is subtle, then stretch the sick leg from above the knee to the ankle.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then open the vein in the arm, or in the leg, or in the thigh, with a wide cut, then carefully and slowly extract the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient can endure.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then bind it, and command the patient to eat foods that produce dark, black urine.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and repeat the evacuation and washing when the veins are filled, causing harm to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The treatment of it is according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Lift the leg of the ailing patient, if there is any hair, then submerge it in water, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bath, heat it over the fire, and then apply it to the vein from the top of the thigh or at the ankle, wherever it is most painful.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the point of the pain, and scratch the vein from each side until it appears raw when touched.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems as if a white string.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then turn the right of the bone, as long as it is raised from the skin, and then bend it gently to the oncine, then cut in another place on the opposite side, above and below.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then scrape the skin over the vein until it opens, then gently raise the edge, as you did before, and bend it to another oncine, as you did first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then take another size, or as many as you need, then the light one, and cut it with the right sharp tool, then treat and lift until the second size is reached.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then extract it bit by bit, until it comes out completely, then cut it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you cannot pull and lift it, insert a needle through the entire thread twice as thick, tie it and pull, press from one side to another until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and ensure it does not tear, for if it tears, it cannot be pulled or raised, causing harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and once you have extracted it, place warm, moist wool and rose oil on the wound bed.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and dress it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the vision is contracted, twisted, and rolled together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it with care but do not tear it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and take it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The way to do it is to make the eye so sharp, and not cut, unless it opens the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is very sharp, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but since it is thick, as we have said, and this is its form:
de la voinne civile	of the main vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is located in the legs, in hot regions where no herbs or trees grow, and on land where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and perhaps it occurs in another part, namely the legs, and this happens due to rotting that comes from beneath the skin, as it creeps within the body winding and turning, entwining between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein appear, it is that there is a very great swelling in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to protrude strongly, as if it were a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the joint opens, it is necessary that you wrap around with a piece of cloth from one and a half to two fingers thick, and then tie it tight, leaving the cloth on the leg, and every time there is no opening at the wound, if it constricts around the cloth, and the new bandage.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut a part of it and wrap the remaining part, without covering its root until it is completely healed.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	Because if you touch it, it returns to its original state, causing abscesses and corruption in that place, leading to great illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For which reason, it is necessary to treat it gently and little by little until the pain disappears entirely from the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and it is never this vein when it is treated with long, or very strong, hands; and a great honor came to me, from whom it reached ten palms in length, and if you touch it, it sinks or opens up, and penetrates to the bottom, so that everything comes out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and empty the matter within, and administer to the place drugs that cause putrefaction for no more than a day, then treat it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And never touch this vein with raw hands, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or the toe, and much cracking and popping occurs;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	treat it as we have said above.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers that are born between leather and bone.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called the "bull disease" in our land because it often affects bulls, and it is a small worm that appears between the hide and flesh, spreading throughout the body upwards and downwards, and it feels very hot from one limb to another, until it breaks through the hide where it was. It then causes a powerful discharge.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is caused by putrefaction of certain humours, as they gather and wind around the intestines, worms, slugs, and ascars in the stomach.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and doubt arises about the nature of his illness, for as it spreads through the body, it ascends to the head, and reaches the brain, perhaps returning and damaging the brain.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it healing and draining, it cannot be done unless it has passed.
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If it is necessary, then you must lie the limb above and below with a strong binding tightly, then cut and pull it out, and turn it inside out in the wound, and do not remove it, if you cauterize it with fire until it heals.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it does is when it bleeds, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming close to the wound, quickly pull the hair forming a curl from below, then cut and pull it out.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary for the patient to purify the body with solvent medicines for harmful humours, and to abstain from foods that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	The pain that comes from flatulence.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called "vakerire" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in no particular member, but can move from one member to another.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I have seen what I have told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I noticed a small swelling in the vein of the breast.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and then I noticed, the sight rose up in the shoulder just as a worm, more so than anything else, as bright as silver when it cuts into another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain departed from that place and fixed itself in the shoulder, and then after a short while, it spread throughout the body, until it reached the other breast.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then it told me that it twisted around the body again, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marvelled much at how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Nevertheless, I wanted to know why the pain moved from one place to another, but I could not understand it, as I saw it in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought it was because the woman had dry skin, and the veins exposed, and because of this constraint of breath.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and did not seem consistent to those who are delighted, with moist skin and veins concealed.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see this illness heal and the patient feels the pain, if it opens as we have said, then press from above and below firmly, and continue until this constrained breath at the joint leaves.
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the place;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it on your own, then treat it with those who expel winds as if they were bad pills, or pills of serapeum, or similar ones.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows vary, according to their appearance and the part of the body they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	Their diversity is such that there are those with great points, and small ones, and curved, and solid;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and some with two edges, and others with tongues, and those with pieces.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and those that break in any limb break in two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or it breaks in the principal limb, such as the head, body, liver, lung, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it breaks in any part of these members, then you will notice the sign of death, which I will tell you below.
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	you must be careful with the extraction of this arrow, for death comes in many forms afterward.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and if this bad sign does not appear and the arrow is not completely extracted, pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of a weak mind when the arrow breaks and pierces the bone, and the swelling appears on the head, is when there is loss of vision, darkness, watering, redness, inflammation, redness of the tongue, spasms, confusion in understanding, and vomiting of bile.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps without feeling in the nostrils or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and by chance loses the word and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and from the moist wound there springs a white fluid resembling pus, and also as blood from a wound;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears, if you hold to the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not stuck together.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it breaks or withdraws is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were stuck in hard, non-empty substance.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance, the patient's sitting may become mute like the pulse, and there is sudden black blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	so he knows with certainty that death is descending.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow wound that never improves is that foam without pain flows from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's skin turns pale, and they breathe heavily and stop moving.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow comes out in the cover of night, it leaves small marks.
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and it causes great pain and great sorrow, and sighing.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and it moves all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow pierces the stomach, perhaps something from the undigested meat may fall out.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow pierces the abdomen, and there is no sign of recovery through the intestines, then there is little hope for treatment or in removing the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow pierces the bladder, the urination jumps and comes out, and the patient feels intense pain.
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	you know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs—as they feel and are affected by pain and swelling in the throat, shoulder, and back; as well as in the joints and legs—are safe according to various arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you, for this reason, you should do the same.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man that an arrow fell or pierced through the root of his nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and I pulled from the other side through the fat of the ear, and it became well without pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And take a sharp arrow, that has fallen into the grease of oil on paper, and the arrow is removed, so that only the tip reaches the wood, and it was an arrow large as a bowstring, all blue without ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	it became healthy, and no ill accidents came upon it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And take an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I loosened the beard, and I pulled gently as I took it, and the Christian became healthy.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And pull out an arrow from the body, which had pierced its belly, and thought that he was dying.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then, after thirty days, if his condition does not improve;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut the arrow, made an incision, and pulled it out, without any bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a person with an arrow pierced through their back or chest, and the wound is deep;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and hold the arrow inside it, and do not change its natural positions, nor find harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And look at another man, who has an arrow in his face, and the wound is deep.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and thus he suffers greatly without pain.
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many others like him.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And remove an arrow from the body of a prince, who had it stuck in his neck, and was slightly inclined to the right side.
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and this arrow was entirely withdrawn.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to treat it after it had been fallen for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very deep.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I approached it with great subtlety, and felt nothing.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and it felt sharp and painful behind his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the point of the arrow I applied a soothing poultice to the place, because the swelling did not go down.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the arrow's shaft.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I applied the heat to the wound for a long time, soothing the patient, so that he felt the arrow inside his flesh all day.
et il le me dist.	and it came out.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied a strong corrosive medicine to the wound for a long time until it opened, and I tested it, feeling the point of the arrow that was stuck in the flesh.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then adjust the opening of the wound with that medicinal oil until the head of the arrow becomes visibly visible.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it took more than three months for the wound to heal, and then it became so inflamed that I had to use pincers, pulling from both sides, but it wouldn't come out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	then I did not cease to try and invent new tools until I found a set of well-made pincers, according to the shape that will be described at the end of this chapter, while I worked on it, and kept opening and closing the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the most skilled judges believe that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I then restored it, and the wound healed, and the patient was entirely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Or, I have told you the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you place your care on what I do not say, for the books cannot encompass everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but the most skilled surgeons consider even the smallest thing and what is present and lacking—correctly assessing new works and nine instruments—when dealing with strange things that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not leave the members where they are embedded, but according to two manners:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either through the place where they enter, or from another side;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and the one that comes out from the other side where it enters, is an arrow entering into the flesh, and will never come out again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not come out now, leave it until the flesh around it decays and becomes easy to remove;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is stuck in the bone, it cannot come out, if it is left like that for no days, and moves each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, it pierces around everywhere in a subtle way, until the swelling around the joint is enlarged, and then pull it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone at the top, it goes all the way to one of the bellies of the brain, and none of the accidents that I have mentioned affect the patient.
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If you cannot pull it out, but leave it as long as it remains even after several days, for if the arrow goes all the way in, it's a deadly wound.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the bone and does not come out satisfactorily and remains in the patient without any further harm, as long as the skill of pulling it out allows.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be pulled out, then apply warm compresses around it, as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the limb as long as it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is withdrawn into the limb deeply and one cannot see it, then apply all efforts to extract it.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, use any suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot open the wound due to its tightness or the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein left, then close it as long as the wound remains large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and try to extract the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that hold it, remove the charred part from both sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the barbs of the arrow until you can draw it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and skillfully, without breaking the arrow, draw it out more forcefully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at once, pull it until the joint around it becomes loose, then treat it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the symptoms of bloodletting work against you, then administer as we have said about treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and guard yourself from incision near nerves and veins, and in any way you can extract the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and place the patient according to the condition he was in when the arrow entered, for it is the greatest aid, and if you cannot, then follow what the signs show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another direction, where it opens anything within, or the skin is swollen in that place if one sees or feels it apparently:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	then cut around it, as much as the pincers can grasp, and then extract it:
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, widening the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	and if it cannot be extracted, leave it for now and then try to extract it again until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the arrowhead is stuck in the flesh, it presses against the entire flesh.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if the arrowhead is removed, you must apply pressure gently, as if you administer a sharp instrument, so that the tip of the arrow enters the wound of the instrument.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then press firmly, and if the arrow is embedded, insert the instrument with a pointed end to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you clear all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow comes out in the stomach or bladder or side, and it is close, you may cover over it, if it doesn't hurt.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and guard yourself from sealing the vein and nerve, then extract it, and then sew the wound, it is a skill.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles an eagle's beak, and here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape [of the arrowhead] pointing downward is like the feather of a bird, to drive to the tip of the arrow, as this is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of claws for driving and gripping, if this is the case:
des voinnes dou cors communes	veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are 31 veins from which one gains health, of which there are 16 main ones, that is to say:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	II beat the muscles that are after the ears, which are called the "soft" ones.
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the second arteries that are in the temples, appearing clearly;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the veins that are in the joints of the limbs, called "aspirations";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is on the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is on the back of the head;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two glands that are in the collar.
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are on the upper lip of the mouth, and these veins are called "augerich.
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins that one commonly sees are 'V' in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, which is located on the left side of the body, and common people call it "vein of the head.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the joint is called "fast", and it is composed of the head and base, and the common people call it "vein of the body".
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the base is located on the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is below the ribcage, and it is the one that heals, opening clearly on the pulsation.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the saving vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and if it rains (i.e., swells).
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and where the foot are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is so placed beneath the ribcage on the left side, and the second is at the ankle on the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein called "nesse" is in the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg, there are three veins beneath these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The healing of veins located behind the ears is beneficial for old catarrh and migraine.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the qualities of the healing, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the patient's head and rub the affected area with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then tie the patient's collar tightly, until both veins behind the ears become visible and hang down from the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	take them in your hand, and where you feel the pulse below your thumb, press gently;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lancet, and cut through the vein just below the bone, then gently your hand along all the vein upstream, and open and close it well two or three times, and let out the blood until you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then strain and hold it, as long as it is healthy;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already spoken of incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The health of the two arteries in the temples is like an old and severe migraine, and the eye accustomed to tears at the corner.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of a good healer is such as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient tightens his collar, as long as both veins are open wide;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the coldness beneath both hands, and then presses with a signet.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then gently apply pressure to the vein at the top of your right index finger, insert the lancet beneath, and draw out the blood, first from the vein above, then the vein below, just as you did with the other two veins, and allow the blood to flow according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then free the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then form a ligature, and leave it until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have spoken there of their treatment and extraction, as the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The healing of the vein on the forehead is just as important as the healing of the head in cases of old facial diseases, migraines, and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and its quality is such that the patient tightens his collar, twisting it until the vein opens.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called "fosseur", which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	and place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another object, allowing blood to escape according to the amount you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then gently release the patient's collar, and tie the vein tightly until it is healed and free from any broad opening of a flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	Nevertheless, one must not let the flames be too fierce.
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and do not let the healthy one go astray, for the bone is hard, and perhaps it will break the flames when they are subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The healthy of the two veins that are in the arms should be aided with these, and at the wound, and at the itch, and at the redness, and at the swelling in the eye, and the diseases of the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is such that the patient squeezes his neck without twisting any ligament, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the healthy one, and make the wound heal, slightly longer than the flame, but not too wide, for there is no need.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	and if the flame is subtle, it may break.
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then make the blood flow, as much as needed, and then bind it with cloth, securing it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The wound of the vein near the nose is very valuable for colds and sudden illnesses, and facial diseases such as migraines and redness that appear on the face, especially when they are old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the quality of the health is such that the patient squeezes their throat, then pulls their nose to your left hand, and takes the fine, long flame and inserts it between the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein will not open well enough, and the blood will begin to flow.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not remove it too quickly, and let the blood flow as needed, then bind it for a night, for it is often restored quickly.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The holy water of the two eyes helps in the narrowing of the eyelid, and at the onset of illness, and with many diseases, and inflammation, and corrosion, and herpes, and pimples.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the water is such that the patient draws their collar close to each other, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and if the master is on top of the patient's head, and the patient sits on a chair, then wash the vein with long water, then treat the blood with temper, or as much as necessary.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then repeat the process on the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and gradually tighten the veins to prevent strangulation of the patient.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	from the healing of the veins
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The healing of the veins in the lips above helps to open the mouth, and aids in the cure of gum corruption, lip cracks, and pain and swelling around it.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of healing is such that the patient should sit before you, and tighten his collar as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one on the right side of the mouth and the other on the left, and you can recognize them by their black color and the small, black lines around them.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Handle them both then, and if you do not know and are in doubt, take the larger one from each part, and make also two incisions, one above and one below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	From the cleansing of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The treatment of the veins below the tongue is of great help after treating the neck, and it is for the tightness of the throat, and for eye diseases, and for mouth ailments.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of healing is such that the patient should bite between your hands facing the sun, and relax the tongue, and look below each side for a dark vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Then make both healthy, but do not cut too deeply, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins through which blood flows, commonly healed, are healed in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	you cut through all the inflamed tissue with a wide or thin knife, as you would make incisions, and it is called "aneisil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are wide and thin according to the thickness and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	It takes on the form of a bright flame if it is very renowned, and it is wide as you can see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the clear, broad veins that contain much blood and are filled with pus.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of olive oil flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more delicately pointed, and is for healing the delicate veins where there is subtle citron-colored blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein from the basilic, which is one of these veins, is very helpful for diseases that are beneath the throat, and the collarbone, and the chest, and the abdomen.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and the healer must carefully clean the vein and wash it with the artery below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if it affects an artery, and blood flow is disrupted, as I have said, it needs to be stopped.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and the flame should not be aggressive, but cut it as gently as possible.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the vein does not open clearly, it is necessary that you extract it and choose another one.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you should not touch any part of it, but heal the vein in place, between the arm and the shoulder.
elle apert manifestement;	she opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and apply the flame as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you recognize the place of the wound, it is necessary that you extract the arm, touching the place until you feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place with a sign, then bind the arm, and apply the flame gently.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and beware that you do not injure the artery when you see the bone enter, for it is the artery.
eschui la donques.	then avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it bulging at the top as well as the urine of a child, and its skin is red and delicate, know that it is an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	then hurry, and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the skin remains intact, as it often does.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	He lies with his arm outstretched, allowing it to remain thus, and does not move the patient.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the wound is not healed, it will decay, and there are no remedies at hand, especially if the artery opens up, as with a retraiment's chief.
et estainche li sans.	and heal the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of fig bark, cut it, and take one half of it and bind it firmly to the other side.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if it is not attached, that is good.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if it is not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that prevent blood clotting.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	the clotting is not overly grasped in various arrangements due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The surgeon of the vein should cut it away if it helps to drain blood from the top and inside of it, because it is composed of both basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and the surgeon should wash for the nerve that lies beneath, and if he does not cut it through completely, and it cuts into the nerve, then it swells and inflicts great pain, and in some cases cannot heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any place due to its subtlety, then you must use a more precise instrument.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and avoid using your strength.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two bones, make it open wide.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The treatment for headache involves drawing blood from the head, which helps and eases the pain.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary for the healer to prick with olive oil or myrrh fire, because this is the safest of all veins, as it does not disturb any nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to seek the lightest vein, and do not be concerned if it hurts the first time, and repeat the process.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and sometimes the eyes swell up in certain people, without any reason, but it causes no pain.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound healing is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about healing is that it is not only a means to restore health but also a way to prevent future illnesses.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and healing should be done through one of the three veins:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	that is to say, the cephalic vein, the femoral vein, and the basilic vein;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one must heal in the beginning of prayers at dawn, and in the afternoon and in winter after eating, when the sign of fullness appears.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one must heal the first day or the third, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The healer who is entrusted with illnesses has no fixed time, but whenever it is necessary, day or night, in all seasons and at all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not advisable to heal children until they are twelve years old, nor women who have given birth for less than four months up to seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	One should not consider the old people who have passed sixty years as healed.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when anyone wishes to become healthy, in any way, it is necessary that he cleanses the bowels with a light enema if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not draw out excess waste harmful to the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	One cannot become healthy who is overly accustomed to eating meats, nor those who are greedy, as long as it persists.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and purifies the patient after colic, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent defecation, much sexual activity, hard labor, watching, fasting, and this due to a weakness of either the weapon or the body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then gently draw out the humours, if they are thick, through food and drinks and medicines, if you have such a means.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then enter the bath, if nothing prevents you, to draw out the blood gently, and cleanse the vein from within, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and guard yourself from work, and pain, and lust, and similar things that day.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be calm and joyful, and make sure the wound is healthier than that of anyone else. Rub the arm twice or three times, then gently pull the bandage from above, for if it is too tight or loose, it will not heal properly.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the limb with both hands until the veins swell and you feel them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then moisten the wound with a drop of old oil, then place your left-hand finger on the vein below the limb where you want to heal, ensuring the vein does not burst or get injured.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flow like strings when healing, and if they are filled with pus, when you apply the fire, it retracts from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and so one remains in this state.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if it opens a vein, if the wound is too tight, then it is necessary that the healers be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens the first time, that is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	if not, it is necessary to repeat this again from the beginning, close to where it was first done; if the limbs are not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the limb is swollen, and the patient is afraid, let it be for one or two days, and do not bind the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	perhaps he gets abscesses instead.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	he should not bathe again until he feels better; then he can continue the treatment if desired.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if it is a small opening, he should make it smaller gently and you will doubt that there is not much blood as you see, for the same fire coming out of this very opening goes straight to all parts.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and make it slightly inflamed, so that the veins become swollen.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	Because this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the vein inflating, do not immediately recommence the wound treatment, and apply a little oil, for it lightens the body of the blood, and the oil is moved in this vein along with the blood.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the oil in each wound that you heal the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and it also acts as an antidote and draws out evil when applied to the vein.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	if subtly the bone moves and spreads when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there appears a large abscess, which often happens, especially when the opening of the vein is small and you are not skilled in its opening, then quickly place a moistened sponge with hot silk over it and hold for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the discharge of blood from the vein, and if it remains at the site for several days without any black or green color, then it does no harm.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, place on it something cool or cold, such as aloe or myrrh mixed with calamine, shows, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And many times an abscess and pus appears at the wound of the basilic (nerve).
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	then place your hand on it, and if you feel the soft place at the compression of the hand, then this is where the appearance (of the abscess) is most severe.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	So be careful that you do not place anything that we have said, for sometimes it cuts off the artery without notice.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but he makes an embalmment with dry materials to harden the joint, then applies other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each pain according to its quantity and the color of the pain.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the skin is pale, let it be left until it turns red.
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if it appears thick, leave it until it becomes thin.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for one who is fat and strong, and needs the extraction of blood, to make a larger wound, with wider incisions.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and to those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is better to heal them slowly and frequently, and one should heal them by cutting across, not puncturing;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this healing method is free from corruption of blood and nerve damage, and it is more effective to heal from a long way rather than a wide approach.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	and for those whose body requires healing, it is necessary to give them a mild pain from the juice of pomegranates;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	if it is heated, then treat with bloodletting 3 or 4 times, and if it is of cold complexion, before the healing, give them mild pain from syrup made of grapes, or honey syrup infused with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints at the sight of blood after drawing much blood, it is necessary that he inhale a broth of horse, and a subtle fragrant syrup, and use other things as we have mentioned in the previous section or chapter on fainting for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to straighten his arm and heal it better later, if it is weakened by much bleeding, he should treat it gently and gradually, according to the amount of its continuous power.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wishes to straighten his arm after the first dressing and has a strong bruise, he should heal it for seven hours after the first dressing or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to be healed from another side should be healed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is much blood inside the body which has been heated, and it brings fever.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	if it is necessary to draw out a great quantity, and widen the wound as much as possible so that it completely heals.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you must fulfill all the conditions for healing, and place your hand on his pulse when he is well, so that death does not come in its place, which often happens when the healer is negligent.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not appropriate when you see the arm dislocated and make blood come out a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press hard on top.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	if he is weak, he should stretch the arm slowly, for it would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but he should let it be for as long as it heals the second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you should apply it to the tip of the flame until the blood clot that blocks the vein is dissolved and removed, then cover it with a small piece of cloth soaked in water, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not squeeze it until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to drain the blood a second time, do so either in the same place or in another vein or arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthier in place of the vein in the head because it is composed differently.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of healing is that the patient should immerse their hand in hot water until the veins are red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then bind it gently so that the vein appears well, then immediately through the healthy flesh, neither too narrow nor too wide.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and make the wound wide, and ensure the healthy flesh is close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot flow out, then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood flow out in the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if this does not work, do not immediately push the hand back into hot water, as more heat will only cause further damage.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, having neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The health of the saving vein in the right hand is worth against all liver diseases, and this is how it is done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	stretch the hand and immerse it in hot water, as long as the vein is swollen, if you see it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and hold the hand across, and if you grasp it from all sides, there is no pain;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not hurt the patient too much, for the nerves are completely bare of flesh, and then apply the hand with hot water, so that the blood vessels become frozen in the wound, and cannot escape.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as best you can, then apply oil and string to seal the wound firmly, and thus do for each person.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sick person should hold the remedy in their left hand to treat the mouse disease, and do it just as I have told you for the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The remedy for the spleen is effective against all diseases that affect the body, such as diseases of the uterus, retention of fluids, illnesses of the kidneys, and old diseases of the joints and legs, and similar ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of their health is such that the patient should immerse themselves in hot water and rub the vein until it bursts, and apply pressure over the joint.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they apply much pressure.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Heal then, where you feel pain, whether it is larger or smaller, at the shoulder, or at the ankle, whatever moves you.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you heal it on the foot, be careful with the nerves that are beneath, and also heal it across, as if you were binding it.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and so the flames will subside.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the wound will not heal, immerse the foot in water and allow the vein to drain completely.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the healing takes place for the first time, then repeat it a second time above, because the wound is salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same for the wisdom of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein's lion is at the foot's joint, and its purification causes pain in the back when it is hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of his health is such that if the patient enters the bath, he should stretch three times above the ankle, otherwise the vein will not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, stretch the vein in all ways that you can, and pull through.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is worth that you grasp it, for the vein is safe, and it is much relieved by many hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not hold it firm, any healthy thread of the muscle that opens or closes the foot and leg towards the little toe, and be careful with your nails.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and apply pressure firmly against the blood to see how much there is, then loosen the tie, and place cotton on it and tighten it.
ele est maintenant sanee.	it is now clean.
des sainies de ventouse	From the suction of the cupping glass.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Vacuum cups are made of horns, or iron, or glass.
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and ventilation is done according to two manners:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	or by puncturing and drawing out blood, or without puncturing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this ventilation without puncturing is according to two manners:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	or it is with all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and the ventilation done by puncturing and drawing out blood is done in twelve to fourteen parts of the body, so that one part remains entirely still at the head.
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are in the neck.
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and others on both sides of the neck.
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the cup (or suction device) from under the chin.
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the cup (or suction device) from both shoulders.
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the cup (or suction device) on the knees.
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and apply leeches to both arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and leeches on both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and leeches on both ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the leeching does not treat blood, but rather small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken anyone, as is done with vein-sucking.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not advisable to apply it, neither hot nor cold, in any disease that arises from excess, as long as the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if, due to necessity or habits, it needs to be vented (i.e., let out), we should do so every hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in between each time.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are some who, when they need to let out (gas or air), have such a heavy head.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if it is for those who have a fullness and redness in their face, head, neck, and darkness around the eyes.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and taste blood.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are any who think, see blood, pain, death, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we order letting the air in after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The physician of the museum helps in the great pain of the head ... which come from dislocations, and it does not suit that this be after the evacuation of all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this application is in the place of the physician of the head, and it does not suit those of a cold disposition, or who have scrofula, for they do much harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason, it does not suit the old or those with cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who is cured often becomes obtuse, and for this reason it is necessary to place the cup a little lower in doubt of obstruction.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The ventilation of the chest is beneficial for health and life, and because of this, it helps to tighten the muscles, and opens the channel of the womb, and relaxes, and promotes filling.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to know when to stop, because if it grips too tightly, it can cause forgetfulness or stomach and body pain.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The ventilation of the chest, if it causes pains in the head, eyes, and temples, and constriction, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and disrupts the health of the sinew of the basilica.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is necessary that you instruct the healthy person to press his hand gently, not to cut the artery, and prevent blood loss.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The evacuation of the jaw is useful for mouth diseases, and for gum corruption, and similar ailments that are in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is in the health of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The symptoms in the shoulders indicate a disease that arises from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The evacuation of the veins is as useful as three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the healthy one not to cut too deep, for the flesh is bare of bone, and knows veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The cupping glass that is on the nape is worth much for bleeding from the fundament and diseases of the veins, and it should be large, made of iron, and must be used skillfully.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and if, by chance, it was too thin, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	and it causes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The suction cups on the legs should be applied tightly, for they draw blood from throughout the body, and they relieve the long-standing pains of the joints, and of rheumatism, and of the bladder, and restore circulation.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and they affect the second ribs, and the ankles, yet they weaken the body after long use, and cause pain in various ways.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you apply it first while it is empty, and then suck firmly, and place it steadily, and move it equally, without stopping, until you see the red and inflamed color of the blood, and open the flow of blood.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then apply pressure, and remove the suction cups, and take care in the arrangement of the skin, for there are some with such hard flesh and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	if it is necessary to strike only once, then it is necessary to make wide wounds and deep ones.
et suce legierement.	and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the pain is intense, it is necessary to strike twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	The first time to discover the way to draw out the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike three times.
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to draw out blood little by little, it is enough to strike only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want much blood, we should begin often.
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the blood is thick, striking deeply will make it flow, and quickly finishing, the veins will be perceived, especially with those who have tough, hard skin, and are hairy; one must apply oil to the suction cups both for opening and closing.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is a matter of burning, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil from cucumber seeds;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in the veins, with watercress oil, or lotus oil, or chamomile oil, or any other similar thing.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take amber oil, or balsam, or donkey oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the skin is tender and has large pores, it does not require oil to be applied, but rather should be washed after a rinse with rosewater, or cold water, or water from a morelle (a type of berry), or water from a cucumber, or porcelain water, or any other similar liquid.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those with excessive moisture should rise from it using myrrh water, and sumac, and similar substances.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those with excessive fluid buildup should drink old wine, or vinegar water, or anet (a type of plant) and chamomile decoction, or other similar things;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and they should not attempt to use the cup (for bloodletting) immediately before or during a bath, but rather after the bath, one hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and do not sleep after the drainage, and it is necessary that he washes himself, both when he needs to drain and when he has been drained.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	and take care that he who is sick has a temper that is neither too cold nor too hot;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	it is necessary that he applies cold things, such as apples, grapes, endive and lettuce in the heat, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and eats plums, and juices of chestnuts, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion, should drink syrup of honey, and moderate perfumed wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat herbs and small birds and pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day when he drinks more than he eats.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary not to give any hot drinks or spices to anyone at any time before or after opening the windpipe, in order to comfort the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and it should be done carefully, but those who are cold should not drink hot drinks.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The suction cups that are used to harm are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagra, and on the stomach, and the bowels, and the legs, and the hips, for this member does not tolerate being wounded directly, and it is only done forcefully to draw blood from one member to another, as we do with the nipples when nursing.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to reduce the viscosity in the member, as we apply suction cups to the stomach and bowels to ease the pain.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and relieves the pain when there is compression or stone, perhaps by attracting the compression with its virtue, or by displacing the stone from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and thus it is done when one places it on the liver and intestines when there is wind retention, and these suction cups are emptied to only suck;
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and never should they be heated together with fire, and never should they be filled with cold water, as in cases where there are abundant tears, and in this way one fills the suction cup with hot water, or with water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cup (ventouse) administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it should be two and a half palm lengths wide, with a small hole around the middle as thick as to fit an needle, and it should be made of iron or softened so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and tell him to place a rod of wood or iron across the wound, so that a cloth can be wrapped around it, according to the size and age of those who suffer from them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the suckers of children are different from those of the old, and thinner than the fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	and one must thus place this sucker over the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	take a cloth of wax or linen, and place it through the sucker across the rod that is inside the sucker, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the sucker, preventing it from burning the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the affected member, and your fingers should be over the opening we mentioned, so that when you want to, it goes in and remove the suction cup.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take up the line as before, and repeat often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction cup, which is used for treating pleurisy, and all acute conditions, there is no opening or gap, and it should not be applied unless it is filled with water, and then placed on the affected member.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	According to their smallness, they are only treated with cups in places where it is not possible to apply suction, such as the lips and gums, and similar areas.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in naked places, such as the groin or nipples, and other similar areas.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the cupper is such that when you find veins that are clear, smooth, and without inflammation, they should be taken.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and place a nut in hot water, until they are well-soaked and have no wind or stomach issues;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then make the vein and phlegma (or varicose veins) healthy, and rub the limb until it turns red, and apply bandages.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and if they stop paining and swelling, it is a sign that the vein or place suitable for cupping can be applied, then apply it, as it is very beneficial afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If that does not work, then gently lift the dislocated limb from the side, and then with water, very well, and then apply pressure.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and hold the eyes steady too long after the operation is complete, if a moist linen cloth in cold water is placed over them, and left there until the wounds are healed.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the wounds multiply, apply crushed vinegar, or gall, and similar substances, until they are healed.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you can place half-peelied beans on the joint and leave them until they adhere to the bone; this will now heal.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more skill, take other wounds.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the roots will not take hold, rub fresh blood into the place, or insert an needle until the root enters, and then place them back, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will sprout.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are sprouting, sprinkle a little aloe and silk dust, or ash, and they will grow now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book on fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear reader, that the foolish eyes shed tears from this chapter, which they have never seen in any of the ancient books, nor read any letters about it.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason the knowledge is strange in our land, for I never found any good of it.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing of it, except for the knowledge from ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have acquired the knowledge, and through experience, and through the habits of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the two chapters preceding this one.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is appropriate that we begin this book with a prologue that outlines the essence of the words and chapters where the wise men apply their understanding and focus on truth; so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain comes to any part of the body, it is necessary that you quickly tend to the patient on both sides, if nothing else helps, such as weakness of the body, or fever, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if it is very close or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and warm things, such as hot baths, and cloth from silk and chamois, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meats that clog the veins with blood, until you are certain of the heat of an abscess or the swelling of a member;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the patient returns to suffering from a previous treatment, as it had been used before.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be given foods that do not cause excessive flatulence, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and peas, and veal, and offal, and ox, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	Because part of the wound's healing causes movement, and more often the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones from the old and frail cannot be well healed or joined together according to their nature due to the immobility of the members, nor those that are too soft, such as the bones of young children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but there is no cure, reset the broken bone with strong claws that separate and join the member together, as long as it becomes strong again like it was before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not touch any part of his body, and for this reason, it is necessary to feed him with nutritious food as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture is of two kinds, one from the upper part, and another from the lower part, and in this chapter I will tell you all manner of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	There is also a fracture that goes to the bone, and another when sharpening, such as the cutting of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, then it is a fracture with a very small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each person has their own way and their own specific tool for recovery, according to the memory that comes to them in their place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and the fracture of the bone is known because the joint is twisted, and it opens well when pulled outward, and responds to the pressure of the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twist or pressure, and the patient feels no great pain, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can have curvature, or fissures, or small breaks.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you do not need to move it with your hand, but apply medications that will follow, and then gently hold it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break that occurs in an artery, and where the two parts are separated, it is necessary for you to now set them equal, so that abscesses do not form from them.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses form from them, if he leaves them for no time, until the abscesses are calmed.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then set it equal to the movement that you can gently and surely make, and know that the restoration of what is whole is easier than the restoration of what has been broken.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then hold steady, as it is needed afterward.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are broken bones, if they are pierced from two sides, whether it is the hand or foot, or at your hand if it is a small member, or at the joints, or at a joint and at your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and place the member according to its natural position, so that when the parts of the broken member are out of alignment, reset them with all your might, and ensure through your skill that no further damage or pain comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust both joints of the bone according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And if it feels good to the touch, but it seems not properly aligned:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if you dress it well, without straining too much, not pressing as those who cause a hot and contracted abscess in the member through their own will, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the member is at its limit, gently comfort the patient so they do not move it, neither waking nor sleeping, nor turning, or in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and ensure that the limb is securely held so as to feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, except momentarily, and it is important to ensure that he does not feel any pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and take care that it is set correctly, so that no crookedness comes when it is healed;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb depends on what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the damaged limb can be different in size and shape, and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For it has small limbs, like arms and legs and similar ones.
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	it is necessary to wrap soft and delicate linen cloths around it.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are thick, like the soles and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	it is necessary to wrap with a wide and firm bandage, for the wide bandage embraces the whole limb and tightens it equally from all sides so that there is no gap.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then he applies slight pressure, three times or four times according to the limb, and gently holds your hand throughout the joint, then moves upwards over the fracture and exerts less pressure, allowing the fracture to slightly separate.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and softens the joint little by little, pressing deeply into the healthy part of the limb, then takes up another joint and returns to the one above the broken bone.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then goes back to the part below the fracture and holds it gently, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we said in the first line above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place it between the thick strings of linen or cloth, as long as it is entirely even, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your carefully made stitches on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	If there is an abscess or swelling, apply a hot soothing agent to it, which reduces the swelling, and leave it like that for several days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then stretch over your stitches, and use a strip of thin material cut from a sharp knife, or from the wood used to make splints, or palm leaves, and conform it to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the thread which one places on the break be a little thicker and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and be as long as necessary for the member, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then tighten it over the threads as you did in the first chapter on the break, and then tie it with an additional thread, as in the first chapter on the fracture;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the tighter it is bound, the less it moves;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is necessary that the thread be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the thread is too thick, as I have seen in works of people who make their threads with twisted linen cords, it is a great error, for the thread cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it is not suitable for there to be less than two threads per inch of space.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is angry because of the pain from the stars after dislocating their joints, he should place them in a hot compress of lint or other soft cloth so that they do not get infected.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by fracture, and the bones are broken, I will describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not appropriate to dislocate all the broken stars on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	Because when the limb is large, it is not suitable to insert threads for more than five or seven days, or as long as the abscess above is healing, according to your judgment.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and now let us consider the ancient methods of splints to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and take flour that clings to the walls of a mill, and mix it with enough egg, and make this paste, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of splints for restoring fractures in various positions, especially among women and small children, as it is neither too hard nor too soft.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another method of splint for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take some barley meal, and honey, and lupine, and poison-oak, and gum Arabic, and mix them with water;
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	mix it with mirror and aloe, as V suggests.
alechil VIIII З.;	add aloes VIIII as directed.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make it into a powder, and mix it with egg albumen;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the patient's complexion is hot, use this paint, for it is of good composition, and heals broken bones painfully, and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another method of splinting that is effective for twisting:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	take a cloth and make it moist with vinegar, and apply it to the wound.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	use mirrore (a type of medicinal substance) and aloe, as described in chapter nine.
acaice VI З.;	use willow (a type of plant) as instructed in chapter six.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	prepare aromatic Armenian powder (a medicinal compound) as instructed in chapter ten, grind it well, and mix with vinegar or an abundance of egg white, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another way to plaster joints and dislocate bones from their sockets, soothing the pain that arises, they use chisels on the bone, and breaks.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take another new cloth, and soak it in hot water and oil, then place it on the wound.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Cyst splints do not restore proper function, but they are good for alleviating hot abscesses and safely extracting bones that cause pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another method of plastering that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dry figs leaves and land pavot (opium poppy) leaves, crush them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plastering for the restoration of broken bones, and to alleviate the return of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take the root of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, fennel flour, of each part in equal measure.
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and grind, and mix with wine, and warm the limbs, mix it with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another stronger method of plastering for the restoration of a stubborn, hard-to-heal abscess on the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take the roots of vismalve, flaxseed, balsam, melilot, and fennel, and violet and chamomile flowers, of each part in equal measure.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the warmth of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates writes in his book that to restore a broken member, one should use a mixture of wax and oil, and nothing else, stating it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen suggests that to restore a broken member, one should apply warm, dry substances such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another method of splinting that is effective for both injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take feathers and horsehair from shorn men, or goose down, and silk thread, and cut them equally, and grind them, and make a plaster of it and bind it tightly.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then, after some time, loosen it slightly and take care that the patient feels no pain, and that the bone has not moved from its place.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if it is not loosened by skilled hands.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching, with no rest or swelling, then hurry and dislodge it, and remove the plaster immediately.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take a light cloth, and a sponge with moist sea water, and dip it in water, and raise the limb up until the itching stops and the pain is soothed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on a dry cloth, moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it up with a bandage until you are certain that the abscess is hot.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and rest the inflamed member, and relieve the bone pain, then resume gently, with a little plaster, and do not strain it as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	as gently as it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is red, swollen, painful, and filled with pus, and you need to apply a poultice and bind it, then repeat as you did at first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing of what we have said applies to the member, then do not release it until after three, or four, or five, or seven days.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and never leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals and approaches the adjustment of the bone to the joint.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then you must hold it more tightly than first, and thicken the flesh as I have said before;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the joint is set firmer than necessary, know that no improvement can come from it.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	soak the dislocated joint in hot water every time you reset it, and do this three times a day, gradually opening it up.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	by this effort, then gently encourage the limb, and patiently wait for what the skilled healers do, who restore the damaged member.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	This is evil, and if it causes great fear, I see no other way than to leave it and do it right.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various methods of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many types of fractures, various shapes, and the causes are diverse.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	For there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the bone splinters completely through to the inside, as if cut with a knife or club.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for this reason, this type of fracture is called "hatchet-like".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Or he strikes the bone with the spear without piercing it, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute";
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and this wound is great or small from these two fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a throbbing, or swelling, or cuts from stone chippings, or blows against stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a recent fracture, which approaches the skin just beneath or on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound that is healed in the bone is as subtle as a hair, and the fissure is small, it is then called this fracture "capillary";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or an arrow, or any similar object, and the bone fragment enters inward, and the joints are bent as if a blacksmith were forging on a forge;
si entre li piere dedens.	if it enters within the stone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this is more common in those who have moist heads, as with infants.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and occurs in all these ways of fracture that small pieces become detached as if they were.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all the ways of dislocations caused by traction on them, and the inquiry at close range, and by the corrupt flesh above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the hair is noted because when the bone is discovered and rubbed gently, it opens the dislocation, revealing the black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, be wary of accidents with the patient, and if you notice any ill omens, such as vomiting, loss of senses, stiffness, paleness, ague fever, or other symptoms appearing in various combinations, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming accidents and hope for a recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the swelling comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the injury.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if this happens, if you hurry to remove the bone on the seventh day, so that the flesh under the bone is corrupted, then the complications arise that we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone reaches up to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part in this way:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and you should press the patient's head with great pain, and expose the bone in all ways that you can, and smooth the wound more gently than you can, and if blood comes out when exposing the bone, or an abscess begins, assist with what is necessary, and fill the space with moist, oil-soaked cloth.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and keep the wound at rest until the abscess is calmed and be sure of the absence of blood flow.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin to separate the bone, and this is done according to two ways of working:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One method is to press against the narrow opening from the front, and this is the shape:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I use another treatment even greater than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second method is that you have numerous openings of varying narrowness, some pointed and others wide, and they are made of indurable iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and gently open it, so as not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and dense, you must drill around it gently, so as to create openings with care, without penetrating too deeply so that the tip does not go beyond the bone. It should have a margin or curve on top to prevent the tip from going through the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and it is necessary to have many, so that each comes back to its place in the expectation of the bone, so you have time for all tests.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and this is the form of the three types of delay:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality to perceive around the broken bone is that you apply delay to the bone, and return to your tasks until you know that the bone is perceived.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then apply the delay elsewhere a little later, and do so all around, then make cuts with incisions in the space between the parts of the bone, and do it more subtlety and lightly, as we have said, while you are holding the bone in your hand, or with any of the tools you have such as pliers, pincers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and remember that you must not touch the brain or the spine.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone with the trepan, it is necessary that you feel the stiffness that is delayed from the bone to all other tools resembling an incisor, but it should be more tense and more subtle than any other incisor.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if it delays nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, gently remove them with the instrument.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then dress the wound with bandages and care as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another method of treatment is as follows, which Galen says is safer.
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and speak very loudly, as he says.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you expose a part of the bone, either where the fracture is open, and when you have exposed this part, place the tip of this curved scalpel beneath it, whose shape is as follows:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one side, but the acute part is on the second side, so that the cuts are towards the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then strike gently with a small hammer, so that you lightly knock the bone around, and be very careful of the tissue below.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is detached from the bone, gently pull it, for it can be pulled off without pain or harm.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the skin, and the bone is cut only from above, leaving small fragments, it is necessary to remove these rough edges with a fine rasper in sufficient quantity to make each part as suitable as possible, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you encounter great raspers (tools) and then more subtle ones, never stop doing this until it is done well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	For each of the other hair cuts or subtle breaks, you must treat according to its location.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and this is something that is never fully answered for him who has devoted his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if satisfaction is desired, you must press a linen cloth according to the quantity of the wound, soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another cloth doubled over two or three times, soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and make it lighter than you can, without burdening the patient, then apply another bandage over it, and do not tighten it too much so as to only touch the wound.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and leave it thus for a day or two until the abscess is calmed down, then untie it and administer medicines such as roots of lily, wheat flour, incense powder, aristol, and similar things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and from these things make a powder, apply it to the wound, and administer foreign medicines without harm;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and ensure that the wound is always clean, do not leave any uncleanliness, nor allow it to form bumps, for when a bump forms on the skin, if it breaks open, it brings great harm to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when you apply sharp, harmful things to it, they do not heal.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care therefore, if no bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is questionable without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if discoloration appears due to the medicine applied to it, that its virtue may take effect, it is necessary that you mix a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and wrap it in a cloth, and apply it to the affected area.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of manners of healing that are necessary, as long as he is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Knowing that the two parts of the upper arm are never broken, except one after the other, because they are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and this bone is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it bends or twists severely, then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should bind your little finger or make a slit in the flesh of the arm, and place the same fracture into your index finger, and by pushing with force, until the bone returns to its natural position.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this gently, and ensure that the patient feels no pain through your actions.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the bone near the joint, and the bones cannot return to their original position, it is necessary that you place a slightly thicker rule across the top, so that the bones align correctly.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	If the fracture is from the second part, and it happens again, then quickly restore the first state on the same day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if this is not possible, then after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling of the abscess is reduced, apply to the wound clean linen bandages, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	or you apply another from another side, if the fracture persists;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and make the bandages so thick that they fill the gaps between the stitches.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say that no restoration is required if the bandages are soaked in butter, and changed each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	I do not think this is right, but it is necessary that they be moist when preparing bandages of egg whites and mill powder.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then remove the bandage until the bone is hard and the cartilage stiffens.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And never use goose feathers or other materials in place of bandages, and if the wound is filled with pus, it holds the rupture, and the breeze blows the patient's pain away.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or make sure you see well.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses appear at the wound while you are treating it, apply a poultice or moist cotton in olive oil or in a small container of eagle's blood.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if abscesses do not come out, apply a poultice from the outside with flour of cumin and incense powder, preserved with honey and egg yolk, then place light bandages on top, without tying them.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the broken bone is small and broken into small pieces, extract it with suitable instruments, then clean the fracture and treat it with hot things like poultices and applications of heat, as appropriate.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if he does not have a wound deep within the nose, then treat it with care, and insert wooden splints until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	from the dislocation of the mandible
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is dislocated and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only slightly displaced, and it is not broken into two pieces, but only out of place, then if you gently know how to handle it, it can be reset.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	If the fracture is in the right side, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient with the malady.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the fracture is in the left mandible, insert your index finger of your right hand, gently push the fracture back into place, and use your left hand to pull it out, equally.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the mandible is severe in two parts, you must administer an extension to both parts, as long as they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the movement of the teeth causes a rupture, then tie them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and apply a plaster to the broken jaw, and cover it with a double cloth;
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and place a large, well-made cloth or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jaw upon it, secure it with whatever means you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the shape changes, untie it after three days and then reset it as it was before.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and apply a plaster on it, with a powder from fine grinding or flour of chamomile, after you have removed the cautery.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and apply a lighter new plaster, and if the plaster becomes hard, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is healed.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	often it heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess appears, it is necessary to do as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is both fracture and wound together, it is not necessary to remove any piece of the bone that has been broken.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if subtly from the opening as suitable instruments to this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once you have removed all these pieces and it does not delay, immediately close the wound if it is wide, and place suitable bands on it to prevent infection, until it heals.
de la forcele	from the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The force breaks many times, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three manners:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	or it is broken and dislocated in two parts, and there are fragments, and it is the easiest to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	or there is fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work is as follows when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the aid that is broken with force.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the others stretch the collar towards the affected area;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then make the fracture even on both sides, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is no apparent deformity or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend it further, place a round, thick cloth or woolen spear under the shoulder of the patient, as needed.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and gently stretch the limb, extending the spear with your hand, so that you evenly align the fracture as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the bandage away from the wound because it is stuck, then it is necessary that the patient lies on his side, and places a medium pillow under his shoulder, and asks his attendants to lift the bandage towards the back, until the bone in the bandage is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then address the fracture with your hands, and if you feel the bone fragment, it is necessary that you cut through it.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and gently try to realign the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined together in any way, then remove one of the incisions you have.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but apply the full strength of this instrument to achieve satisfaction:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it should resemble a spoon, and not be too thin, and also as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and he should say to the patient, as you see, one shoulder should be wide and the other narrow, just as the opening of the wound that you made when you treated the bone;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are sure of the hot abscess, if you cut the wound, and if its opening is small, then you doubt the hot abscess, if you use cloth and bandages for the wound, according to their quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess forms, take a cloth dipped in rose oil, or aloe, or wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The straining of the bone, when it is sensitive to touch and has no dressing, is that you place on the bone a thin paste of finely ground powder and egg yolk, and then put light stops over it, and insert a spear under the joint if needed.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	then take a very wide bandage, one palm length wide, then place two layers on top of each other over the joint, and wrap it.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a thin stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage extends beyond the joint.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and place the stick on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the collarbone, and remove the healthy armpit, and the painful armpit.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the stick does not move on the broken bone, tighten it each day, and when the ties loosen, then release it.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient lie down on his side, and place a small pillow under his armpit when he is asleep, to lift the dislocated joint up.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	if you align the shoulder and lighten the fracture with the positioning of the arm at the collarbone, and do not unlock it until after a malicious accident does not occur for 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then resume the plastering if you see that it needs to be done again, tighten it and leave it thus until it is healed.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is restored in no more than 28 days, and to no one less.
de la brisure de l’espaule	from the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It is often the case that a broken or dislocated shoulder does not heal well and remains unstable, unless it is properly aligned by touch.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if it is aligned according to the shape of the break and restored to its natural position in every way you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then lay the shoulder gently on a soft, thin cloth, and cover it with a double cloth.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then place a wide and delicate blade, slightly larger than the shoulder, and dislocate the blade at no specific point on the shoulder, using the sharp edge of linen cloth so that the blade cuts evenly.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then tighten it with a great tight band firmly, so that the blade does not move from its place, and inspect it each day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and whenever it loosens, tighten it again and realign the blade if it is out of place, and lay the patient on their side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is healed in 10 or 25 days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when these numbers are completed, if you loosen it and be sure, for this is not an oss that will easily set itself.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone sticks out and is not removed from the inside, it pierces and causes inflammation in the abscess, so do as we have said to soothe the heat of the abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	from the fracture do worse
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The skin is never completely broken in the middle, but this happens rarely.
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks from the heat.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it declines to the inside, and the patient feels great pain, and there is no improvement, and sometimes blood oozes out, and it opens up the openings in the broken bone, and everything feels good.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on their back, and places a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and aligns the ribs to the two hands, and subtly adjusts it equally in all ways so that the bone figure is as it should be.
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then place on it plasters and compresses over the delicate salt or other light bandage, wrap it in a drape, and secure it to the broken bone so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and straighten the ligament back to its original position, tighten it gradually, and check the freedom of movement every hour, relaxing it if it becomes tight.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it needs to be released due to rust or itching that appears on the skin, or pain or abscess, act quickly, release it, remove the plaster, and treat what has come about in a curative manner.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then reset the splint and hold it tightly until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	from the breakage of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	You know that the breaking of ribs only occurs in the upper back and at the top, and they do not bend unless they are broken.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and feel the patient well at the examination.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is such that you put the break back in place as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a board, if you have such a need.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the breaking of ribs is internal, the patient feels very great pain and a stabbing sensation, as well as weeping, because the bone punctures the tissue.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and he holds the fingers, and touches and vomits much blood, which is of great illness, and the ancients have put great effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if it is of those who say that it is appropriate to administer foods that cause bloating in the stomach to push out the fracture inward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not pretend that abscesses will not form if they have not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes back, healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they say that none of us should use cupping glasses on the shoulder to draw blood, as it is useless; it seems reasonable.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	Nevertheless, there is doubt that the cupping glass does not draw away the excess blood from the shoulder according to the arrangement of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say none of you should cover the wound with moist wool and oil, and put tents between the ribs to equalize the space around it, then be cured of pleurisy, flesh, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patients feel great pain that they cannot bear through the bone where the cloth is applied, there is doubt in the patient, and it is necessary to cut into the broken rib cage and place instruments to preserve the satisfaction.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then one must cut the bone, pull gently, and stitch the two edges of the wound together, if it is large, and treat it with bandages, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	and if abscesses occur, place moist, oil-soaked rags on them and cover with a cloth.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat while the cloth over the abscess is still fresh, and place warm compresses on the affected side or where it is needed, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	Of the dislocation of the collarbone.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	No fracture ever occurs to the delicate collarbone without reason; it happens when it rains.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also to the sharp pain in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to a person, and you want to know if they will recover, be wary if you see their hands becoming soft, swollen, and numb, and unable to move or stretch them, and if you pierce them with an needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Knowing that it is deadly in many ways, if they are silent and feel well when you squeeze them and they do not hurt, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and the patient will be cured if proper treatment is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if similar things occur to the sharp pain in the back, you must know if it is sane (curable) or not, if you notice whether the feet are weakened, and if there are accidents in the hands, and on the back, sudden vomiting and expulsion without will.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when it is remembered on the stomach, sudden vomiting without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is recalled to its back and wants to move, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Knowing that it is mortal:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if one does not work diligently on its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to pass, then it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that if there is a hot abscess, you apply rose oil or egg yolk oil to it until it is soothed.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then place a comforting and drying poultice on it, secure it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, as long as he is alive.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	and if any bone becomes detached, it is necessary to cover it with gauze;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then take the bone, and afterwards close the two edges of the wound with stitches if it is large, then apply a dressing with hot compresses as long as it is alive.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the bone fragments are broken, which is called "shattered limbs," press your thumb of your left hand into them and place it level with the other hand, then apply plaster and bandages as needed.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then hold it firm, and if there is a bone out of place, pull it back into position, and set the fracture, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	From the fracture of the bone of the spine.
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	First, note that the bone in the neck (hainche) is broken, and if so, it should not have much diminution at the top.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	it extends down, curves towards the back, and brings pain to the patient in place of the break, causing swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the healing is such that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are above the break.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and such are the fracture and form of it;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the fracture is only at the head, then make all such fractures even, as long as they are in their natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, it inclines inward, then have the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that fracture appears.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have made it even, then place an splint over it, and then put a stick or rod of wood across it, and hold the fracture still so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and secure the limb against the ribs on the inside, as long as the ligaments are even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if an abscess appears and is not touched, it should be left until the abscess below is calmed, and apply what we have previously mentioned.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to restoration, and tighten as appropriate, if there is no adverse event.
et c’est li maniere.	and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	dislocation of the shoulder joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The aid (or support) is between the shoulder blade and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it must be restored according to one of the two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	Don't do it unless you take a thick piece of wood, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	and bind the two pieces together, twist them upwards, and place the patient on a seat;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then pour the patient's broken arm over the wood, until it is straight, and have them hold a wooden splint in place, then twist it downwards to any heavy object or have the attendants pull it down further.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	then place the splint against the break, equal to the patient's hand together, until the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another method is that we place the patient on his back and tie his hands to his neck, then instruct those assisting to apply pressure over the break in each hand, and extend them all equally.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that extraction is too violent, hold the broken part firmly in place, and on the break, stretch each of the assistants to their side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the fracture is close to the top of the shoulder, you should place a moderate ligature under the bone, and another around the neck, below the fracture.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and also if the fracture is on the side of the neck, you should apply a light ligature without effort, as long as the fracture is even on both sides, on the bone and on the neck.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	then even out the fracture, as appropriate, and tighten it, if abscesses form or pain persists.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if an abscess appears, do not press it for seven days, and apply a moist cloth dipped in rose oil until the abscess at the base is calmed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	then press it, and the method of pressing is that you apply a splint to the dislocation, then raise the arm above the affected joint, and place your hand on the shoulder or breast.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and apply the bandage, press on the affected joint and the arm so that the arm is raised, perpendicular to the body, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a splint, and place a wider and stronger stick across the break, and leave two spaces between each stick, and let each stick be so large that it extends beyond the break on each side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	then tighten the sticks, as I said at the beginning of this chapter about the break, stronger and less distant.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you observe the position of the sticks and their tightening, as we said, when you return the broken limb, and you doubt whether the abscess is hot, leave it bound for up to seven days, as we said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	then examine each of the three days the wound, that itching does not swell or come to the surface, or the healing cannot come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it is appropriate, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accident occurs, then the dislocation should only be corrected after three or more days, and the patient should sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and place the dislocated joint in a soft cushion made of equal parts wool, and every hour during the day or night observe whether the limb's shape is restored and its joints are not too tight.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if the treatment is by the virtue of medicine, and he gives the patient the food that we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is first subtle.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when he begins to recover, it is often severe.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	and it is customary that the aid and leg must be reset after forty days from the beginning.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then he must be dislocated and treated with baths and specific remedies to correct the position.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the contraction is severe and painful, it may take up to ten days or two months to release it.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fossa," one smaller and the other following the direction of the hand.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is larger, and it is the one that is located below, towards the smaller bone.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	should the larger fossa break only, or both, and they become disjoined.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the smaller fossae break, their healing is light and swift.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the bones are broken, if healing is poor, it is more painful than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bones that are broken, then a little gentle stretching and positioning them equally is sufficient.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is a large, deep wound, then it needs to be tightened more strongly.
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and extend it on the cushion, placing the palm higher than the other hand, and the small fingers lower, crossing the patient over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any pain.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then extend the attending physicians their hands to the distant part of his arm, or to the joint, and other ministers to the others above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then set it even with the eyes, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if, in the fracture, each piece is set in its place, and if there is none that holds the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place by doing as we have said before, then it must be cut off and the bone healed.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the wound rupture, I have spoken of it in the specific chapter;
si pren la cure.	then takes the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if, at the beginning of restoration, abscesses occur, I wrap them with a bandage made of rose oil and white wax, not too hard or too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and I wrap it gently, as long as the abscess is calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	Then remove the bandage and apply the plaster of fine-milled powder with plenty of egg, then place the nails, making sure the nail from the break is stronger and a bit wider than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that it must have 6 nails or arms in different positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	so that the break is in one of the bones, or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and it holds faster over the fracture than elsewhere, and for a longer time as it moves away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and the bandages that are over the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and the thread, from which it is held, should be linen, not too thick or too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after no days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if no harm comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then it is necessary that you apply hot water to the limb until the itching is soothed.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the member not be squeezed too tightly at rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then repeat the stretching, and if the ligaments loosen and the bones deviate, or similar things, address it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then you should soften it slightly, and leave it for a few days until the swelling goes down, and then stretch it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said help the patient, then he should be loose for up to 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	if uneasy, then bind his hands to his chest, and make sure his collarbones are even, and guard against movement and reaching, and have him sleep on his back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 45 days, and perhaps in 10 days, according to the combinations and complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that on the back of the hand and at the joints there are often small fractures, and it brings only pain many times over.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient cuts a cross and holds it straight before him equally.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then places his hand on the extended board, extends the broken bones of the limb, and aligns them properly, until they are well joined.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and applies poultices and heat, if an abscess forms, then he places a piece of salt according to the size of the wound.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and is wrapped in a cloth drape.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is near the abdomen around the root of the plant, make a ball of cloth and command the patient to press it against his swollen limb.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then apply a long strip of cloth, and make the bandage as soft as possible, as large as the palm of the hand, and tighten it, as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the open air, it is necessary that you place a stick above and another below on the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly all around the hand, and seal the gap between them.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	If any fracture occurs among us in the hand, it is the joints that are affected, so we must set them even as they should be.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and tighten with the palm, and if you notice a small, straight bandage that raises the fracture without moving it, use that.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the fracture is in another finger, just as it was described or indicated by one of the others, set them even and bind it with the healthy finger afterward.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	You should hold them all in place until they grow out, or put a splint over them as you would a broken bone.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and placement of hot abscesses, and protect those who come near them, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	from the broken hipbone
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The foot bones are often broken, and one can clearly see them when the foot returns to its normal position both in front and behind.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is when one binds them together over the break, and another from below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on their face, then extends each limb equally to their side.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the fracture is through the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the hipbone, one of the ligaments should be bound towards the knee, and others should be bound below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is near the knee, then the ligaments around the knee should be relaxed and the leg bent downward.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then place the splint with both hands, equally according to its natural shape, and then apply the bandage, binding it tightly around the injury so that it does not move.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, leave it to calm down before returning to your work and treatment.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The bandage is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	You should wrap around the fracture a bandage hard and doubled in two or three layers, remove the excess, then turn the leg until the heels reach the root of the toe, and pass a long thread between the calf and the leg, beneath the knee joint, and bring the end up over the top.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn the bandage to the leg and thigh, then place the splint on top, and put a stick across the bone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then use the eighth part of a soft cloth between the leg and thigh to even out the pressure, then begin to tie three or four loops around the splint.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and as you go higher on the splint, it should become less tight.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then take the two threads that you have threaded between the leg and thigh, and tie three loops underneath, then return to the other side at the top with the thread, as you work towards the foot.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and hold them still, if they do not move from their place, then leave it so, and there is no abscess or swelling or any other sign.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it happens that it becomes dislocated again, and you notice it, then correct it as we have said many times before.
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are fragments of bone that stick, it is appropriate to remove them, if possible.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if it is not possible to remove them, then it is appropriate to break the joint and pull strongly.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and the treatment is as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And never should the foot be broken in this way with stars, as is done in the case of aid or the arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	However, this carefully performed restoration does not please the patients.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the foot is restored in 7 days, or fewer or more, according to the diversity of dispositions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the alley of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	You know that in the alley of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, even if it is only a crack or an opening, it affects every wound, and feels painful, and everyone feels well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is when everything is put back in its place as it was before, as long as it can be moved together.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then apply the plaster, and place a round stick, if needed, and tighten it appropriately, then repeat all the arrangements we have mentioned in other fractures, as for a hot abscess or anything similar.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	if one is involved in such an accident as it suits them, as long as they remain healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	from the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Knowing that the leg has two bones, of which one is called "right" and not "mustelz", and the others are called "foscile";
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and it continues to break all the way to the arm, and because of this comes the restoration as with the equal arm, and all the work is complete. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg moves from every side.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bones are broken, they bend forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	and if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain, and one can see it clearly.
et torne desoz.	and it turns inside out.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	then apply extension, and set it equal, and tie the stars equally.
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but nevertheless, it is necessary that the fracture be ugly, and there are several pieces, so that the extension is smaller and lighter.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and light according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your task, take two strips of cloth as thick as a finger, that cover the leg on both sides, and are long enough to reach from the knee to the sole.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap it in two strips of cloth around the leg both above and below, and tie it tightly in the middle, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and no one should administer any medicine to the long bones of the leg, especially if it is broken, and he places the leg to prevent movement, and properly does this at the fracture where there is pain.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and each day he moves the leg to see if there is an abscess or any other complication;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if he treats it while it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the fracture of bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones in the foot can be fractured and the toes can be dislocated, and there is no cure except in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if a foot bone is broken and you see the bones pushing against each other, the patient lies with his bad leg on the ground as if he wanted to walk, then place your foot on top of his, holding where the bones are lifted, and press until they return to their places.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then apply the plaster and stop it up, and place beneath the belly, at the pit of both groins, a small table with two flat sides, then tighten it at the most recent healing, after you have wrapped them in drapes and other things that you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three days or four have passed, if he loosens the bandage, for you will find the bones even, either broken or discolored.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if either of the bones is not broken, but restored, as we have said regarding the bones of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	then place on the broken bone a steel according to the length of the bone, and be a little wider, then beneath the foot place the table I mentioned, and tighten it firmly.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three (or more), break them, and place on each finger a stone according to their quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the table from under the foot.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and if it is on the top of the table, towards the stomach of the foot, make sure it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And it is important that you do not forget the other things I have mentioned about other breaks, when we have said this.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and protect each case as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	On the fracture of the bone of the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bones of a woman's natural structure are broken, if she lets the swelling increase, then she inclines her body to one side, and it is held from behind.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the swelling with cotton, and also put in large amounts of it as needed.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then stand the woman up, gently pressing her back little by little, and then remove the cotton until it reaches the entrance of the bone structure, and return the bones with the filling.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven days or so.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	if the fracture is to be healed, and you see, take a bladder of a goat, and tie a cane to the wound, and squeeze all the bladder back into its natural shape;
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow into the cane until the bladder is fully inflated inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	its natural shape will return to the fracture.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for several days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when a bone of the man or woman is broken, it should be restored as we have said for the hip bone;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these fractures should not be hidden from him who applies his study and skill, and listens to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture indicates various dispositions for the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	then understand.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	On a broken arrow, take a goose throat and insert it into the shaft.
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	Then wrap it with cloth, leaving it for three days or until it heals completely.
de brisure avec plaie	from fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is important for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bones of the leg or shoulder or similar, to be healed immediately, so that the healing which we have mentioned serves as testimony.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, but there is still a fracture from poison, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or on the same day, before abscesses form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscess increases, leave the healing until it is completely healed, as long as the abscess is calm, and do not touch it for at least a day or two, otherwise you would cause a bad outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible through the opened heart, it is necessary that you place it gently with your hands, slightly extended.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension does not appear to be even in your hands, rearrange this instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and its width should be according to the size of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and because it is an art to be precise, it should soak for three or four times, depending on what is required in each case of fracture.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and it should be round and slightly thicker, so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb in your work, and is firm in front, and thick from the middle towards the front, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	and it is called "palainche", so the curved bones should be placed on top of the visible joint.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and twist it once, as it returns, and let them be even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, you must hold the head of the bone until the instrument has a firm grip.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, take a suitable instrument, such as a knife or scissors, in your power.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then remove whoever is delayed in the bone due to stiffness and small cuts.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterward, knowing that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	if you do such that it is in its place, then moisten the cloth with astringent black wine, and wrap it carefully around it;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not place any bandage or other substance on the wound that has oil, so as not to cause putrefaction and corruption.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer heat as you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and clean the covering around it entirely according to the amount of the wound, and be well careful that the wound is not strained with the fracture.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and often they have done this foolishly, and brought upon the patient either death or corruption many times.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and so the tightenings should be milder and more gentle than with other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is severe or extensive, and you doubt that a bad outcome may occur, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, if it is not suitable to put pressure on it;
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but envelop it around, instead of pressure, with hard bandages, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is beginning to close, then remove whatever you have placed over it, and apply healing ointment to the wound, such as a four-ingredient ointment and similar remedies.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the member twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it remains swollen and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be dislocated in such a way that the bowstring moves gently downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it persists for a long time, and it cannot heal but keeps returning to the bowed state, knowing that there are small fragments of bone, then you must clean the wound thoroughly and remove all these misplaced fragments that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula occurs in the place or any other form of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it according to what is said in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when a bone is broken and open on the member, like the bone of the leg or the shoulder, or other similar bones of the large limbs, do not pull it, for many times death results, but let it heal until it rots.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	if, after twenty or thirty days, the wound has healed, then treat it if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	burn injuries that come from the heat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often encounter after the healing of the break, especially when it is near a joint, and the sight of the misaligned limb is a painful thing to behold.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and by chance cannot perform the natural functions of its members.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Beware therefore, if it happens to us:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if we administer astringent medicines, such as aloe, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, sumac, and similar others, without pressing any of these things, or all together, and confide them with astringent wine, or with abundance of honey, or with ash;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and place them on the wound in compresses, tighten them well, and do not remove them for several days;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then dislocate it, and begin again with another, until the nodes are healed.
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or stretch it on a well-made plank;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	because the property of the plank is such that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the node has already become hard like stone, it must be removed, cutting off the upper part and exposing the excess.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	You should shave it with no razor while it is infected, and treat it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The weak member after treatment.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone is healed and the limb remains weak and delicate, it occurs for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	due to which one was tied too tightly and not tied as it should be;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because it had too many bindings, and cannot restore blood flow to the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or because of the abundance of inflammation;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or due to excessive and sudden movements, not staying in place at the appropriate time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because the patient has little blood in their body, making them weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment is that you make the patient eat, and make the body firm, until the blood increases within them.
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer baths, giving joy and comfort;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then place the poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and rise it often with cold water, until the nourishment reaches the member.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	Both members twisted after the dislocation.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the member is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural strength.
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	nor believe the foolish who say one must break off the member from the very beginning, and many foolish people have done this in our land.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and this work is blamed, and it brings great harm, and perhaps death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	However, if inflammation and pain are severe, it is necessary to use hot water or cook gentle herbs such as fennel, roots, melilot, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and apply the gentle plaster, well-made as a decocion, and take the mucilaginous part of fennel, and preserve it with gelatin fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster from it.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	You take fat figures (or perhaps fatty substances), grind them finely with a pestle, and mix them with similar remedies that soften the hardening.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never should the dislocation be subjected to continuous and prolonged friction with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And allow the affected limb to move every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	If the stiffness is due to inflammation and hardness, similar to stone, then it must be cut open with iron, if necessary reaching up to the bone, using a delicate incision.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and apply compression and study the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations result from a joint moving out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs due to no apparent reason, it is necessary to attempt to bring the limb back to its normal position immediately.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if treatment is delayed, the swelling may increase, and in some cases, it might be necessary to forcefully reset the joint back into place.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	for this reason, it is not necessary to move it as soon as it swells.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	often causing fatigue and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	nevertheless, when this happens, if it makes the patient healthier, then leave it until the abscess is completely healed.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then raise the affected limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as the cure comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the upper limbs from the wrist to the shoulder.
des mandibules	and of the jaws.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	Soon, it happens that the jaws become dislocated, and the dislocation of both occurs in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	when they are slightly out of their sockets and softens a little;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are entirely dislocated, hanging towards the lower part, and draining saliva from the mouth that he cannot hold, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue moves with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself through various dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is entirely and completely dislocated, then it is necessary that you reset it immediately, without delay;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a way that the physician places his hand on the patient's head, and pulls it toward him with gentle pressure at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, so that the dislocation is from two parts.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two hands should be prepared, making them equal.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instructs the patient to soften his jaws and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he adjusts the mirrors equally until they return to their place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if they return to their place, especially when both jaws are together, then apply hot water and oil gently, until they align slightly.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Do not hesitate to bring it back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are brought back equally, and the mouth of the ill person closes well without softening, place moistened cloth bands covered in a mixture of rose oil and wax on them, then gently bind them with soft strings.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and make the patient sleep on their back, with their legs between two pillows, so that they do not move to the right or left, nor should they strive for more, but gently press down on the flesh until the pain is gone and the jaws are relaxed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then massage what he wants to move lightly, and do not strain to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well closed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be properly aligned within an hour and do not return to their normal position, then fever and persistent aches may occur, along with abdominal pain, or vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it is destruction;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and often it kills those who have it, within seven days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fork cannot dislocate from either side in the continuity of it, and from the worst side, it is never healed properly outside, and it causes great pain.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, extends their arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the joint firmly into your palm, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then place the splint and bandage, and tighten it;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the joint which is towards the neck cannot be dislocated.
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if it does not dislocate, and if it never dislocates, then return it to its place, as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then place the splint and bandage, and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus, itself is brought back to the shoulder joint, when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	**Shoulder Dislocation**
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is damaged in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one is that it damages the part of the shoulder at the base;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the part where there is most pain;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and by chance, it damages the part above, and this happens seldom.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and do not dislocate it behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate it inside for the nerves.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and often dislocate it towards the armpit, especially those with little strength, for these leap strongly.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	for those with enough strength, it leaps slightly, and returns slightly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to no one that they feel a sharp pain or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	You should therefore test it, as long as you are certain.
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And the dislocation is recognized when it moves towards the joint, and it makes a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest diversity;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and by pressing on the joint, the top of the shoulder feels as if it were one.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring his hand back to its normal position, nor make any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated at the top and not properly concealed, for you will feel it clearly when touching;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this method of dislocation is not to be used unless it is fresh, or if the patient is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is that the healer places his hand on top of the patient's shoulder, then places his palm beneath the joint, and pulls the joint upwards with force towards the bone.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the healer lifts his hand and extends it upwards, then places it beneath.
si venra hastanment.	if he comes to illness.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said, within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and apply gently softening and soothing treatments, such as an infusion of aloe vera, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and let it be applied.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then the patient should be placed on his back, and a soft cloth of equal thickness should be placed under him, neither too loose nor too tight, then place his heel on the cloth, and gently lift the head from the shoulder, and stretch the hand of the ill person.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and other ministers tie the patient's head so it does not move below.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	the shoulder now returns, and if it is dislocated, reset it according to this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and make sure that the person at home is stronger than the patient.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and be straight towards the side, and pull the patient's shoulder away from the body, lifting the shoulder up so that the patient hangs on the opposite side.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and other assistants take hold of the patient's hand, lowering it towards the abdomen.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, so that anything heavy causes him trouble, then the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And it is also done in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and insert a long stick into the ground, making the end as sharp as a pistol, neither too thick nor too thin.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then place the patient below, but with soft cloth above, and the pain should be from the long of the leg.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then his hand should be extended downwards from another direction, and the joint will return to its place gently;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not want to return for all the things we have said, then do this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take a strip of cloth wide and long enough to cover the entire wound, and cut it in such a way that the edge can fully enter under the stitch.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then lay two cloth strips over the wound to prevent further pain for the patient, and insert them under the wound of the sick person.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extends one arm over the leg along its length, and fastens the aid to the leg, and places the arm at the top of the hand, then puts the arm on the broad edge of a shovel, and lets the hand hang down, and leaves the body dangling from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	the joint moves now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is dislocated in any way, it is necessary to put under the joint a thread of equal wool, then apply the plaster with a mixture of powder from the mill, with incense and egg yolk, over all the shoulder and around, then pull the joint back into place, and tie the bandage again on the plaster, and press the hand against the collarbone, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he moves little, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it will heal faster.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then move more after a few days or seven, and move it.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if (it) is closed and (the patient) cannot relax it, then (it) is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is firmly stuck due to moisture or any other cause, it is necessary that you apply cautery in three places, as it is described in the chapter of cautery or treatment.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and after seven days (the joint) becomes loose, and does not hold its place, and the patient cannot raise their arm above their head, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is either compressed, stretched, or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never return to its proper place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is toward the worst side, and the joints, either in front or behind, are caused by a sudden movement, stretching of the hands, and (the patient) should be given another treatment.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure as long as he is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after healing, cracking occurs in the member, and delayed movement, if the patient uses it many times, until the cracking is relieved, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation cost
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Knowing that the dislocated joint is weakened at the edges and returns to its place;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and is weakened from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not fully corrected, as we can clearly see it and feel it;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and is weakened according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the dislocated part with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is dislocated, preventing the arm from bending or touching the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary that you reset it so that the abscess closes and does not reappear, because if the abscess reappears, it would be difficult to reset it.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and by chance it cannot be brought back to its original state completely, especially when it is at the rear.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	it is worse than other dislocations, causing greater pain, and if left untreated, it may lead to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And for the restoration, when it is possible to bring it back, you extend your hand with both of yours.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and the arms should be extended, and the hands turned toward the side opposite the joint, pressing and stretching it together with the palm's base, until it returns to its original position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to its original position, and bring the base of the palm with the joint that is misaligned.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer a strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and this involves extending the arm, and the physician should hold it firm, so that it does not move during the extension.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm in each direction, after you have wrapped it with a long and wide cloth;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when you observe the joint at the hand's junction, if it is not lubricated with any oil to soften the joint, then press the swollen joint firmly, until it returns to its normal position.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, apply dry plaster with heat, form a strain, and stretch the arm to the collarbone of the suffering patient, and do not leave it for any days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	and if the joint is firmly in its place, loosen the ligament, and release it.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint is not tightly held, reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for no days until it is firmly set.
puis le deslie.	then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if the patient feels pain after resetting the joint and it becomes silent, then bathe and gently rub it, pressing until it is relieved.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	or place the greasy sheep's fat on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and immerse it in the bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when it sweats, gently rub the joint, then replace the fat and then immerse in the bath again.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this twice or three times, as long as it is healthy;
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see, place a fine cloth dipped in warm butter over it and hold it on;
si revenra a sa disposition.	it will return to its original position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand is misaligned, and its return to position is lighter than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	However, it is necessary to bring it back to its original position carefully, at the same time that it is misaligned, so that the joint does not swell or an abscess forms hot.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the re-location is such that you place the sick hand on a table, and stretch out the patient's limbs, and look to ensure they are even, so that he places his palm over the appearance of the joint, and presses until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	However, it is important that you check if it is well-positioned.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	then place the patient's back of his hand on a table, extending and relocating it.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on a table, and look to see where the joint appears.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, it is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If, however, the strain of soothing treatments does not cease for abscesses, it leaves him thus without wanting to recommence.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place for any number of days, then the joint remains dislocated.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and causes no harm to the patient as long as their hands are relaxed and cannot tighten anything at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	so you know that the nerve or artery is cut,
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If there is no other remedy but to extract the case by delicate cautery, then it may be worth trying something else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is dislocated, if you place on it the splint that we have said, then pull and hold it for a day, then release it and leave it so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well and there is no fracture, then apply hot water moistened cloth and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	On the dislocation of the two joints of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Never should the palms be massaged on either side, or the back of the hand or the belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then they should be pressed, and the dislocation reduced with gentle movements until it returns, then support the head with both hands, and pull it towards the part where it is dislocated.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave it for two days, then set it even with the other hand on that same day.
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and bind it with a thread, as we have said, and loosen it by day, and make it move, and replace it to the bone;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, while it is tight, and do the same if it becomes unwell in the palm of the hand, and proceed as you have done before, until it is healed;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same when it becomes unwell on another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	dislocation of the spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine or the collarbone is dislocated and there is no cure, the patient's condition worsens rapidly and death may ensue.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the contractions suddenly leave without will, unable to hold it, and often a limb becomes weak, either both legs or both arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the elderly person becomes mute from the third part onwards;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	The one that becomes mute at the back is called 'gibbousness'.
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The treatment is that if the gibbousness has come from childhood, you must reward it.
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	If there is no cure or recovery from it at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things, they speak of old ways of treatment with great words, but it brings no real benefit at all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my understanding, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the hardness that comes at the root of the hair, no one has any knowledge of it.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also those that come straight in the second side, and one cannot cure from outside unless the one that comes to the back is properly treated, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient should be extended on their face in the first position evenly, and have pressure from beneath so they do not move.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then I insert a stick into the hollow of the earth-formed head, and another through the soft parts, and tie a strong cord around the afflicted's arms, legs, hips, and ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and the two assistants know the positions of the cords, one for the head and others for the soft parts, among the two sticks;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they should be tightly held, the sticks as we have said, and the patient places his palms on the formed spike until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a table three feet long, cut a slot in the wall behind it, place the patient on their side, and turn the head of the table away from the wall, then put the middle of the table over the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and place the mirrors on the other side of the table's head, and press firmly until it returns to its place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see, do it with the turner that turns in your hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And you should insert two splints into the head of the patient's ailing arm, and towards the feet, two others, with a space of about the length of a palm between each splint.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and each splint should have an opening or a hole, through which you can insert a thread and tighten it firmly in place so that the splints do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each pair of splints, there should be a connecting thread, which tightens the splints together, and this thread should be as thin as the length of a palm.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then take the ligament that is among the muscles towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other turn, and each of the assistants turns their turn to the entire ligament, and the master makes the spike even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, apply a drying plaster with plenty of heat, then the stoppers, and then the steel of a tablet three fingers long, which should hold the joint of the stiffness and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a ligament, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle relief, until they are healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if any condition arises at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the intent that we have said before.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and never should one administer a plug, and never should the appearance arise in the lower spine of the back, and it is believed to be dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone that opens, so one must not have any presumption;
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	in case death were to come.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	You know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only cause dislocations, unlike other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the hip joint is misaligned according to three parts.
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	inside and outside, and front and back;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and deeper inside, then less misaligned front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is such that when you join the affected leg with the healthy one, if it is longer, and opens the sick knee more than the healthy ones, and the sick cannot double their knee at the fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the leg that is severely inflamed with hot abscess, because the joint of the thigh comes here.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who is about to die is that this event is contrary to what has happened before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of one who has it in front, so it is that they have a well-aligned leg according to its completion;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	nevertheless, do not bend the knee without pain, and if one wishes to make it move, it cannot do so before, and it retains urine, and swells the leg, and as it moves, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of someone who is about to die from behind include: they cannot spread or bend their knee, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the angle of the limb becomes soft, and the foot is in a different position compared to the hip, towards the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	They must reset this appearance of dislocation if it is an old dislocation that persists according to its nature, as there is no cure for it.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it is not appropriate that he should have any presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And for the one whose dislocation is recent, and it's of the four types of dislocation—if you act quickly and reduce the joint to its proper place, both inside and aligned, and then move it to the right or left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	so that if it returns, there is no need for any other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong support, and stretch the leg strongly with both hands, or bind it to the knee joint.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and other helpers extend their hand over it in such a way that they bend their fingers towards the sole of the foot, then tightly hold it with a gentle grip on the calf.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another holds the head with a firm grip.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they extend it upwards and downwards several times, until the patient is lifted from the ground once, and remains still.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to all four parts, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this is not treated, it is necessary to take care of its appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When dislocation is in the shoulder, it is necessary to have the patient lie on their healthy side, then apply a bandage at the base of the thigh, and the joint that is above the angle, then stretch the bandage towards the angle and towards the strength.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then apply pressure with other assistants on the patient's arms, embrace the large joint of the injured thigh, and extend it to a wider opening.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot tighten it in the manner we have said, then you should bind both feet of the patient together with a strong, soft ligature on both heels and both knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then it should be hung from the top of a post, and two long arms should be above the ground.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then instruct the healer to embrace the top of the thigh, and have other assistants with the patient, who also embrace the thigh, for the joint now moves gently.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is in the exterior, if the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of kyphosis, then tighten the ligaments on the affected leg properly, and also on the opposite side.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then place two pins, one at the top and another at the bottom, then insert a pin between the thighs of the patient in the shape.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and he should surround it with moist flags, so that he does not harm the patient, and then extend each limb towards him, and with your eyes make the dislocation equal in his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it does not return, put it on a table and press it as we have said in the previous section, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is present, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg forcibly, as I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and place the mirror to his pain of being on the diseased angle, then press with the other hand, and stretch it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is external, it is not necessary to stretch the patient downwards, nor raise him up from the ground, but rather he should be kept in a position as if his hip was dislocated downward, just as we have said gently on both hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and place it on his face, with the ligament extended as we have said before, and he must press down on the joint on the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and will be at the point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then fasten the thighs, and apply the plaster, and wrap a bandage tightly so that the hip does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and rest for three or four days, then untie it, and apply the plaster again.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see them grow even, stretch them as they were before, and leave it for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then release it, and make it go smoothly, as long as the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From the dislocation of the knee.
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The patient is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	that is to say, internally and externally, and behind.
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are such that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if they cannot straighten it at the knee, know that they are dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is such that you make the patient sit straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place them face down on your lap, and place their foot on top of yours.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take their knee in your palms, and draw it between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee forming an 'L'.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and other assistants stretch his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he has safely freed his leg slightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and apply a poultice, and make the leg move at the knee, and hold it together strongly for three or four days, then loosen it.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and the patient should not move about until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not straight, apply firm extension as we have said in the treatment of the neck, as long as it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	On the dislocation of the heel.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is neither completely dislocated nor fully healed, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and it feels tense in the area where it is dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	We reset it if it is light, and one must gently extend their hands when they are slightly stunned.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated completely, one must then ensure the patient lies straight and holds the limb firmly above the ankle with a helper.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then take the foot in your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and gently bend the foot upwards.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice as we have said, both bending and stretching the foot.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it returns, that's good.
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	If it does not return, the work must be recommenced, for it will;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return in that way, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and insert a stick firmly into the earth between their legs, binding the blankets around them to prevent injury to the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then attend to the patient's leg, and have other assistants stretch the foot or hold it in place, securing it to the collar of the bed.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then extend each limb equally, and let them move repeatedly between the legs of the patient to hold the patient still when they are stretched.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then place the mirrors equally on the dislocated joint in both hands, and another helper holds the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return to its place firmly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it stops bleeding, apply a poultice and compress above, and strain the limb, fasten the foot to the leg, and secure the stirrups behind the ankle, ensuring the bindings are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	then let it be for two or three days, and gently move it if it is tight.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	then on the third or fourth day, gently release it, and make the patient walk for three days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if it goes beyond this limit, it is not fortunate that it does not dislocate further.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess forms, it is necessary to soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, while it remains healthy.
des dois	Of the two (parts/sides).
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two (parts/sides) are disaligned, if they need to be properly aligned without strain, it is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any other part of the foot or leg, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back or on a table straight, and place your foot on what opens these joints, then press with your foot firmly until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is even, and it opens nothing, he places the sole of the foot on a table with two joints, then strains it firmly, and leaves it for three days, then loosens it.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and makes it rest, as long as it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	from wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, often the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in treatment, since you are ignorant of the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not patient and merciful and slow, do not be bold.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and at the beginning of things, apply hot poultices to the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you have no hope for recovery;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and if you see hope, then immediately reset the limb to its place, so that the abscess does not form again;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in place, apply hot poultices to the abscess and treat the wound as necessary with dried herbs;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is a dislocation with broken bones and small fragments, then as we have said in simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and keep yourself from entering a path of fear, according to what I have said, for it is your movement according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your arms and body.
