You, dear children, I have completed this book which is the essence of medical knowledge assembled together with its fulfillment, and finished it through its explanations and revelations. And in my vision, I came to know that I should complete this with this manual, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is well-established in our region and unknown everywhere else, so has knowledge been lost and surgery stripped down to bare, and nothing remains from it that wasn't recorded in books by the ancients whose hands have performed surgeries. And out of this comes error and vanity, and minds are closed off and knowledge is lost.
It appears that I should revive this treatise together with its order according to the path of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together with the forms of iron cauteries, and other tools for working, with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And because no skilled masters are found in our times, the art of medicine has been lost. And it is necessary for the one who intervenes to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows how to judge the parts, and their shapes and connections and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews, and the number of bones, and their disposition and of moving and static veins, and where they exit.
And thus says Hippocrates that it is much easier to avoid illness than to treat it with medicine; and similarly in the art of manual skills.
We are telling you at the beginning of this book that if someone is not aware of the things previously mentioned, they may make mistakes and mislead people; just as I have seen many times where those who interfere with this science abandon their knowledge and experience.
And I have seen a fool who performed an operation on a woman's neck to remove a sore or swelling, and cut into the arteries in her neck. Because so much blood came out that the woman died from her own hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a large stone in the body of an old man, and the stone was large. He removed a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
And I have already been called to help draw blood, and saw the position of the body and the size of the stone, and if they had removed it while he was alive, he would have died.
And I saw another case where a cure took on the task of treating our lord's leg which was broken, and with the breakage came an injury; and the doctors full of ignorance caused the break to occur in the wound, causing it to become inflamed by strong winds, and did not allow the wound any rest from bleeding, and allowed it to happen like this for months; and he instructed them not to ever cause such harm again; and waited until the leg was completely swollen up to the feet and then went towards ruin.
I was summoned to come to him, and I quickly came to relieve his leg; and when I heard that it had been dislocated so much that he felt no pain.
But every path of corruption had already been confirmed or member, and one could not heal it; and the corruption would continue to spread within the body as long as the limbs were completely lost.
And look at a second sore which collapses an abscess that is deeply embedded, and then inflames through the wickedness of her lordship.
For the ulcer, when it is full of melancholic humor, one should not touch it with iron if it isn't in its place where one can remove all that has been corrupted.
And for this reason, dear children, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: namely, an area where there are dangers in multiple situations; and I will show each one of these divisions within this book where it has fear and danger.
Because it is necessary that you keep this in mind, so that the foolish may not speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in readiness, and treat your illnesses lightly yet firmly, and use the best means so that through the grace of God you come to salvation and be healed; and leave those terrible diseases with no cause for complaint; and remove from yourself the doubts caused by those who make you doubt, and have faith in them so that you may go from this world to another one of glory.
Galen states in some of his admonishments: "Do not seek to treat a disease wrongly, lest you be called foolish by others."
I have written this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters deal with fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and these chapters are arranged from the head to the stones; and about the forms of instruments, and the metals of cauteries, and all that is necessary for the operation.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, as well as suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, along with similar matters; and these chapters are arranged according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapters concern the restoration of dislocations and twists, as well as similar matters; these chapters are arranged from head to stones, and include descriptions of instruments.
Just as we remind ourselves of the work, it is necessary for me to describe the quality and harm of each constitution.
I say that the qualities of aid, and harm, are the longest word and most subtle science and secrets in response; and many wise ones spoke about this, agreeing with it. And they provided little to me through their words, for I fear the length.
I say that the fire cautery universally applies to all types of skin where there is matter present, considering that there are two types of compositions: one being hot with matter, and another being dry with matter.
In the composition that is both hot and dry with matter present, they devised a plan and said that the fire cautery is great aid; while others said the opposite: that the fire cautery only works for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be treated with hot illnesses by heat or drying; and it's said that he who says otherwise that the cautery gives great aid to hot and dry diseases that come into men's bodies. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find that the body is cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it true on every occasion by means of experimentation.
And every path, do not interfere with it except that which has been proven and by one who knows through long use the chapter of cautery treatments, and the diversity of human complexion, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and time frame thereof. With other complexions we have no fear, especially for cold and moist illnesses. And let all the parts assemble and agree with the cautery.
And know, children, that assembled fire cautery has secrets of remedies and greater goodness than the burning medicine cautery.
For fire is simple, and does not come out anywhere except on the body part that is burned, and it does not harm any other body part.
The burning medicines spread from one body part to another causing diseases in other body parts; and by chance the patient feels the discomfort of these diseases.
Fire, due to its intensity and quality, will not cause this if there is no excess.
And this is what I have found through experimentation and the longevity of my service and study in the art, which corresponds to the truth of things. And for this, I apologize for the length of speech, because I do not want to take away from you the secret that lies with fire and the quality of work, how it relieves diseases from bodies, as the philosopher says by demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
And know, child, that they determined when the cauterizations should be done, and studied their effects.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the harms occurring are minimized by the help of the cautery; and moreover, if the cauterizations are due to necessary pains that cannot wait for the time when greater harm would occur to the member.
And never think like the foolish ones do, my dear child; because a disease cured by cauterization does not bring back what was lost. And they say it this way: but that is not entirely true, for cauterizations are only medicine that changes the complexion and dries up the fluids that cause pain, and their value lies in expediting one's strength and in the virtue of their work and authority.
And the ability exists that diseases occur according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and they gather in him the excesses through the consumption of meats and similar things, if not treated with cauterization where there is little excess and moisture, such as cauterizations for pain, and similar things, so that such pain does not recur; but this happens rarely.
And no one understands why cauteries are called after medicine, it's hard to see; but they do not believe that cauteries can follow medicine afterwards. However, their understanding is false, and in cautery being the latter of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they don't work, then we administer our cautery, and it works. Therefore, it's correct to say that cauteries are indeed the latter part of medicine, not according to the understanding of people there.
The old ones said that gold cauteries are more effective than iron ones, and they mentioned this only because of the quality of gold and its high substance. They also stated that gold cautery doesn't cause decay, which is not true as I have proven it; and found out that it does occur in some people. And gold cauteries work better than iron ones, just like they said.
And indeed, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know that it is heated by the color of gold and it cools immediately; and if you heat it too much; then put it in fire; and so there is enough prevention.
And indeed, we use our metal cautery for the work that we have prepared for our task.
So you have been instructed this chapter concerning the first joints up to the knee, because making it easier to find the way.
Use an olive pincer cautery
A fire cautery is effective against moisture and cold on the head. There are two of them that we perform due to the cause of an illness called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the head as in eyes, ears, and because of numerous dreams, toothache, throat pain, and especially all diseases coming from cold such as paralysis, soda (which seems to be a typo, possibly meant to refer to something like apoplexy), and apoplexy-like illnesses.
The shape of this cautery is such that the patient's condition is purified by a dissolving medicine altering the head. Either three times or four times, depending on how much the properties and the heat and the habituation to the patient's condition can bear; and then washes the head with the patient afterwards.
And then make him lie down with his hands crossed between your hands, and place his hands on the palm of his hand; after put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two nostrils; and let it be where your middle fingers reach, if it bleeds from there, heat up the cautery which is called 'olivare', with this form:
And place on the joint with ink, and when you descend and apply pressure little by little while twisting your hand; then raise your hand alone, and check if you see bone. If you do not see it, start applying heat with the cautery until you see bone as I have told you; afterwards take one part of honey, mix it with a soft cloth, insert into the joint, and leave there for three days. After that, place on top of cotton soaked in butter; let it stay until the scab is removed; afterwards treat the wound with tetracycline ointment until it heals.
And if they were told by the old ones that the more time an open wound stays exposed, the more it will purify; and due to this, movements are taken.
And it was said by no one that we should leave the cautery in place until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone and treat it.
And the other says that when using a cautery, one should keep it in place there and push so forcefully that it lifts part of the bone as wide as half a hazelnut because this is what women do with their needles to let body fluids flow out; and one should leave the wound exposed for an extended period. Afterward, one must clean and close the wound.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be entirely good for all things; except when there is a way for fear in some people. And it seems to me that I should leave them as they are; because the joints weaken due to continuous solutions from nature, as we testify in other limbs; and even when the joints of illness are weak by nature, and my first impression of cautery is more healing and effective for me, and from this use I work altogether assembling salvation.
from the old pain in the head
When throughout the entire head comes chronic pain and lasts long, one must use the patient's remedies such as pills called "cochie", and treatments for the head and ears and bandages; and if one applies the cautery we have mentioned before, and it proves effective.
Take care that the head of the sick person is strongly affected by pain, and is not too cold; then apply the cautery while it's a little hotter than what we have mentioned above.
After you have performed the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, just as we previously described, perform one more cautery near where the horns meet; and use two levers in which suction cups are placed; and move your hand so that it does not touch the bone: this type of cautery causes much greater pain for the patient compared to others, and I will discuss this further. And it should be noted that the cauteries on the horns should be more precise than those used on half of the head, and this is its form:
Instruct the fire cautery to operate upon the malady, commanding it to let the hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow. When sudden pain occurs in part of the head and spreads until it reaches the eye, and the disease is cured by purging medicines, and various other treatments have been done as I've mentioned in the division of diseases, but none are benefiting: then upon this I perform cauteries according to two methods, that is, with medicine for ague and fire.
The medicine-based cauteries consist of taking a spoonful of vinegar, and using the peel and the inside of it for two parts of each shoulder. You then apply this mixture on the area where the pain resides in such a way that you can place the spoonful of vinegar under the skin; once it is placed there, make sure to tie and tighten it well and leave it like that for 12 hours; after which remove the vinegar bandage and let the wound heal for two days or three. Then apply a butter-soaked cloth until the soreness exits.
After the treatment of ointment as long as it is sound; and if you see fit to use some of the burning medicines that I have written or the first treatise on burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the iron as it is described here:
And call it "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a bell, having .i. point of curvature, and halfway through there is a small appearance; and place it over the painful area, hold your hand steady and gently move the iron for a bit, until half of the thickness of the skin is burned; then lift your hand so that the artery doesn't burn, when it's done, let out abundance of blood.
After this, put wool in place of the lint, and apply it over the affected area for three days; then replace with wet cotton soaked in butter, and continue to treat the area with ointment as long as it is sound; and if you want to cauterize this migraine using the cautery that is called "cultellare" (a type of hot iron), apply at the whole tip, but take care not to cover the artery in this migraine which isn't old.
Of a headache
When you treat headache as we have previously explained in the divisions of diseases, and if it doesn't improve, and you observe that the cauterization methods previously described in medicine don't work on him, then it's necessary for you to heat up the cauterizing tool known as 'cultellare' until it turns white; and so when there is a line half an inch long from the head, and your hand operates once, and you apply pressure ensuring not to cut the artery and stopping before reaching the bone; and beware of the jaw clenching when eating, and only let the tongue and throat be attentive during this phase, and avoid spasms that could harm the patient. And be cautious about blood leakage from the artery if it's cut or if the operation causes much fear in someone who is not trained and experienced, and who isn't aware of these procedures; and leave the work halfway done; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery has been cut, and show you its correct location in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizations don't help with the illness and the patient is suffering, apply the cauterization in the middle of the head as we have instructed, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you observe this, administer the cauterizer as described or from the chapter on extracting arteries, using a cauterizer that has two blades. And these cauterizers are better than others and more effective.
of the pain of the ears from cold
When cold causes pain in the ear, and treatments involving solvents and other remedies that we have discussed in this section are applied, and if the pain persists, then prepare this type of cautery called "points", as follows:
After applying points around the entire ear, or around both sides where the pain is felt, move away from the base of the ear soon after marking its position; place ten points around each ear. After this, treat the area until it has healed.
of the agony of the mouth
Pain that should be cured by a cautery does not include those that move from blood flow, as we have said in the sections on diseases; and no cautery should be done for symptoms that come from scarring and skin rashes.
When you treat this kind of pain that originates from water flow and head discharges, as well as gargling, and this does not work, then it is necessary for you to apply the cautery with three applications: one at the root of the ear, and another slightly outside the temple area, and the third in adjusting the two lips; place the cautery on the healthy part that opens, and cauterize that spot above the ear's root up to a bit under the head of the ear, and do the same for the temple as long as it is about one pace; let the cautery be placed there until half of the skull is burned; this is how you should use the cautery:
And for the appearance of cutaneous ailments as we described earlier, but it's a bit more subtle and requires that the knives be slightly thicker; after treating the area in the manner I've described previously, do so until it heals properly.
When dealing with a long-lasting apoplexy and you are treating it as we have said, and it doesn't help at all, and the patients do not have fever, then you should apply four cauteries: two on each of the two temple areas, one under the chin, and one where the head is located that is referred to as 'vassel' as we mentioned before. And perform the last cautery over the mouth of the stomach; treat it as we said beforehand.
From Liturgy
For this illness, you should give the patient large pills and mastic tablets that purify the brain; afterwards, wipe off the head of the patient completely, and then place the sinapical plaster under the back part of the head as written or described in how to apply plasters; and this is how to perform the cautery: do it just as I have said.
If it proceeds thusly, well done; and if not, let three fire cauteries be performed descending from the head to the collarbone, with an interval of one finger's width between each cautery. And treat them as others are treated, and if you see that they adjust, and the patient is suffering, let a third cautery be applied in the middle; and should it require further treatment, two more on the two horns, and treat until they are healed; and make of those cauteries which are called 'olive-shaped', as I have previously mentioned.
From the cooling of the head It is necessary to cleanse the head of years and what we have mentioned before; after soothing the head with the patient, then let a fire cautery be applied around the wound, on each horn, one behind and three on the spine beneath the neck; and if you need more treatment, and the area is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease continues, apply four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave it until the worst kind of heat is burned away, then lift your hand; after that treat until it is healed, and make of those cauteries which are called 'olive-shaped', as we have mentioned before.
From epilepsy
The epileptics should only use the cautery if they are phlegmatic, and first need to modify the head with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section where the patients have large issues and suffer from medicine.
And if the child can't endure it, make them gargle and chew, modifying the head often with good meats; after that you place the neck halfway, and I apply one fire according to what we have said before, and one fire on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is overactive and suffering, I apply fires as I told in those who are paralysed and have a softening of their body, on the spine at the back and neck, and let the olive fires be done according to the method that I said.
And if the illness is in a child, then you apply one subtle fire according to this manner:
When due to melancholy are the excesses or the moist substances corrupted and large, then the metal cautery of the fire cautery as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if due to the cause of melancholy is the excess declining into melancholy, and there is moisture in the body's organs, then it should drink something so that the brain becomes purified, according to what was explained previously in the division.
After you have removed the head of the illness; after this make one and a half pieces of well-made linen, like one circle, put it around the head; if there is any complaint from the organs, place them in their correct position, held firmly all around; then present the liniment, and apply it with butter of old beeswax; heat it over fire until you know whether it can be tolerated or not; after this pour out the circle containing the head, let it cool down; and do this for each organ once a week using different management, as long as there is no further complaint.
If you see someone being cauterized by making several points on the entire cautery device. This method of cautering moistens the brain significantly; and then place wet cotton, butter, and gelatine fat on it.
of the fear of the eyes When fear first comes to the eyes through the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and continue to instruct the patient to drink something that purifies the head, and protects it from all moisture, and make them sweat or take baths several times fasting.
After having him clean his head and apply cauterization to it, and have him undergo two cauterizations on the two temples once his fear has subsided completely in both eyes or when it subsides in one eye; then take care of every application around the skull for all veins and arteries that are within it, and perform each cauterization long according to the width of the temple; and guard against bleeding out, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it at a point with the same method as before.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions in the cautery, how to apply it properly; and whenever a cautery or cauterization is done, do not perform it over the two bones behind.
of the path of tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed, and are located on the veins, or beneath the arteries that are visible outside of the head; and it can be seen that they are cold excesses of phlegm. Therefore, do as I have said at the beginning of this work for the treatment of these things: 1) apply the cautery to the forehead, and 2) two cauterizations on each temple, and 3) two cauterizations or application over the bones below; and if more is needed, carefully apply the cautery up from the eyebrows with every small cautery.
of the path of tears within the eyes
When you apply the medicines according to what we have said in the division, and if they do not benefit, then give three raw chickens to the patient to drink. After he has consumed this, take his head, and perform a cautery or olive oil cautery; and make two cauteries using the ‘clavilis’ type of cautery on each of four nostrils, slightly over the hairline; and be cautious not to touch the artery when you perform this procedure. And this is the form of the cautery which is called 'clavilis':
When the paper of the oil has been softened due to disease and moisture, then apply this cautery which is called 'olive'. Here is its form:
And if you see that it takes two cauteries on each of the two nipples as long as they are present; and do not release your hand until only a third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have said.
of hairs that prick at their base None of the times has it been that the hair at their nipples turns into the armpits, and pricks them, then one performs cauteries according to two ways: namely with fire, or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and equal, then instruct the patient to be in a state of health; afterward, on the page describing the eyes, draw a figure that looks like a leaf of myrtle, and make it resemble the beginning of the sign with the hairs. Then place moistened cotton infused with egg whites and garlic paste on the eye, then heat up the cautery which has this form:
Afterwards cauterize on the figure that you have drawn gradually and many times so that it burns in the eye area, and signs of health are as follows: when you see the paper retracting, and hairs raised at the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave thus for three days. Then place moistened cotton dipped in butter until the scorching is removed; afterwards apply ointment until it is clean.
And when hair and paper become soft again, then reapply the cautery to that same area as you did initially. If hair has fallen out, then cauterize until the paper is raised back to its natural position and evenly distributed, without touching the eye.
In the treatment of heated cauterization, you should instruct the patient to let their hair grow until they are long and even, then create a shape from parchment like the leaf of myrtle; next take one part each of French soap and fresh oil, combine them well; then apply it quickly without allowing it to cool, after which place on the form that matches the leaf of myrtle and put onto paper with your eyes; if the illness lasts for only half an hour, then cut open halfway, and if both are also affected; place a piece of wet cotton inside each eye akin to an egg; let the patient's head stay in your healthy position and apply your fingers on the medicine, squeezing once every time the patient feels the irritation from the medicine, as they feel it just like fire. When you have done this for a long time, if you apply the medicine to your finger. And when the irritation has passed, if you lift your finger from it, and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted as if it had been lifted by constraint of fire or incision; and if this is so, then it is well. If not, reapply the medicine to your finger until your actions are even, and your eyes are adjusted. Then put wet cotton in butter until the scorched area is covered, afterwards clean the finger of the ointment known as 'dyafenis' and another, until it is cured; then apply this treatment when you see fit.
And if you need to protect yourself well in your work by great care so that the medicine doesn't mix with those elements. And if the paper becomes moist after, and the hair pricks at the eye, then renew the medicine on that part which has been softened by the proper clean paper; just like you did before; wash it until it is healed; this is the form of the leaf of mirtle:
And know that the eyes of humans vary greatly in size and smallness, and according to this apply your restraints; and do not let the right way be answered by him who studies this craft.
Regarding the treatment of a fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the sections of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary for you to perform cauterization according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your proper care; cut the hair on their head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or remove their head; afterwards, apply damp cotton inside an egg or garlic juice to the eye; afterwards, heat the cauterizing instrument which is prepared: and be next to the head as if of a feather from a rooster's wing, place the cauterizer there; if you see that it points from one feather edge to another, and if you see that it is also like a tent; but all the same, it must stay in place for the sake of your work.
After pressing the fistula if it has been opened, and treat the putrefaction, and dry it off; and if it is sealed, do the work, and remove from under the eyelid; afterwards place something hot on the cauterizer in a shape form, hold your hand at the cauterizing instrument near the part behind the ear above the eye, so that your hands do not go astray; and put the cauterizer into the grease of the oil, and let it be corrupted.
If you come to the start of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well. If not, begin again with the cautery one more time, and if needed, do so again, leaving it for three days; afterwards apply moist cotton in butter, and the cure of the drying ointment until it is healthy. And when forty days have passed without it being healthy, place a corrosive water medicine until the bone is exposed; and follow according to what would be prescribed in his chapter.
And there is a way of applying a cautery to a fistula that none of the old ones mentioned. Understand by fistula, and do as follows; afterwards put inside the opening one subtle camel's hair as it is described here: And it should be the size of about three parts of lead; and hold your hand or camel firmly, and do not let the patient move, so that the melted lead does not drip into their eye; and when you place lead on the eye, use wet cotton dipped in egg whites or vinegar: the lead serves to treat the fistula, and it heals miraculously with great health.
And if the fistula is cured through the cautery we have described, that is good. If not, it should administer pertus to the child, and bring back the fistula to the body according to what should be done in its own proper place.
Of cuts in lips Many times, there occur cuts in the lips which are called "whiskers", and similarly on the lips of children.
When you treat these cuts as we have instructed with divisions, and if the treatment does not benefit, then use .i. small surgical tool according to this form:
And place them quickly into those wounds until they grow just a bit; after that, cleanse the wound of pus while it is still healthy.
from the abscess of the throat
When an abscess arises in the root of the throat or in the lymph nodes, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotten and swelled up and become diseased and turned into a fistula; and you treat it as we have instructed in sections, and it does not improve: then it is necessary for you to have one cauterizing instrument according to the size of the fistula; afterwards remove the pus or foulness from the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron reaches the bottom of it, and even beyond. And do this once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, while it is still healthy; and if it can be treated like this, it's good; and if not, you should expose the wound and remove the decayed bone, according to what you find in your chapter.
movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and this does not work, then place the head of the patient in their health; afterwards heat up the cautery as will be done later in this manner that you put a twig on the tooth; and place inside the cautery a small flame, and hold your hand so that the disease feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after lift your hand and continue the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and apply it for an hour and then remove it.
And in this way the tooth which was moving is now fixed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the moisture has been eradicated and dried.
from the pain of teeth
When tooth pain comes due to coldness, or there is coldness or inflammation, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it must use the method of cautery according to two ways: and the butter cautery and the fire cautery.
Butter cautery if it is so that you take butter from a cow, and the tip in a spoon made of iron or copper; after taking cotton and wrap on the point of a tent, and moisten with the heated butter, then place it over the painful tooth quickly and hold until it has cooled; and do this often until its strength reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see wet wool and cotton in the cold butter, then put it over the painful tooth again, and heat one iron for as long as the fire goes into the tooth pain.
Combined fire cautery if it is such that you take a piece of iron or copper, and make it large enough so the flame does not reach into the wound; after heating the cautery, from which its shape will come later, place it over the tooth and hold your hand until the heat of the cautery has cooled down; do this often, because the pain will be gone that day or the next. And it is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter in anticipation of this cautery, and then immediately cool off; this is the form of the cautery:
When the tubercles are of blood and cold moisture, and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then you should use a cautery as described below. And create two openings for the fumes to escape from the other side; and place the hot cautery over the abscess once or twice, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; and cover with moistened cotton soaked in butter until the pus is gone; afterwards cure with ointments and bandages until it heals.
When the moisture invades the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the body be cleansed with diuretic medicines first. Then you should make a cautery at the root of the throat, and watch out not to come all the way up to the throat, but just a little bit. After that, do another cautery at the junction of the neck to the base of the spine, and it is this type of cautery that we have named "clavile" which you will see in front of us; then cure accordingly until it heals.
To the cautery of fire, command the sick person to let their hair grow long and evenly; and if they prick at their base when young, hold the eyes still so they do not move until they grow. For all illnesses related to the womb are due to cold moist conditions, and the patients do not have fever or dryness, they're an old illness. In such cases, apply two cauterizations on their veins; and one other cauterization in the genital region between the two breasts; and let the cauterizations known as "clavile" be performed according to the form described previously.
And if you see fit, apply the cauterization using the entire "poins" that is known by its form in the malady of the ears; and let there be points up to thirty or beyond that point. After this treatment for the area as described previously, follow the cure according to what was stated before, and then perform the cauterizations at three inches following this pattern:
And because of this, the cautery is lighter, for you make it three to copy.
Regarding the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After that, surround the wound on its back and sides; afterwards, lift out the kidney inside the loins with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two prongs as described here:
And cauterize the knee until it perceives up to bone, and let the shape of the cauterization come together with three cauterizations; and this is done with a cauterizing instrument that has three prongs, for it makes three marks in cauterization, and they follow the intricacy of a tent, and this is the shape of the cauterization that has three prongs:
And each time it is set on this one nerve because there are seven cauterizations here.
After applying the hot iron, press it with a string; afterwards let the patient rest, and do not let the limbs stay in place for too long until they are properly comfortable.
And if it is reset above, where very little happens, then do the cautery on the thick part of the bone, or with few cauteries when pressing them. For the joint has been closed, and the moisture has been drained and healed the patient.
of the weeping cautery
The old ones said that one should make weeping cauteries from the roots of aristological plant, and here's how: take a long root of aristological plant, the longest you can find, ensure it is dry, and also as thick and as long as your thumb; and soak it in oil, then place it on fire, and cauterize one cautery between the arm pit and the neck, and two smaller ones somewhat downwards on the part under the beard; and two more cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, slightly behind; and one around the navel, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and four more along both sides of the hip below the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not squeeze your hand, just apply it as you would smell it.
And it's told by some old ones that no one uses a fire cautery to shave like twice, and they heat it up and put it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess; then when the pain goes away, just as we have mentioned about the pain in the abscess of the liver. But in this chapter there's fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
Of mice
When you treat the illness of mice in those who we have discussed regarding the divisions of treatment, and it doesn't benefit, then they try three methods of cautery that are all good.
There is a method like this that you do: make three or four cauteries, or in line according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire-cautery as we have said before; and don't rush your hand all over the cautery, and let the patient be somewhat behind their back;
And another method for cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two ears, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the handle that's placed at the mouse, or where the pain comes from the left side of the body, and let your elevations be according to the handle, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries should be according to the width of the body.
After burning the two flaming prongs until the handles are pierced from the other side, then remove the cautery and thus there will be four. And if you see fit, cauterize the whole cautery with three ears. After treatment when it has expelled pus for a long time, this is equivalent to using another method of treatment as was previously mentioned.
Of cautery by fire command the sick man to let the hairs grow long and evenly; and if they sting at their base, hold the eyes firmly so they do not move until they grow.
Cautery is not valid for ydropique except by the method called "asclytes". When you cure according to the methods we have discussed in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you give four cauterizations inside the mouth, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place on the anus; and make sure the cauterizations are very close to the heart's kidney.
After allowing the cauterization to remain open for a long time due to pus formation, and do not cease the treatment on the disease after the cauterization; and healing would hasten, and both the two intentions will come together with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is that which we have shown before; and the one for the back is olibanaceous, according to what was set out previously.
of the swelling of joints When the joints are swollen in someone who is ydropic and filled with yellow bile, it is necessary to apply the cautery on the back of the hand between the thumb and the little finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not go too deep inside, otherwise it would remove the yellow bile and make the application according to this form:
After this, make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the cuticle; and make the cauterization along the length, one in front of the knee and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauterizations for a long time without curing them until the bile comes out; afterwards do the other treatments as we have said.
Of the cautery
Quantities of stomach discomfort come from coldness and moisture, as long as the retaining and digesting powers in the stomach and intestines are congested and cannot be treated by regular remedies; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong green symptoms, so do this. Firstly, apply a large stomach cautery according to what he has mentioned previously or stomach cautery, under the heart. And secondly, place four internal stomach warmers throughout your body under each .i. delicate collar bone, and .ij. cauterizations on your hips.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, do this: apply a cautery on the elbow, and one on each knee, and two small cauterizations on the stomach near the heart, for the treatment is beneficial when there's good help.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are located or multiple, being old and filled with large cold moist putrefied fluids, they are treated as we have said in divisions; if it does not help, do make cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, that is right below the navel point little by little in a triangular pattern, and one cauterization right under the buttocks. Two doses;
And if you think that the stomach is cooled down and the meat isn't cooked, and one sees it inflating the faeces, then on the faeces you do a large cauterization on the stomach, as was mentioned earlier, and another one on the liver, and another one under the belly button to cover all the way up to the clavicle; and leave the cauterization for as long as necessary. After curing it until it is healed.
Of the pustule which is called "Thelul"
When you are working with the shoulder bone, if it seems to be one and a half inches in size, heat up the cautery that looks like two blades, then place it completely heated on the coped shoulder; keep your hand with the cautery until it reaches the beginning of the vein from which blood flows. Do this once or twice, and if there are many shoulder bones, cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatment for beneficial ointments is done when they are healthy. And if you cauterize with a large-sized cautery, it will provide more assistance.
from a poorly treated wound
When the patient is unable to endure a cut or opening, as we will detail in its section, if such sickness occurs that cannot be healed except by cautery.
When a certain opening does not come about and is aged with putrefaction and corrupted moisture, if you need to try the entire process once carefully, be sure that you know precisely how much the attempt has progressed. Heat up the cautery to resemble a blade of .i., then place it in the opening according to the quantity that this attempt has entered into, and continue using the cautery until the infected, putrefied parts are charred completely, once, or twice, or three times, depending on your need; be cautious not to burn the nerves and the major veins. If the opening went into the bladder's body and towards the intestine, be aware of these points, and do this only in a place where it will not harm. After healing the place until it is healthy, and when the pus has been absorbed over a long period, then you can ascertain that the process was complete; and if the materials have not been absorbed, know that there's still pus inside, and the bone has become corroded at the bottom; thus as with one of these we will speak about in its place.
Regarding kidney illness When abdominal pain stems from the kidneys and accompanied by large wind movements, it affects women in particular cases, thus you should apply a cautery to both sides of the kidneys and to the arm where we previously mentioned; and if we cauterize it at the center, we would perform three cauterizations in line, which will provide more assistance.
From the bladder When the bladder is diseased and weak from heat and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then one should apply a cautery to the lower part of the bladder, where hair begins on the penis, and one each on the right and left side, and each cautery should be as long as your finger. And you do one application of a cautery behind the back, or two if needed; and let the cautery resemble a small spoon in shape as previously described.
From the maris (maris is likely misspelled for "mânes" which means souls) When the manes are cold and moist, and do not allow for conception, and the flowers become corrupted and their ends delay; and when they come forth, one can feel great pain: thus it is fitting that you apply three cauterizations inside the womb, as we have instructed for the bladder or fire cautery, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauterizations resemble a small spoon, as we have described.
From the hip
When the viscous fluids descend in the cavity of the hip, and due to this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints can be found from their origin, so you should cauterize the hair on the cavity of the hip with about one fire cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the joint inside the cavity as it turns, so that the cavity is within the circle; and have your cauteries like those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if you don't have those fire cauteries handy, make three olive-sized large fire cauteries, and ensure that all the points of these are as well-made as the rest. And treat it until there is no pain.
Regarding hip pain When pain comes to the hip joint, and this is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated as we have described in the division, but the cure is ineffective, and the illness is old: then it is necessary that you cleanse the patient of large fluids using bad-smelling pills, or other similar good pills.
After performing the cauterization; and the way of cauterization is according to two methods: this means mixing hot medicines, and cauterizing with fire. The fire cauterizer can be done in several ways, among which one method is: you should cauterize at the hip joint with three triangular cauterizations following this form, and each has a good depth and size, and there's space the size of a coin between each cauterization, and these are olive cauterizations; no cauterization is done in the middle above the main part of the hip joint, because there are four like this:
And if you see that you need to cauterize at the circular cauterizer as we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip joint; but do it in such a way that the circles contain all the hip joint, and all the parts of the blood are burned.
And this is the way to treat sciatica, when pain stays in the hip, and doesn't reach up to the thigh or leg. And if it reaches up to the thigh and leg, then we make two cauterizations there where the pain stays, and one above the ankle on the third day, at the left part a little bit; and have the cauterizations done with surgical knives, and burn away any thickened flesh from the wound; and should the patient feel that the pain extends up to about four inches down or near it, then cauterize where they sense the pain three points or four at the cauterization known as 'points'.
And if the job requires more; and should it be that the pain is from above the knee towards the thigh, then make cauterization with a surgical knife or circular cautery. And ensure you take great care in all your cauterizations not to leave any part of the process undone, burning nerves and large arteries as well while ensuring no unnecessary harm and contraction are caused to the patient.
And I myself have seen several who had made a cauterization up to the ankle bone, and left them so that the leg was swollen all the way down, and also the joints, causing them to become inflamed and rotten. After this stomach treatment, they died.
And if the pains are in two parts together, apply cautery to both, according to this manner. // And as for the physician's advice on the fire cautery of the hip, which is described here, do as follows: make one such iron rod and have it at the top also as thick as a young hare's foot or perhaps slightly smaller, and place them in between with one iron rod placed among the other right up to the distance of the space of a nut; and let there be the iron rods opposite both parts, and they should resemble knots, and have two iron handles well made; and this is the form:
And heat it until it becomes completely red and steam starts to rise, then place the heated iron on the spot of the hip ailment, and twist it over the healthy side. And apply the cauterization once with one iron rod and leave for three days; and after that, apply a dressing of butter, and keep the wound open for as long as possible; finish the ointment treatment until it becomes clean.
Albucasim says that we use very little of this cautery for the fear of his judgment, and we see few who use it; however, such is a good cautery which one can endure, and leave where it settles.
Of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or impact, or too much evacuation, or through exposure to cold matter, none of these conditions warrant cauterization, for it is akin to that which arises from an infusion of cold matter.
After ensuring that the patient's body is free of foul pills or other similar symptoms, one should apply treatments to the back, at the site where the pain resides, three lines marked with a cross, and in each line up to five cauterizations depending on how much and how intensely the body can endure; perform the cauterization using the cauterization method known as "points"; and if you see fit, do three or four cauterizations halfway between the cauterization for the clavicle according to this form:
This illness often affects small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they seem pale when they stand up, and fear; you find it in the last spinal cord at the back and we see the appearance coming on other spinal cords.
When you see this and observe its treatment,
So that the cautery touches each part of the spine equally. And if you observe this, apply the hot cautery to the spine in two or three lines,
of the pain in joints
When joint pain is due to moisture that spreads throughout the body, and when pain comes in the foot, they call it "gout" properly, and when it's caused by cold and cannot be cured with medicine, it should be treated using cauteries in this manner: make a fire cautery inside the joint of the foot, and let the cautery use olive oil according to this form:
And if there is need that you grasp on the face of the foot, make him undergo cautery across all the cautery saying 'point'. And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make him undergo cautery on each knee. Three or four in every part, across all the olive oil cautery; and if you need more, do so accordingly, but don't remove your hand until the heat is fully gone from the wound.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, he should be given the cautery as we have mentioned in this chapter. And if the pains are at the hands, then make points between the fingers four lines deep; and if there is no pain left on the back, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and take good care of him and administer medicines. For if you give him good care and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
Regarding the rupture of the uterus
When rupture comes about in the lungs, and the bowels descend to the kidneys, this is newly happening. It's necessary that when you look at them being cured, they don't eat anything during that day; and they should use things that lighten the stomach, so that the wind descends from their belly. After have them sit up on their back between your hands, then command him to cut his arm until the intestines are repaired, and bring it back with your fingers, and feel for under the rupture upon the bone of the wrist, and do all at a sign as if it were half a circle above the chest; then heat the cautery that is described here:
Until it is white and gives off fumes. Then bring the bowels back to their place; and let the attendants cut his hand so they do not turn around; and work well on the thighs with the patient, and put a cushion under each thigh and another under his buttocks which touch your hands; then place the cautery at the mark all over your hand, and hold one steady and the other straight until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, keep repeating this until you reach the bone; and watch carefully that the intestines do not slip when you make the heat; that you don't burn them; and that because of this the patient does not suffer, or any other harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is for nothing. It's necessary that the children's cauteries be subtle according to their size and the large people's also be as large according to their measure; after three days treat his arm with butter under the cautery until the scab is removed; afterwards treat other ointments until it heals properly, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound is well healed; and it must be that his bedridden times are long enough so that the intestines do not slip when he wishes to go to chambers.
And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, he should apply a well-made bandage and keep it on for forty more days; with good rest, he must work moderately and refrain from excessive drinking and eating, as well as loud shouting; once this instruction is followed, they are completely cured. And I will later explain the treatment of cutting in my chapter. of the rupture of the abdomen
When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, if you notice that they no longer grow, then apply the fire cautery according to their quantity, taking one-third of the thumb; after that, treat it as we have instructed. And none of the old ones said that one should cauterize with the three-cornered firebrand in this shape:
The first sign is the location of entry and make a line across the width above the wound, and another below, and guide your hand with all the fire cautery. But the first cauterizations are lighter and wetter.
from ancient pain in no limb When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being hit, and if this pain lasts long, and medicine does not cure it, then it should be cauterized with a cautery called "point", and the applications of the cauteries must correspond to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its function and its location in relation to twists and pain. If the first application is effective, that's good; if not, apply another one after this, for such things usually cause it to move near the body part they are closest to, so you should perform the cauterizations until the patient feels relief.
In mixture
The mixtures are treated with a cautery on multiple occasions and also the disease that arises from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. If you see them being cauterized, take care if the disease is in the beginning stage and when it is cured according to what we have said in the division section, not letting it reoccur or persist, and if there are doubts that corruption spreads throughout the diseased part then do this: apply four times with the cautery. The first one begins at the head and goes towards the nose after nine steps; and another one is made from the head to the end of the hairline; and two others on the two horns, and one behind on the neck; and keep your hand so that the cautery reaches up to the bone, until the scabs come out entirely allowing for the fumes of the thick humors to escape; and cauterize it on the mouse area as is done before.
And if the mixture is everywhere spread out and it's clearly apparent, then it's necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries that we've mentioned on the head and one cautery in the middle of the nose, and two cauteries on the spine from the neck to the back, and six on the spine from the shoulder blades down, and one large on the knee and another slightly smaller, and two on each shoulder blade; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful not to burn any nerves that are under the back part of the heel, do not burn them. And never cauterize near the bone in the elbow, and another one near the bone of the stomach, and one near the liver.
And know that the more I use the cautery, the more help it provides, and it benefits them; and know that patients do not feel pain during cautery as healthy people do, for their bodies are already completely corrupted. And ensure that the cautery sizes are large or small according to limbs and joints, just like you will find in descriptions of metalwork techniques. After treatment, dust the area several times with honey and other remedies until it heals.
Of inflation
When swelling appears in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but does not heal, then you should make a cautery on the limb according to its size; and make sure that the cautery enters only slightly into the inner flesh of the wound. Then treat it with poultices until it heals. And one should apply the cautery both above and below the wrist and ankle, along the exit point of the nerves that paralyze the limb, and in this way remove the swelling; and yet no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of moving body nerves.
Of cauteries by fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their base, hold the eyes still so they do not move until they grow.
When the disease called "albaras" has worsened, and medical remedies are of no use, then use a small cautery to cauterize, according to the size of the lesion, until the pus is removed and its color changes; then cleanse with flour mixed with lentils, rose oil, and plantain leaves, as well as blood from colognes and almond birds, each in their part. Mix all together, wrap it with a cloth, apply it to the affected area until it heals.
The treatment of gangrene by cautery
When the ulcer starts to appear at the beginning, and you see it stopping, if you stop it by applying the cautery, do so around a circle, all around the edge of the ulcer. And sometimes they advise that you apply the cautery in the middle of the ulcer; and oftentimes this does not seem right to me because I fear it might cause it to be ulcerated and corrupted, something I've seen happen before. A more straightforward approach is to apply the cautery around it, using the circle-shaped cautery we spoke of earlier.
Of the swelling that cannot die.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it doesn't die off or because of the excess it causes or due to the old age of the illness when it is decrepit (that is, too old), and there's little blood left in the body, or due to its strength; and you see that it needs to die faster: then apply small cauteries around in several places; leave it like this. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierced through with all of the cautery tool, if you heat up this form of the cautery that is described:
And place your hand in the midst of this illness called "adubelati" as long as the cautery has pierced the root, and make the cautery such that the patient feels it being burned outwards in such a manner that the course of infection is alleviated. After treatment until it is completely healed.
The cure by fire using a iron
Another method for disease involves what is called 'corrosion', and this is nothing more than limb damage, because it affects the limbs just like one might burn dry wood. If you observe this disease on the body that can withstand a combined cautery of fire, then make small and large clavicular cauterizations according to where the disease resides; after applying cauterization from all sides until you remove all corruption, leaving nothing behind - ensure everything corrupt is extracted. And then leave it for three days. Apply a burn with oil on the cauterized areas until any scabbing from the heat has been healed and all corruption is gone. After this ointment cure of generating flesh. And if after three days healthy tissue hasn't started to grow, that's good; but if not, restart the fire cautery on what remains of the corrupted area. This damage can sometimes be treated with medicine in place of a fire cautery; however, fire cautery is more effective aid and I have previously discussed this medicine cure in the division: take it when you need to do so.
From stones that come into joints
Many times, a disease occurs in bones that originates from within which is called 'cyst' according to our understanding, and this is a large, solid lump that hurts the bone. The cauterization for this disease can be done in two ways: fire cautery and hot water cautery.
And if they have been moved from beneath the body, and often occur in hands and limbs, it is necessary that you bring them the cautery of hot water; and thus: take one of an arane's hair or iron, or a feather of goose, and place them on the nail and the althelul, meaning for warts; and place the stick so that it touches all around, then put a bit of hot water, hold your hand well, press your hand back in such a way that the edge of the stick burns to the base of the nail, and then find the deep passage of hot water down to the base; and let the patient endure the hot water burn for a little while an hour; then leave them like this, and it will be uprooted from all its roots. Do this one after another until you are done with those on your body, then treat any swellings that generate flesh.
the treatment for shaking
When someone shakes from cold or nerves, or from intermittent fever or otherwise, it is necessary that you apply three or four hot water cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one near the elbow, and one under the stomach with an olive oil cautery. If this continues to cause shaking, then hasten their recovery from the cold illness.
of the pus-filled sores
Anytime they become visible through the skin or pus-filled sores that come from large putrid matters, if they originate from thick, rotten materials. When they become visible at first, it is necessary to cauterize each head of the pustule: a subtle iron cautery from the wood of myrtle, where its tip is taken in fire, or from the long root of aristolochia, or on the lenticular cautery. And none of them should be cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow pus further ahead, but the excess causing them is dispelled, and they become healthy; yet it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery has been tied Many times there have been great flows of blood from the artery that has been tied at the wound, or during an incision on an abscess, or during the cauterization of a limb, and similar incidents; it is very distressing to smell this.
And nonetheless, when this happens to any part of the body, if you rush to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, hold it there until the skin becomes calm under your finger and no more drop flows; then heat several olive oil cauteries, both large and small, until they are all red. Then take one (or according to the size), larger or smaller depending on the wound and where the artery is located, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, keep the cautery there until the skin becomes cool again.
And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are heated, take quickly one more of the cauteries that are hot.
And do not stop doing this one after another until the skin becomes cool; and watch that you don't burn the nerve underneath it, and that no harm comes to the patient; and know that when the skin is cut off from the artery, one can hardly properly cool it themselves when the artery is large, unless it's through one of the four methods we have mentioned: by cautery, or extraction if it wasn't treated yet, or with strong string application, or by applying medicine that has the power to cool blood; and tie and hold in place for future use.
Who will administer treatment by tightly binding with cloths or by placing burning objects thereupon, or other similar things, if it doesn't benefit then do not proceed.
And if this happens to anyone and they have no sight or medicine at hand, if they must apply their index finger onto the wound of the vein as we said earlier, stretch it well so that it remains stuck under the wound and under the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often until it is very cold. And create gaps in front of those who need cautery and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases where it is necessary to apply a fire cautery or medicine that is heated, and we discussed their uses, causes, instruments, and forms. We ended that chapter on the topic of burns until the skin, and I will continue with this chapter using the same approach for those who find them easier to understand and need them.
And as I begin this, it is fitting for you, dear apprentice, to understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first use of the cautery, and for this reason greater caution should be taken.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often blood evacuation when opening veins, and incisions on abscesses, and treatments for wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar operations; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to undertake folly. For many ways of people come in treatments. Some from those who are so afflicted by their disease that they die lightly due to the confusion they find with their illness, and the heaviness of their malice; and from these one should have fear. And from these I give you the meaning and say: "Wait, I am a doctor"; and the disease is stubborn. It's not right for you to agree with those who come to your door in this manner, but place more respect towards your honor than your greed, don't rashly open to them but wisely listen to those about whom you are certain, and from whom you can receive knowledge; use prediction and suggestion in the treatment of your patients' illnesses that lead to health, and this will help you gain a good reputation, glory, and lasting memory.
Dear child, Our Lords give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to breathe the holy inspiration of their hand, Amen.
Or let me have ordered this chapter in devising by chapters, according to which is before or the chapter of cauterizations, that I have devised from the head until the foot, so you will find it more easily when you need it.
The head full of water
Know that this disease comes about very often in infants at birth, and when the mother presses too hard on the baby's head; and sometimes it happens due to no other reason than we don't know.
And I never see this disease outside of infants, and among all those that I have seen their death hastened; and for this reason it seems to me worth abandoning the practice of such treatments.
And I saw one child of this, where the shoulder was full of water, and their head swelled each day until it could no longer be supported; and because of so much moisture he died, and this moisture is assembled around the bone under the elbow, between the chest and the bone; and the treatments are such that if the moisture is within the chest and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you make a large cut across the head; and let it be as long as two hands, as long as the moisture runs; and see this form of spasm:
When moisture accumulates more, and if the abscess is bigger, make two incisions in a manner like a cross, according to this form:
And if moisture is under the bone, and you see the corners of the forehead opening on each side, and a sharp pain occurs when you press it from your hand internally, and this does not respond: then it must be that you cut through the center of the forehead with three cuts according to this manner:
And after making the incision, extract all moisture outside. After treating the cuts with bandages and powders, put wine and oil and leave like this until the fifth day; then remove it, treat the wound by changing dressings and ointments, and allow the head to rest equally, and afterwards give the patient dry meat from the inner moist area until the member is strengthened and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you look at where the aperture of the abscess opens, and the assembly of the water; for it never stands in front; nor behind; nor to the right; and never to the left.
So cut the place where the abscess opens and the water filling it, make a cut according to your ability and watch that you do not cut the artery; look for a source of blood, so that the patient dies from the flow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
regarding remedies
When it comes to any illness that is called "catarrh" either around the eyes or at the bottom of the nose, and this sickness is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort treatment involves cauterization using what one would cut off their two main arteries.
It is necessary then, as you see fit, that the patient bend their head; after this, rub the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries are visible, then pull out the patient's throat to the length of one hand. Then observe where the vein lies and check both ears after them, noting if they have returned; then mark each ear, then cut both with a sharp knife across two parts until the size matches up to the bone, and this should be done by the width of the head.
And if you see this, hold the knife over the artery and cut above it, making the incision also as wide as two inches through.
And when the vein is cut, make sure to pull the string continuously upwards from there.
And if the artery does not open with feeling, it is necessary that you measure the size of the space to be about three inches, then gently press and apply until reaching the bone; and what should be done regarding blood to remove is about six cubic centimeters, and by chance a little more or less depending on how well the patient can bear it, and the fullness of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains just above the bone point of syphilis, if there is no trace of abscesses left after incision, then press the wound and tie it, and apply ointment until it heals.
Of grains
When the old age comes along and severe colds occur, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and elsewhere, as well as similar conditions. Medicine is treated through the methods of medicinal cures, but none of these help it much. Then we extract the veins in the temples and cauterize them, just like what we have recounted.
And the method for their extraction is that one should lead the patient's hair from the temples to where the artery opens on them, as it opens well by its pulsation and responds only in those whose heads are overly cold; and if it does respond, hold the neck of the patient with some cloths, then rub the head with a rough cloth, and raise the head under hot water until the artery clearly appears; then take out the cautery tool that has this form:
Then lightly scrape the skin until you see the artery; then guide it upward with forceps and remove all tissues from each section very well; and if the artery is thin, twist it at the tip of the hook. Then cut that part according to the number of both bones. For if it is not cut properly, it will cause bleeding everywhere.
And drain out the blood until the seventh day; and if the artery is large, it's necessary that you tie it with two strands of a sturdy silk thread, so that putrefaction doesn't occur before the healing of the wound, or during bleeding; then cut away any excess material between the two threads at this very moment. And when you see fit, apply cautery from the surgical knife until the bone, as long as the bones are cut. This is the main task, should the patient not have fever and their complexion be warm.
For the cauterizers are help to finish the moisture: because with them it is of greater help against moisture. It is necessary for the extraction of arteries that you fill the whole with old cotton and place well-made tents above it; and when they are released, if you do a cure with dry medicines that generate pus and tents until it becomes clear; and if there's no artery bleeding then do as you work, quickly apply heat from the cauterizer, or use the whole of vitriol and squeeze it in your hand so that the blood becomes congealed; and if you don't have this on hand, fill the hand with alcohol until the blood is frozen, and dip the hand in cold water until the bleeding stops, then hold it as needed; and what is softer and more fluid during the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein from this cauterized trenching at .ij. parts, but the trenching should be well spaced to keep heat for a longer time. For when the instruments are too tense, they retain less of their heat. And it should have between the two knives half an inch, and then when you have decided to insert both of them, and you place the heated iron until it reaches the bone, and cut along two lines; and keep them far apart as this cautery does not fully adhere everywhere; and this is the form of the cautery:
Of tears
When the tears from the eyes are draining through the veins that are under the skin of the head and face, and no benefit comes from medicine being applied there, you'll see the skin turn red, and feel or notice heat on the forehead as if it were pulsating; and at such places they become damp and wet so that paper hairs fall off, and the papers get heated, and are burnt by the heat of the tears, in which case this treatment is needed.
And they called him the old "bruise healer", and you should instruct this patient with this sickness to let their hairs grow on or above their forehead, then I will make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to its length; and have one of the cuts in the same way as two halves all along the forehead downwards until it reaches half, and the other two cuts at each side near the eyes, and be careful not to cut into the arteries that are above the eyes; and keep your hand away from joining the two halves together again, and each wound should have the width of three fingers through their join.
From the cut that is behind the temple until the second cut; and remove all the flesh in between the two cuts up to the part on the bone, then continue with another cut from the middle cut until the other second one, and then remove this spit.
if you use the tool called "cultellaire" in the first opening, and it is very sharp on one side, and blunt on the other, not sharp, and this shape: And place the cutting edge of the tool towards the lung's air passage at the heart, and the soft end towards the bone, and push the tool until it touches halfway through the wall. And remove all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to where the opening occurs at the heart, and then proceed in the middle slit until you reach the other opening; and drain equal amounts of blood, expressing the heart for the taken blood; then place a layer of old cotton in each slit, and cover with moist cloths soaked in wine and oil and basil, making sure no pus is present; and on the third day remove the stitches, and apply large quantities of water-based treatment, then continue treating with ointment made from basil and olive oil, and other treatments for wounds until healed.
from the inflammation
When it comes to sudden fever and habituated coughing, and you see the eyes red and small, and weakening of vision, and burned paper; and hair falls out, and one sweats profusely, and the body aches with malaria-like pains, and the patient shivers; then know through these incidents that those matters and this fever come from many veins, and the treatment given, if it is such.
And you instruct the patient about their forehead, then make a large incision through the forehead, and another wide one. Start from the left temple incision to the right temple, and ensure the cut goes down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the brain nerves that move during eating. When the bone is exposed, flush all the blood with an sponge, then clean between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton and linen fabric; afterwards, cover it with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, taking care not to leave any remnants. Once the bone is out, you should rub it until new flesh begins to grow, then treat it with things that promote growth and healing.
In this manner: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colofoin, and make a poultice with them; then administer it to these wounds to promote the growth of flesh everywhere.
From the burning of ears
All that chokes in the ears is one of four things: grains, or animal, or mine stone or similar thing like iron; or seed, like beans, peas; or flowing substance like water and oil and similar things.
When it chokes in the ear or with any other matter that doesn't fit into the ear or doesn't grow inside the ear, put the ear under the sun. If you see a stone, if you distill a drop of violet oil or pine resin oil, then proceed to extraction; and make them sneeze with consideration, and plug the nostrils when sneezing comes, and insert pieces of cloth or wool into the ear; and hold the ear above. Often this cure brings relief; and if it doesn't bring relief, then proceed to extraction with subtle hooks, as shown here:
If it jumps out with the hooks, that's good; if not, proceed with extraction using a thin and delicate tool of small curvature; and if it doesn't jump out this way, make an araneae stick and hold the tip of the stick or the edge of the ear very firmly, plug the wax hole inside the stick as tightly as possible so that nothing can enter with the stick; then pull forcefully, for often this brings relief as we have said; and if it doesn't bring relief in such a way, take out the wax and hold any tool ready to do this work, put a little cotton in there; then press the wax or whatever is there onto the stone, and pull with force. And if she cannot heal from all these things that we have said, hurry to cut the ear in such a way that pus and phlegm escape, along with spasms; and the method of cutting is as follows: first you make an incision near the auricular muscle, draining blood according to its capacity. Then place the ear between your hands and turn the ear upwards, making a small cut at the base of the ear in the fatty part hanging down; let the cut be like a crescent moon until you reach the bone, then extract the bone with force and suck it quickly into your mouth; perform the cure while it's still clean. And if they are grains and it inflates, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, perform this type of puncturing in such a way:
And perform an incision on that grain. But do not perform this when you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have done many pieces; then remove them with fine tweezers and suck out the pus, as we said, so that the extractions become easier.
In the case of weeping from the ear, then it must be that the patient uses expectoration of cold fluids first, and broadly fill the ear with old cotton. And remain lying on the same or another side where the cold is. If it leaps out through this, it's good. If not, take several stones according to their length along your desire and gently, then heat them a bit over fire; and place one or a few of these stones in his ear, and leap forward from one foot on the other, and strike with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop this action stone by stone until all cold comes out completely, and so it leaps out completely; and if you see fit, take one, and insert a piece of the head into the ear, and the other head with fire until the most sensitive piece of the twig becomes charred; then redo another row of twigs until all cold is released, as we have spoken about in stones.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is small like a flea and similar thing, treat it as we have said in division; but if there's something noticeable that one can feel, then perform the extraction with forceps; this is the lighter thing to remove in the ear.
In the extraction of the twisted worms in the ears, if you're treating it as we have said in division and about distillation therapies, and if the treatment doesn't benefit, then you should examine the ear to the sun: if there is no worm visible, then treat with small forceps; and if nothing's visible, take the shape of this:
And make it tight below and loose above. And place the finest part of the curette in the ear according to the amount of suffering from the illness, then proceed to fully apply the paste; do this repeatedly until all the pus has come out. If they do not leave by themselves, numb the area inside the ear with cotton as I have said about the stone; and if they do not protrude forcefully as we have said, administer distillations that the old people have proven effective in worm removal, and you will find them or treatments for distillations; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, which is formed just like you see:
And use either silver or arsenic in a small tube below for distillation and to press within the distillation with one well-made tool of arsenic suitable for this task. And place a piece of cotton wrapped around the end extension near the raseur. Then pour your oil or juice into the tube, and observe what you see from your medicines within the wick, and have the wick in the ear; then fill the raseur completely with all the cotton, press your hand gently until the oil is fully distilled or until it has reached the ear canal; and listen to the symptoms within, and ensure that one portion of distillation is heated over fire just like you do when distilling it into the ear; and make sure it's not too cold because the medicine would not be as effective.
Regarding ear piercing or perforation.
No child is born without any missing parts in their ears; and this same thing happens to people when there's injury or birth in the ear, and these injuries come into the ear sometimes unseen if one can't see them; and never does one have more than one hole for the ear, and one sees it very well.
That which comes unseen, if one can't see it, is of healing in multiple positions, and in that situation where one sees that you should place the ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent thickening, if the work has become this pus-like substance from which the following description is related:
And let it be so and cut in front and behind all flatly, so that it doesn't hurt the ear; if the thickening is from a birth or a part of the ear, if you have fine pincers, and gently scrape, until that flesh is entirely removed.
And if the operations are placed precisely in the ear, take .i. a thin and light rasp, rub it gently on fire, then place it behind the ear. If you feel the operation causing the patient's ear to hurt from the skin, make a slight incision and ensure not to damage the ear nerves; then insert a tent into the ear according to its width at the perforation, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment in the ear.
Continue doing this every day until the wound heals, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder it with ground vitriol. And if you see swelling in the ear, it is necessary that you replace the tent and insert another moistened one made from roset oil and wax, until the swelling subsides; then treat it until it has fully recovered.
And if bleeding occurs, dip an sponge and wring it out in cold water, then place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that stop bleeding, which include methods for dealing with distillations.
Of the ashes of papers
When dealing with hairs in papers that are wet and dry, it is necessary to spread them out using tweezers and forceps. And take the root of a fumigant from its leaves; then place sulfur in its place.
And if you don't remove the bark, sear it with a small lens cautery, and after the incision, the cautery is useful for movement; and many times they return, so that no part remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots burn and do not come back.
Of the gravel
Many times in the papers appear some things that seem greasy in their form and hardness, because of this disease is called "granulation," and it's a collection of moisture being large on and under the paper; the procedures are as follows: take care if the granulation remains from one side to the other, and this is a small matter to know; do it then widely open, then sear each part lightly separately, then take them with forceps, and scrape. If you cannot scrape without piercing a bit of the paper, or if it does not harm the patient in any way; and if the rupture is large, or there's an incision, cure until it heals; and if it is small, do not apply much pressure, because the ointments restore it quickly and encourage tissue growth.
And if the granulation descends inside the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper and have the granulation at some forceps points, then scrape and press from one side to the other; and if the paper is pushed away by the incision, this does not harm; and when the granulation is scraped off, wash out with salty water, and treat the wound until it heals as long as the patient is well.
of the grease of the warts
Extraction is a fat which becomes saturated on the sheets of papers above, and this happens more with children than in any other people, it greatly troubles their eyes, and it comes to them in the early hours, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears are quick to their eyes; and for this reason, they lie down near their faces always, and sleep on them, and have their papers damp under their eyebrows where the exinach spreads over. And when you press your thumb onto it with your fingers and feel the extraction inside between them.
And the way of treating is that the patient's head goes to your health; and then take one linen cloth, and set up a tent in such a manner as a circle according to the quantity that contains extraction from each part, then place it on them; and press with your thumbs on both sides so that the extraction comes together inside the circle; then make a cut in the middle of the moisture using a sharp trenchant tool for width, and not more than the wound when you are making an incision for opening a vein; and make the leather fit perfectly until you see the extraction coming from the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Remove then all in one piece of linen cloth between your thumbs on the outside, and turn your hand to right and left until it is dispersed; and make sure you do not fill up the cut until you reach all the trenchant tool up to the eye, without hurting it.
And if the incision does not open at the beginning of the wound, increase it slightly gently until it opens; then treat it as we have said, then moisten it with cloths in water and oil, and place it on the wound, and apply bandages.
And for those who grind grain and put it out to rot the remaining moisture. Then treat until it is healthy again. And if an abscess forms at the wound, then treat with healing plasters until it is healthy again.
The phrase "des poilz des papieres" translates to "the hairs of paper". This could refer to thin or lightweight material that resembles hair, possibly used in various crafts or as a decorative element.
When hairs grow in unnatural places on the body, and they become thick, they can harm the eyes and cause issues leading to diseases like frequent tearing of the eye and inflammation or swelling of the paper-like layers under the skin as well as albugine (a condition affecting the eye). All this happens due to damage to the eyes. The cure for such conditions involves three methods: using a cautery device combined with fire, applying an ague medicine according to what is described in the section about cauteries, or performing incisions and suturing, depending on how I explain later.
You should place the eye's head in its natural position and then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it turns, that is good. If not, take one needle through all half an inch from the edge of each hair; and do this either within the margin of the paper where hairs are growing or above the hairs themselves, taking one thread across the entire sheet of paper and then turning to the rasp after that.
And if you need to do so at that point which requires a large quantity of paper according to how the paper is softened; then cut across the entire membrane above the two lines you've marked, and start from the large tear right up to the small one. If there's already an opening near the natural hairs in the thickening area, then insert the needle into one of the two corners of the eye, then peel it off completely. Then join the two lips with a stitch using half an inch of fine wool thread on each side, and remove any bleeding, and burn away the excess threads across both eyelids if you see fit; otherwise, leave the stitch and threads for up to three or four days.
And if by another method: and you mark the paper with a shape that is as like a leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at three inches cut it according to the form which is here:
Then cover that which is on top with small force evenly according to the shape which is here:
And if you don't have the power to hold the forceps, and if the thing is not even, then take one needle or place two threads, and place them in the figure; and place another thread underneath the large vein, and another thread underneath the small one. Then unite between your fingers the two threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over what you've marked, as we have recounted, then sew together the two edges of the wound by suture, and treat until it heals properly. And if pus comes to your incision, then soothe it with tallow and similar soothing ointments;
And sometimes the paper hair turns into skin: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about cutting; but the stitch in both cases is more artificial.
The treatment of cuts follows this pattern: and it is that you should transform the paper (material) and make an incision according to what I have said, then create two stitches by skill, and two fine threads each as long as the paper and as wide as the distance between the edges; and place two ends of .ij. cuts at .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then join both of them carefully on top of the paper part of the eye, stretching those two stitches from the two sides forming; and leave it like this for a few days, and the skin that is stretched will dry and harden until it tears out by itself.
If it takes time, and if the healing progresses, then treat until it is clean; and when the wound has healed, and the paper has been lifted, and no more hair will grow; and this is the form of the two stitches that you should create according to this pattern, and in accordance with this length and width:
The work procedures involve taking a delicate needle and tying two pieces of fine silk thread onto it. Then, you join the joints together carefully, making sure both are fastened nicely. Make sure each piece of the thread is roughly the length of one palm in length. Proceed to weave another thread through the joints briefly, knotting it firmly at each end. Place the sick part into its healthy position and allow sunlight to shine onto this operation, as it involves subtle and small procedures. Then, insert the needle all the way back into the hair follicle where it's attached, piercing the paper quickly while pulling upwards from natural hair; then pull out the hair up until it reaches the middle of the weave in the paper, knotting that hair in place if there are one or two, three or more, or even more hairs present. Once done with this step, remove your hand until all hairs stick out evenly across the paper, still adhering to natural hair length.
And if the procedure on the weave and hair is completed without them coming out with it, then pull the weave off to the side with all the thread that you've ordered, until the weave sticks out past the end and you can see through it by your eye; therefore, once you pull the weave and the thread, cover your eye and leave it covered for two days or three, until the hair hardens in its place and a new flesh grows up; and if the hair is small, accompany one long hair from a natural calf, raise it with that or let it alone, until it stretches then lift.
Of the corruption of the eye
When this disease, called 'aleacrati' or gangrene comes to the eye, if there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. And it occurs suddenly from a wound, or from surgery or cautery, and from similar actions.
And the way of treating it is that you cut through this bond, and open the eyelid, and put linen bandages inside, and keep them until they are healed; and it should not be used in his treatment with things that dry and restrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first one; but use of things that soften, such as fenugreek; and rinse with water or salted and linseed oil, and apply onion juice melted in any of the oils, and wrap it with a bandage, and treat with this.
And the treasures of your treatment are that you must beware not to heal it according to its original shape; and these treatments that we have mentioned do not go beyond addressing this illness, so that it does not recur in the same form it was before.
of the matter coming into the eye
This disease known as "axacrati" is truly called so and is natural and accidental. Accidents come from wounds, tears, cauterizations, and similar things; and the way of treating it involves inserting a needle in which there are two filaments, into the body, and you make it pierce on the left eyelid as far as possible, so that one filament reaches both corners of the body; then the body lies above all along the needle, and the wound is made about an inch wide.
And if the figure of the paper returns according to what should be, it's good; if not, take a bone and place it in the tear, then turn the paper and make two tears inside the paper. And let there be angles at the two cuts that you have made at each corner of the incision, so when they are assembled, the figure will resemble that of a letter with two Greek letters 'γ' (gamma). Then remove this flesh according to its size and depth from where the paper was inserted, then join back the two separated parts using thread stitches; then apply treatment with softening medicines and bandages until it heals.
And if the disease comes from a tear or a stitch or a cautery, it is necessary that you cut an incision filled with hairs of papers, and according to what was mentioned before; then pierce between the two hands of a tent, as I have said; and must perform the operation according to the shape of the disease, for she varies greatly in form. And the surgeons must prepare equipment for all situations so that they know how to restore the figure to its natural state; and even the patients themselves, according to what they need from operations and instruments in various positions.
immediately of the paper
When this seam happens between human hands in such a way that the paper above is glued with the egg white of oil, and cannot move or do its natural operations, then it is necessary that you pierce the edge of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and stretch it to pins, until you catch what is protruding at the subtle spatumile (a surgical instrument), which should not be too sharp nor too narrow, so as not to allow the patient to suffer from overly sharp spatumile and burn their eyes; and make your incision, where you remove that gathered together with ease, such that the paper regrows according to its natural form; and the whole thing is cleansed, and do not salt water in the eye again, and leave it with fresh water and lard; then place a linen tent between the paper and the eye, and cover the eye with wet wool; and after three days use a colander and other surgical tools until it has healed.
From the edge of the eye
You should know that the edge of the eye can be in two ways: it is nerve-like and resembles a hard piece of wood, and another which isn't nerve-like but seems like icy moisture. If you touch it with iron and try to hold it using tongs, it can't move; both resemble towards the large tear duct, and grow slowly and slowly until they cover all vision and light and the movement of the eye.
And the method of incision is such that the patient puts their head in its healthy position, then exposes the eyelashes; lift the paper with your hand, then place the edge of the eye with tongs slightly bent, and place it above; then take a needle, and put one horsehair or cowhair or buffalo hair, along with a strong thread; and double the needle's tip a little bit and insert it into the edge of the eye, piercing all the way through with the needle, and attach the edge of the eye to a thread and place it above; then shave off all the hair on the side of the eye that touches the cornea and the silk-like skin up until the root, leaving only natural tears in the patient's tear duct, so as not to let the body's usual tear flow through the incision; and every single time, the edge of the eye is placed at the edge of the nail alone, and with the thread, just as we have said; then shave off all the thin hair from what has been mentioned above, thus forming:
And see that the cautery doesn't touch the fatty tissue and doesn't break it, nor should the rod pierce; after incision pour a bit of oil in the eye socket, and make a collar from silver and let it stay until the next day. Then treat as necessary when they are healed.
And if the nail is not made of bone, and you can't push in the needle, and the nail grooves cannot enter, this false nail is treated many times with medicinal remedies; grow exactly as I described in the division, and if it looks like a real nail, the eye sees the illness, take the cautery lightly with somewhat sharp point according to this form:
Pull the nail upwards slightly, and if you see that it doesn't diminish at all and the reason presses on it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of silver and red paste and oil, and apply to the eye until the next day; then start another procedure according to this same work as long as there is any bone left.
If nothing opposes your view, such as a boil on the skin, then proceed, and begin by treating the boil until it is drained. Once the boil has been treated, then continue with the work as before, until it heals.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the armpit seems to harm your eye through great disturbance, suspend it by the navel, and remove a part not all at once, so that no tears come; then distill into your eye the red bandage made of stannic oxide.
Of the flesh that arises on the pupil
From some individuals, red flesh appears only once and covers the pupil, restraining it on the eyelid and outwardly resembling a candle flame; and this work is that when the patient's head is in its healthy position, then they remove the eyes, and with all that flesh to the navel's strength. Then take out the first layer of flesh, and continue trimming with a razor until you reach the edge, while ensuring not to injure the eye during this process; and be cautious about injuring the eye at the incision point as we described in the section on cutting fingernails and small forces within the body that remove impurities. As shown by the form after this chapter, one removes it.
And when the incision has been completed and all of the flesh removed, one should apply oil from sulfur or distill it with red reed and similar corrosive medicines. Place cotton soaked in this oil outside the wound, so that it remains free from pus; and if nothing persists there, and if no scab forms, and you suspect a warm abscess, then leave the oil alone and treat the abscess with things that alleviate hot pus. Then return to your work until the wound is healed, and thus make many cuts heal in this manner through such an appearance.
But still, it is necessary that you manage the treatment of each weak oil in its natural way; and by accident in its way; in iron work. And do not thrust your hand into any of these works until you see that this member bears that work.
of veins and eyes
When the veins become red and covered over the eye, and tolerate their damage to vision for several days. Therefore, at first you must observe the eye, in which the sebel is situated; there's no other disease apart from the sebel. Thus handle it this way: instruct the patient to place their head on your healthy side, then suspend those veins throughout all of their circumference according to their wisdom, and have them apply fine double strips in a specific form:
And let there be two inches by degree, for one side, according to this form:
Then perform this operation carefully on the veins, and allow the blood to drain out for an hour or two after, as long as you can see those veins receding from the eye; and be careful not to puncture the eye with the needles, and carry out this procedure at noon in front of the sun, and be very meticulous in your work so that you do not allow any force other than those veins. And when you have completed this task, apply a collar of green and red vinegar to the eye to eliminate what remains of the sebel.
And if you do not have the power to handle all of this in that hour, then create a poultice from things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is soothed and sufficiently free from pus formation, then begin again using this method as described before until they are healed; and this is the way to use force.
Of the duct of the eye
The remedy known as "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with a cautery and by using hot water medicine according to what I have mentioned earlier, and if it does not heal, then there is a place where you open up on the abscess, at the point that should die off, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone becomes visible.
And when the bone is discovered, and you will see the corruption and the darkness, if you take all the tool of what is shaped here; and call it "hard head", and make it from a single piece of metal for one-inch length, and make its tip pointed like a file as it is in this current form:
And place on it the part of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that this corruption has stopped; and do this several times, then restore the part with drying medicinal applications.
If they are joined together and the bone starts to grow, and the body of the bow is joined as well, and remains like this for thirty days, and it does not renew itself and there is no pus anymore, and no bad events happen, you know that it has healed; if not so, then there's no other way than to bring back the fistula to its original place according to this form: and then you uncover the bone the second time with a tool and using cold medicinal applications, and when uncovered take one iron rod as this form, and make the head of the iron into three angles, and the shaft should be thinned until it reaches the size like shown here:
Then place your hand on the bone of the fleshy part under the eye, and keep your hand away from the ear .i. pox, then turn to fully feel the forest until it penetrates the bone, as you will sense what is happening through your nose if you hold your hand over your nose; and then restore the head with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the child begins to grow tough, take its matter away from its nose; if there's a lighter thing for the patient.
From the exit of the eye
When the eyes open completely and there is no dislocation in the neck or narrowing, it is necessary to tie the patient's eyelid; then heal them, then place a suction cup or a blister without piercing to allow exudation, then place over the eye. I.e., make a plaster of myrrh and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with strips and bandages; and the manner of the bandages is that you take bandages that are quite soft, and double each at four, and then place one on top of another according to the amount needed by the eyes; then strain it from above with a hard bandage formed, and continue using suction cups without piercing; then remove the suction cups and allow the eye to be strained day and night, and if the ligatures loosen, it is necessary that you strain more; then remove the ligature after day and night, and if you see the eye heal, it's good; if not; then repeat the plastering and bandaging and the ligature and suction cups until they are healed.
At the bursting of an oviductal membrane
When disruptions come in the oviductal membrane, then opening appears and comes out pieces of paper like a seed of resin, and it is observable; therefore if you see this covering, the condition is such that you insert an awl at the root of the part below up until slightly above, then insert another awl or with one thread double from the part near the eye; and do piercing, leaving the first awl according to the placement; then cover the other side of the thread double and tie a portion inside the oviduct tightly, then pull it well, then remove the awl and place wet wool cloth on the eye; and leave this until the thread breaks with the oviduct, then heal the eye with restorative things until the wound heals; and no time the wound is held back by the ruptured part of a circle of cloth, until she is healed.
And if the eyes have a substantial appearance, then pierce through the thin lid that comes forward from the eye, and drain out the watery humor and descend beneath the eyes, and enter immediately; then pull until it is healed.
By the stream of the eye
This disease called 'alcunnati' does not come forth except by the stream in the eye that appears like an edge descending, and it is not really an edge; and the way of its appearance is this: you make the patient sit upright with their head slightly forward, then hold the neck between your hands with the chin at a .5-inch distance from the seat, then move the head as much as you see the stream come up above your eyes; then insert it and don't let it descend, remove any blockage of light, and observe the patient's condition as usual; and if it doesn't descend immediately, know that it is an edge, and if the descent of the stream isn't uniform as we've said. Then hold the patient between your hands, then take a thin spatula and place it on the corneal layer through the junction with the cornea and the crown until the stream escapes; and when it has escaped, apply hot water mixed with honey to the eye, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey, then cure it with another treatment until it heals.
From the tears of the eye
Our experience involves the sensations of heat in the division and what needs to be pierced; if one works according to health. You must make the patient lie between your hands crossed, away from sunlight, and tie the healthy eye tightly while holding it firmly; then place the piece of paper under the affected eye's left or right side, depending on its position. Next, take the tool called "almagda" in your right hand if the affected eye is on your left side, or with your left hand if the affected eye is on the right side. Place the tip of this tool underneath the cornea by about the width of a hair next to the lower part of the inner corner of the eye, then move the "almagda" tool firmly and carefully until it pierces the inner eyelid tissue, feeling when almagda reaches the empty space; and the measure of the almagda's way should match the space from the outer edge of the eyelid up to where the dark area ends; this is the cornea. If you see bone through the corneal paper due to its clarity, then place the tool until it reaches the eye or where the water is, and express fluids one after another. If the water now descends, observe the patient looking at you and your tool in his/her eye.
After a short rest, and when the water ascends in the second canal, apply force with the tool, and once it is firmly placed and no longer rises, gently remove almagda by turning your hand back and forth; then add a little of a yellowish paste near the water and carefully pull out the eye or its remnants. Then place under the eye, wool soaked in rose oil or an abundance of egg whites, and tie with the healthy eye. Now, for those who are similar to us in time, let's use a poultice made with an abundance of eggs.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some individuals whose eyes are too hard, you should take the tool called "alberit", which has this form:
And then puncture only the conjunctive part, do not go too far forward but make it about half an inch, then insert the amalgam tool as we have said; and upon completion of the work, prepare for the patient one additional poultice, in which they sleep on their back for a quarter-hour. And remain free from all movements, eat light meats, do not move your head neither to the right nor left, be bound according to its position until three days; then release them within this dark room and check their vision, let them see some things, and after that, reapply the bandage up until seven days. And it is not advisable to perform this during the treatment time or after the incision now, but you must apply it because the infection has quickly spread.
Wound discharges come out that you should release the eye before the seventh day, and use an assistant for wound discharge. And when it is calmed down, then release the vision and put on one eyepatch to cover a day, and stay in this dark room. Then exit the room slowly and return to your usual routine; know that no students should interfere in such situations.
A man from Yrach came to us who told us that they were using a pierced amalgam tool there, in which the water would be drained out, but still, I never saw any like it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in old books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the descriptions of the forms of mercury, for those who do not know them can see them; and they are properly of lead:
And let its head be made from this same subtlety, and the tail in three angular sections.
from the flesh near the nose
No matter how many times they are born or emerge as scorpions with different heads, some resemble pies' legs; and there are those that have a charred body with a faint color, while others have a good-colored char. For the chars that are of a good color but not charred, it is fitting to have the patient hold their hands against the sun with the malformed part facing upwards; work on their nostrils, pour vinegar onto these chars and remove them; then hold what you can bear of the fine sharp spiciness on one side until you know that this char has been fully removed.
And if there remains anything that we cannot cope with, should you open the wound completely using two fine and light instruments, ensuring nothing stays inside. And if it is without obstacle or abscess, if it needs to be cleaned as it should; and if it's an evil abscess, if you act quickly and use heat until all pus has drained out and all bones are clean. Then let the water or wine flow freely out of it.
And if the nose is operated upon, and moisture comes until the palate, know that it has been cleansed; and should there be no opening or pus when you cut as intended, know that there is new flesh growing within the bone, to which neither of the instruments can come for cutting: thus it's necessary that you insert one thread of linen somewhat thick, knot it with your hands, and place between each knot an inch or less; and guide the patient so they breathe through their nose and pull out the thread as it comes out from inside the nose. Children often do this in schools, and it is a simple task for those who are to perform it; then hold one head coming out by your hand, and the other head coming out from the mouth with the other hand, knowing how they follow each other according to our instructions. Do this until you know that the knots have been rotten off the flesh, then pull out the threads, drain the blood, moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and reapply it in the nose as before; do this for three days or more until all of what was left from the flesh is corroded away; and then use a piece of opium for several days if they are cleansed, and if there's need for dried medicines, apply them; and that's how the tool to cleanse the head works, in which one distills oils and medicines with wine.
And it should be made of silver or lead, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and guide it that way; and if you see fit, make a closed cane, and have the instruments filled to purge the head; and hold one end of the head when heating oil or any liquid.
from the nose hair
Many times the head under the nose experiences a sickness called "telul", it grows and becomes large to the point of being visible; because this requires that you start by cutting at its beginning, then remove all bone, after which place your cautery or burning medicine in it; and if you delay cutting until it is large, if it becomes hard, changes color, loses sensation: don't touch it with iron as there's an abscess inside, for when one cuts it once, it can cause great harm to the patient; and if the abscess was due to hot touch, not just change of color, and you see that all can be cut away, then empty the patient and treat the area with drying and restraining substances.
When the nose is cut and sewn.
Know that when solutions of continuation come into one of these venous vessels, it benefits little, for this happens in few men. Therefore, it is necessary for this to occur in none if the wound is fresh all over with blood; and then adjust the two lips to a seam, after treating until they are clean; and should the lips be dry from one side to another, then it is necessary that you sear every part of their keratin until they heal, then bring together the two lips to a seam, and hold them tight, applying powdered dragon's blood and incense ground; and place powders on top with a piece of plaster, of strong or another soldering plaster, and leave it until it discharges by itself, then treat with ointment until they are clean.
The method of sewing is such that you join the seam: either with needles, as we have said in the abdominal stitch; or with thread, which I have made known to you.
of the abscesses of the lips
In the hands of a surgeon inside a wound abscessed hard, resembling grains sometimes large and small; therefore it is necessary that you re-open the lips, cut into each nodule, and take them with tweezers in each part; then after the vitriol incision, let the wound bleed until the pus is exhausted; and then drain gently, and cure the wound of dry things until it is clean.
from the flesh of the gums
Many times, a connective tissue forms on the gums, which the old would call "albulus"; it is necessary to hold this with forceps, cut it at its root and allow blood or blood to flow out. Then place it under the vitriol burn, or other drying and desiccating powders; if that flesh returns after the incision and repeatedly appears, cut it again secondly and cauterize it: if it doesn't return even after being burnt with a cautery; these are the methods for cutting out this tissue.
From the sounds
Some times they are gathered at the top of the teeth roots, inside the mouth between the gums, those that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the tooth turns black and yellow and worms, until corruption reaches the gum, and the tooth becomes stinky; then it is necessary to make the patient sit with their hands on yours, and the head should be in your palm, and pull out any teeth or roughness as long as nothing remains; and so you deal with darkness and greenness, yellowness, and other tones, until they are all gone; if what comes off at the first attempt is correct, it's good; if not, start again from the second day and third onwards, until you have everything removed; and know that teeth require various types of instruments to be pulled, according to what their craft demonstrates, for the rasp used to remove teeth above them has other forms than those used in between them; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
When you treat a tooth for its pain, it is necessary that you wait as long as possible to pull the root out, because one should not do this too hastily; indeed, the process should be conducted slowly. This is due to the fact that if done too quickly, one might make an improper cut, and thus no excuse exists for hastily removing a tooth. So when the patient is forced to bleed, it must be certain about which tooth causes pain. Many times, with toothache, one should consider if it's a wisdom tooth causing issue, and pull out the good tooth; and throughout this process, do not let the pain disappear completely until the bad tooth has been removed; for we have already taught our surgeons to handle these procedures; and when you are certain about which tooth is causing trouble, it is necessary to scorch around the tooth with a strong spatula to keep the gum intact from all sides. Then move it into your hands or under delicate tweezers gently until they are well dislocated, then firmly secure the tweezers; have the shoulder of the patient in your holy grip between your knees, and hold it tightly so that it does not move.
After the tooth is extracted correctly without breaking it off, and if it doesn't fall out on its own, take none of these tools and gently push it in from every part inside each section, then move it around like you did initially. And should the tooth be pierced or damaged, it's necessary to fill it with cloths where they're lost; and when extracting it delicately with tweezers, ensure that it doesn't break during extraction; and it must be very carefully opened around the gum in order to extract the tooth.
And make sure you do not break it and leave a part behind, causing more severe toothaches than before due to the pain of the root. Remember not to act like unaware surgeons who with their haste and boldness break everything down once, then don't follow our advice; but they cause this disease by repeatedly getting into the root or damaging the jawbone each time, as we often tell them. And when the tooth has been extracted, wash the mouth with wine or vinegar and salt; if bleeding starts (which is common), fill the mouth with vitriol powder. If that doesn't work, cauterize it.
The shapes of the tools, to which one binds their teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles, so they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
And let them have large parts that do not bend while being pulled, and be made of well-crafted iron, and have teeth for holding things in place.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains during extraction, it is necessary to put in place a wet cotton swab saturated with oil for one or two days until the gums are softened. Then remove the forceps known as 'algefri', so that the shoulder appears to resemble a surgeon; and they should be made inside like a file, which is the shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these clamps, then it is necessary that you uncover the entire flesh right up to the root, and place the tool called 'althali', which is known as a palainche, as follows:
And let it be strong and thick so that it doesn't break at all, and if the root jumps over this, it's good; if not, use all your tools, as those mentioned next will come into play:
And if you assist with the tool having two points, as described here:
and other tools located in front according to their place, and from this tool that seems like a pair of large tongs, as depicted here:
And be this one of your tools so that it may not break, and know that there are many types of dense tools; also other tools, which are not counted among the rest; and the wise masters themselves discover their own tool by themselves, according to what their work and disease reveal to them. For there are certain diseases where the old did not teach a tool because of the diversity in these ones, and if it breaks due to wear or from other bones, or if it decays, when they seek out the tools that suit them, that I have told you about, and aid with gestures, as what follows is their form: And let them be large and well held to hold the bone, so that it doesn't escape, but can be held and removed; and then restore him to the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if you use all this instrument.
When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and its shape is ugly, especially even in virgins, you must know if this tooth was born after another tooth, and it isn't placed straight, and one can neither file nor saw it: so you should remove it; and if it's next to a tooth, take this instrument that has the following form, and resembles two small beaks, and it is made of hard iron.
And the dentist holds the molar tooth gently and very firmly with their hands for its hardness of the tooth surface, and because you do not move the others, and if it is visible that one can shave it off, then he shaves it with half of a file in this way:
And also like the file used to make needles; and he files the tooth gently in his hands softly, so that it does not move until it grinds; then makes the flat part at the end using all kinds of raspers, and if its edge is too sharp and hurts the tongue, then you must file down the roughness until it is even, so as not to hurt the tongue or impair speech.
when the tooth rots
When the tooth in front of a hole appears through percussion or fall, and if it doesn't press upon what it's chewing that it doesn't defecate, and you've treated with medicinal restraints, and this isn't effective; then they must be restrained with an gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes. And the thread size should neither be too small nor too large, according to the space between the teeth; and if you notice that teeth are aligning themselves, take hold of the thread and braid it in between two healthy teeth, then place the dislodged teeth between your own teeth if there is one or more, until you see clearly up to the other side of a healthy tooth; then resume covering up to where you had covered before, and pull your hand gently yet firmly, so long as they don't move; and tie around the root of the tooth so that it can't escape. Then clip the threads with tweezers, assemble them, and place between the healthy teeth, making sure not to irritate the tongue; then leave it compressed in this manner for as long as it can stay without loosening or breaking, and if it does loosen or the threads break, you pull again with another thread; so it will remain compressed and serve its entire duration like this, and this is the form of teeth and the connection between two healthy teeth and two own teeth, as you see:
And when the tooth aches, you put it back in its place, step by step, as we have said; and don't interfere with anything that isn't appropriate or tolerable, and never form the shape of an ox's bone tooth, and put it in the place where there is a defect, and hold it just like we've said, and remains and serves for so long.
covering the tongue wound
No instance comes from within the tongue or nature that one is born with; or by chance due to healed wounds. The surgical procedures consist of working on the mouth near the ailment, have your head in proper alignment, and lift the tongue; then cut the nerve cord wide enough until the tongue has been dislodged from its position, and if there's stiffness or swelling, it might be a result from healing wounds, so pinch the hook and cut the affected part of that connection; and ensure the incision isn't made too deep for fear of an artery beneath; once finished, place the head in water of rose color and coolness, then under the tongue lay a linen cloth; and every night cleanse the patient, making sure no more bleeding occurs. And should there be bleeding again, pour vinegar into the head wound; if it doesn't stop, cauterize using the slow flame cautery which is suitable for this purpose; after that proceed with other healing methods until they've healed fully.
And if you see that the ailment has turned to red or black or hard so that the patient doesn't feel it, do not touch it because it's gangrene; and should it turn from yellow to green and there be moisture, then pinch the hook and drain a thin pus, and cleanse from both sides; and if the wound discharges when you don't apply anything, pour vinegar on top until it is cleaned out, then return to your work until all strength has been applied; after that place the head in cool water and steam, and proceed with other treatments until they have healed fully.
From throat abscesses
No time comes within the throat bokes which are called 'godath', and they are properly termed as the two almonds. And when you treat them, just like we have mentioned in the division, if they're not healed, do be careful: should there be hard pus pockets of small sensation and be colored yellow or white, don't touch them with iron at all. And if they're red-colored and the root is large, don't touch them with iron either for fear of blood spilling; but let them remain until they bleed naturally, then you can remove them, or they'd rupture on their own; and should they be whitely colored, have a fine instrument ready to scoop out. But first check if the pus pockets are calmed down and in peace. Then place the patient under sunlight, ensure their arms are in good health, let them open their mouth and press their tongue between their hands of the servants, applying pressure with all the tools; this is how it's done; and have it made of silver or very fine brass just like knives:
Can't you press the tongue with all this tool, and see if there's pus? Take the onion and the point of the almond, pull it up more than you can; and don't remove anything from the threads with it. Then scoop it out with the tool; this is how it looks like a force; and every spot that was affected, one place then another, they're very sharp, and made of iron or brass:
And if you don't have this tool now, take the scissors; this is how it looks like:
And make an incision on one side and the other; and when you have completed one of the almonds, complete the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot, cold water, or cold and gentle water. If bleeding occurs during this process, then continue to gargle with hot water, or use cooked currant fruits, or rosemary leaves, or similar substances until the wound is healed; then complete the cure when it is healthy; and if any other abscesses form in the throat besides the two almonds, you should remove them accordingly like the two almonds equally.
And I treated a woman of an abscess that she had inside her throat, to be precise, one small abscess. And almost the entire throat was blocked because it had been completely clogged, so the woman could neither breathe nor eat or drink and died within one day or two days since she couldn't endure this state. The abscess had grown quite a lot, and it had caused four ribs to be pushed up from her neck. I quickly acted, put an ounce in one place, then took out the thread, and removed a large portion of flesh with it; after that, I made another cut at the other nostril and got the mouth open, pressing on the tongue; afterwards, placed the thread into these abscesses, and took out some part from each, and only a little bit of blood came out. And thus opened the passage in her throat; she started to drink water now and then wine, and I didn't stop cutting this abscess for a long time; the abscess grew back immediately and filled up all that I had emptied, until it became quite large; after that, I treated her with cautery inside the throat: she didn't grow again. And from these parts, may God do as he pleases afterwards.
Regarding the eye
When the swelling comes down in the eye and it swells again, lasting long, it is named "perpendicular"; if it is large and round, it is named "eye". When it heals as we have said in its division, and treatment does not help, and you see that the wound from the abscess has calmed, and it becomes soft, then you should handle it; and one that is round assembled and not long; and it is bloody or of reddish color or black, then you must avoid making an incision on it. For there is great danger for the patient. So when you see it, according to the manner I have said, based on its size and length, make the patient face towards the sun, press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, pull it outwards, and cut off one-half to three-quarters of what we have said in cutting the two almonds. And you should not remove more than necessary which is beyond the natural boundary; for if you remove too much, it causes pain and difficulty in speaking; after making the incision, use what we said about cutting the two almonds, then treat until it has healed. If the patient fears during the cutting process, you should apply a tool for cautery sensitive to their fear. And the method of cautery is sharp and precise. And make sure that the eye puts its head towards your healing area, then press their tongue with the instrument mentioned in the chapter about cautery, applying it with living force, so that it is neither too thick nor too thin; and use the movement of this tool as described here:
And put our head with some hair on which we apply the medicine, just like the movements of a spoon, and place the tool over all the medicine on the eye; and let the patient lie on their side so that saliva and mucus go from their mouth inside to the medicine, ensuring it doesn't descend into the throat or the stomach; then hold your hand with the medicine and press onto the eye for half an hour's quantity until you see its numbness and the medicine's impacts have calmed; if you notice, take cotton and wrap it in any tool, soak it with medicine, insert that tool inside the cotton all the way to the string, until the cotton dries on the eye; repeat this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and close afterwards for 4 days or 5. If you need to restart the medicine's cautery, do so, and after the cautery cleanse around the eye with gauze soaked in butter, clean up what is inside of the medicine; rinse from cold water, and wash with gargling until it heals fully.
This cure is safer than incision, or with the cautery; if it is treated by fumigation in this manner, take camomile and hyssop and rosemary and rue and calendula and parsley and similar herbs, and gather all of them or some of them into one pot, then place it there, and bring to a boil; and ensure that the pot is well filled with strong earth, and within the pot there be two sticks as this method dictates: And it can be made of silver or iron, and if you have two shoulder blades place them in the mouth near the illness until the vapor rises to the ovule through the nose, until the ovule is necrotic; after this begin often again, until the ovule dries up, and ensure that you do not perform this at the beginning of the appearance of pus-filled abscesses, for many things happen then; and do not use this method when the pus-filled abscesses are declining. And if this instrument is unavailable, take a reed and place inside your head an eggshell, so that the mouth near the illness is not too hot; for the eggshell does not cause the vapor to burden the mouth, and this collection of remedies will serve as a cure together in health.
Many times there is air in the throat bone or spine of fish, without any issue; therefore, it's necessary that you remove what you can see, and press the tongue at noon to all the tool, so that you can see if something moves; and if this doesn't reveal anything and remains in the throat, it's fitting that you make the patient vomit until the illness is expelled; by chance if the illness is pushed out through vomiting. Or if the illness swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or one chunk of dry bread; and tie the sponge with a thread, and then swallow it again; and when she comes to the head, if she is expelled by air, and then pull out forcefully; and if this doesn't work as described, take one tool of a plonc according to this form:
And prepare the instruments so that they may enter more easily into the throat, and have the head raised in the air; be careful not to touch the epiglottis, that nothing gets inside it or push bone inward; guide them well as the patient pushes out the instrument, because they will push if they move or if the thing is pressed; if it's pushed down by mouth, or it pulls forcefully on all of the instrument equally until she can pull it.
of the lumen of the throat
No treatment is given for the throat fluid, as I have explained in the division, through medicine therapy; and when this doesn't help, then look at the patient's throat with the sunlight, then press their tongue against the instrument I've told you about. And if you see the throat fluid, then guide it out by half an uncia or with fine tongs suitable for this task. If that doesn't work, take a hair and insert it into the patient's throat where there is pain, then push or pull the hair with the effort of one hot iron several times, and repeat this often. And if the patient's throat becomes discolored by water all day long, then take a full glass of cold water, work their mouth with it, pour it inside without making them swallow, and move it around in their hand often; and as soon as the throat fluid smells the water, they will vomit.
And if she does not give birth as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the tool I mentioned for fumigation of the eye. Do this many times because it will relieve without causing pain. And concerning the method of fumigation, you take one pot containing charcoal sticks and cover its bottom with a small pierced covering in the center, then place the tip of the tool in this hole. Then pour your fumigation, put the end of the stick inside the mouth of the patient, seal their mouth so that no fumes escape but only go into the throat; and now the saliva will come out. If it does not come out, start the fumigation again many times. And let the patient suffer thirst, eat salty things, among others, and do not drink water; then it is necessary for her to relieve herself through this process.
And the shape of the tool used to expel saliva is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved scissors meant to enter the throat; and has the appearance of a doctor's snout, and it has a grinding quality like a rasp, so whatever she takes, she cannot leave it; and here is the form:
The chapter on abscesses
No mention of discharges is according to what memory comes after from one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; it's in two ways where one is by its appearance itself, and due to the moisture that he has. And the second way it is by the bones in their position within the body. for discharges from the head are different from those at the foundation, and the discharges from the soft parts of the head are different from those which come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if in discharges one must not pierce them until the body is dead according to its completion; and if there are such that it should be pierced when they have grown and do not die according to their completion, as discharges coming out of joints. For when discharges come out of joints, and you leave them while they are still within, by chance perhaps they corrupt the ligament and nerve in the joint, which is a cause of contraction in that limb. Or if the discharge is within the main body part, and if you delay perforation until it has been dead, it will harm the main body; or if it is within the foundation, piercing should be done once it has been dead; and it should not pierce a growing discharge without full digestion completion, except for that which is within the foundation, it could have broken through fully and remained inside, causing a tunnel to form; and cannot heal in great duration.
And it must be that you know the time of the perforation of a discharge which is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain has eased, and the departure of fever, and the diminution of pain and redness, and from agitation and sharpening of the head of the discharge, and other signs; and it must be that you place the perforation at or higher than the location of the discharge, and where it opens outwards; and have the perforation along the length of the body, and if the discharge is on hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere equal where there is no wrinkle.
In those that bend, according to the extent of the limb. And when abscesses are in the soft part of the body, you should only puncture them if they are confirmed by digestion completion process, as we have said. For if you pierce before this point, it will prolong within his body from the poison and be filled with much dirt; and accidentally harden his lips and deepen inside him. And for any abscesses that are pierced through the width of the body, according to what the limb needs.
Those who do not have a head, such as superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you pierce them fully; and when the abscess is large, and has accumulated much pus, if you pierce it, you should not extract all the pus in that moment, but remove only part of it; then cover the abscess until the next day, then leave nothing else in it; do this repeatedly from large to large, until the pus completely escapes; even if the patient is weak or a woman bearing, children, old and decrepit. For each time there's an escape of pus with the exit of the pus, the patient might die, and you would not know about it. Therefore, be careful in this chapter and when you have pierced your abscess, if the wound appears, look to see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it's a full cut, use linen or old cotton; and for large abscesses, and there are many punctures within, it should be that you stuff each one with a tent so they lie against each other; and if you have stitched in the abscess some part of skin, and sewed it together internally, then you should fill it with old cotton or linen rags without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then heal and apply ointment until it heals properly.
And if there's blood leaking from your vein, you should cool it down and keep it mild. And apply a wet cloth once or twice. And if the blood leakage persists, then take control of the situation and treatment, along with the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it's in winter conditions, and where the veins or abscesses are very sensitive, it should be that you place wet tents and cloths soaked in wine and oil; and if it's summer condition, and the veins are soft, then you should cover them with cloths soaked in cold water and oil, or in chilled wine and oil until the third day, as we have said; and then remove and clean the wound properly, following what should be done, until it heals.
And this must be known universally in treatments of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here begins the chapter.
of the womb
Or small abscesses come from the womb and are in cloths, as with a knucklebone of a calf, and many resemble this. There are some that have moisture like little animals; and others have such that they are hard and stony to the surgeon, and there is no doubt that it's an artery if it doesn't go against this. And the work of the operation consists in trying with all one's instruments what is called "an entromissor", which comes after this form, containing something. For if it contains moisture, then you do this through its length. And when the moisture has been drained out, then scorch without leaving anything behind that contains such moisture, for it returns immediately once nothing is left; then immerse cotton in Egyptian ointment oil, if present; should there be none, in water and vinegar, and apply to the wound, leaving until the next day; and this heals what remains of the night. And thus you renew the cotton as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it doesn't remain through the night; then treat the wound with ointment according to what is suitable, until it's healed. And if the abscess contains one or two fat grains, you cut according to this form, longitudinally; and you squeeze out all your remedies from it, and scrape around everywhere, and put your entire cure of draining force on the cloth where it lies; and if the artery gives back against this, then do as I told you after. And similarly with stone-like abscesses, and with cutting and treating as I told you.
And when dealing with pierces and moist areas, it is lighter because there's less blood involved. And if there are no moist conditions in these pierces or their vicinity, and of these two pierces I described for the elderly woman; and found that the pierce was just like a hard stone, rough and white, and couldn't be broken; and if any had been made into it, one would have done as well with it as with a stone. In other pierces arriving or their vicinity, it was observed that those coming from the children's heads and the roots of the ears, the opening should always remain for several days at least dependent on its position, so that the poison may exit; and treat them accordingly.
Regarding the treatment of scrofula
Many times a boil occurs in the neck, and when they are opened, and during infections, and nowhere else or on body parts, and are hard, being bound together. And each scrofula is properly confined within its bone, just like a nut or a boil at the head, as we have said; and there are many appearances of these scrophules. Some contain moisture, and others are malign, not willing to submit to treatment. In that case, you see good disposition in the surgeon's hand, resembling the color of the bone, being silent from each part and not touching the glands under the neck or arteries or ducts, nor being deep; it should be cut from above, and scrape off every part, and extend the two lips at the angles, if necessary, as we have said about boils. Treat gently and gently, make sure you don't cut the nerve or the vein, nor create too much heat and do not penetrate too far ahead, ensuring that you only cut what you are supposed to.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to open, then apply vitriol paste or any powders that stop bleeding in the wound, and keep the wound restrained; and let it remain as long as the abscess subsides and the wound softens and begins to heal. And when the blood has stopped flowing, return to your work until its completion; only then should you seek guidance according to your duty if there are still small scabs remaining, remove and clean them. If in the root of the scab there is large bleeding, it would not be suitable for you to cut that scab from its root but tie it with a double thick thread instead, let it heal naturally; then apply an old cotton pad soaked in Egyptian ointment to the wound and proceed with treatment.
And if you cut the whole scab, it is necessary for you to join together the two edges of the wound and stitch them now. There should be no excess remaining because of the size of the scab. It is fitting that you attend to cutting off its root and draining it thoroughly; then sew it as we have said earlier. Those scabs that retain excess, pierce wherever it opens and drain it. Do this similarly as previously mentioned, with dressing and other similar actions, so that they are corrupted where they remain from the corruption process; and when the wound is well cleaned, treat it with ointment until it heals properly; let it be covered by ointment and dressings while it remains healthy.
The text "de squinance" refers to issues related to or conditions caused by malalignment or misplacement, which is a common theme in medieval medical texts dealing with anatomy and orthopedics. It could refer to deformities, dislocations, or other types of misalignments that affect parts of the body such as joints or bones.
The old ones spoke of the surgery to alter the throat; but I never saw anyone do it in our land, and that is written from their speech.
For those who have squinting vision, it is necessary that the incision of the throat called 'epiglottis' be avoided; and one should not take help from this, because all the veins and the heart are at risk for those who have a foreign body in their mouth, or in the throat or between two gums. When the disease is within the channel of the heart, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary to make three or four small cuts across, between the two circles, by the amount of the cut through the skin but not into the cartilage;
And those bones are suitable for cutting the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from there.
And if the surgeons are fearful, it is necessary that they extend the skin of the throat to all parts of the neck, then cut through the skull until it reaches the chin; and avoid blood vessels, should you see anything, and then perform the operation as we have described.
And it is demonstrated by the section of the vein in the chin that blood jumps through the side where the bone is broken, and due to the loss of voice.
And leave the wound open for a piece.
And when the time has passed since one doubts strangulation, gather the two edges of the wound neatly, and all along the skin until the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, as long as it is healthy.
Albucasim asserts that one should not perform this until the throat is entirely swollen, and the patient's organs are judged dead, and the defect has been made. So one should cut through the epiglottis because the organs cannot evacuate, and they breathe through the wound, and in this way, one is protected from death.
And because of this, the old men commanded to leave the wound open until the illness's malady passes, and it has passed in three days or four. And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and treat it until it had been treated.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young lady took one knife, and stabbed it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe.
and I was called to treat her, and found her just as dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and I saw well that there had been no opened vein or outlet but rather the windpipe, and the veins flowed through the wound.
I hurriedly treated it, and once it was healed, I cleansed the wound as much as possible;
and after she spoke again her voice was hoarse, then she returned to being in good health.
I swear by heaven that there must have been no defect in the tailoring of the epiglottis.
From the large throat
Cysts of abscesses are called 'throat hernia', and they are large abscesses in the color of a chestnut, and are very common in women;
and there are two ways: natural and accidental; or natural has no belly.
And the accidents are according to two ways, one of which resembles a mass within us, and the other way resembles an abscess that comes from our artery; And there is fear, it does not allow for large cuts only in those who are small, and the proof and search takes place throughout the entire surgical intervention: if you find it as well as a small rodent, and cannot pierce any vein, if you operate, as one operates on a mouse, and work out its entire body, if there's anything; and search well inside, and treat it according to what is appropriate, until it is completely healed.
from the mouse
Many ways are there for us, so I will describe all the possibilities;
and it is fitting that I should explain all the differences between us and dislocation.
I say that dislocation is marked by heat and fever until the boiling has passed and decay been completed; thus the fever and heat subside.
With dislocation, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains one gallbladder, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a boil, and becomes large.
And according to two appearances, or greasy, or moist, and none of colors as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of a new wound, that you first test and inquire about every tool which is called 'entrainer', according to its shape or chapter that comes after.
And the method for inquiring about pus in wounds is that you take or more moist substance than what you find in the pus, and make your fingers move little by little, until you know that the tools have reached the core, then according to the size of the pus;
Then remove the entrainer, and be careful not to jump while doing so.
When there is moisture, it cuts through whatever material it has, if it creates an opening like I have described for other abscesses;
And if after the incision there is no moisture, know that it has been fat, then cut it across instead, and take hold of it with tweezers, gently scrape it from both sides, protect the area where it was located by covering it, and pull out the limb in good condition with a stick;
And if you cannot remove it cleanly, then remove it piece by piece so that nothing remains.
For if nothing remains, it will return to the wound repeatedly;
And if it stays for a bit, and the lack doesn't bother you, use certain corrosive water powders on the wound, hold the wound steady, place things that relieve in an abscess warm, and treat other treatments until it heals.
And if the lack is large, tie the two sides of the wound together, and treat the one who has ingested flesh.
And if the vein is too large or goes against the grain and rushes you, tie off the wound, and use the lead of vitriol in small portions, and let it sit for two days or three, as long as the wound heals from within, then rest with a bloodletting; afterwards return to your usual treatment.
Here are the forms of surgical instruments used for insertion, and there are three ways: large, medium, and small; and among them, there are four squares called 'albaret', and one called 'breb', and among these, there are three sizes: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses.
And they are also like the needles from which one removes the thorns, and they are made of amber citrine, or iron, or silver, and yellow ones are valued more than black beeswax because they excel in surrounding the curves of fistulae;
And there are three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the width of the defects.
The shapes of the pins resemble sheep, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are two curves in the pins also in three ways.
And if there are pins with two curves, they also come in two ways; and if there are pins with two curves and single-curved pins, and these all come in two ways; and all of this is necessary in their location.
The head of this one that they make to be sharp, and among such ones who cut not force but from one side, which they sear the skin. For in this manner there is neither cutting of the vein nor nerve;
And these introducers have their pincers in hand so that the patient does not feel them during the opening of abscesses;
And there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and one uses no force but in the leg muscles, such as legs and arms, and nipples, and at joints, and similarly to them;
And no other small instrument is used at all, resembling the pieces of pestles, according to this shape, to which one stops the blood flow:
And it is placed only once at its natural location in the body, near veins and arteries, and never according to this large shape:
The breasts of some men do not swell when they begin to become corrupted, until they look like breasts of women;
And remain ugly and swollen, and if someone wishes to treat them, they should proceed according to this method described in line B up until point .g: Then scrape off the fat, and apply medicine to the wound that stimulates healing flesh. Then join together both sides of the wound for stitching. And treat it until it is healed.
And if the belly rolls down and is flattened due to its size like it happens in women, when they divide it into two above, by two similar cuts; From which one holds to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the longer line contains the shorter according to this form, from this line B up to the line G; Then scrape off the skin that is between the two edges, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary for treatment, until it heals.
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not completed throughout, because the patient does not wish to rest, or due to the bleeding out, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with wet cotton in a corrosive ointment; And let it be as long as it can chew while removing and replacing it, then treat it until it is healed.
removing abscesses from the armpits
Abscesses that occur in the armpits are methods of hard scrofula or those with knots, and if there are any containing moisture.
Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this shape, from line b. up to line .g.: And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat with ointment as long as it is clean.
And if the abscesses resemble scrophula sores, cut them as we have said in cuts for scrophula sores, and if the wound is full of pus, apply a cautery as we have said previously.
regarding the rupture of an artery
When the artery is punctured, and the skin is sewn where it was cut off, many times there are abscesses. And similarly this happens with an inflamed vein and abscess.
And if one knows that it is because of the artery, then make the incisions long enough. And when you feel it with your fingers, if you feel resistance; and when it's due to the vein, there is often an outward swelling;
And it's foolish to cover this abscess, and similarly when it is located on the axilla and armpits and around the neck and in other parts like this, and they are very large. Therefore, one should avoid the iron treatment. Also, in cases affecting the head, one should avoid it similarly. In those affected by swelling of arteries over the skin, do this above the leather until long.
Therefore, one should avoid the iron treatment. Also, in cases affecting the head, one should avoid it similarly. In those affected by swelling of arteries over the skin, do this above the leather until long. Then work on the size in ounces, and beautifully remove the artery from the membranes, as long as it is exposed.
Then take one thread and pierce it through from one side to the other, and bind the artery with a double thread for about an inch, as I taught you in extracting the two arteries that are located in the temples;
Next, insert something into the space between the two threads until it comes out as needed from the hole and free the abscess;
Then continue with the treatment until the wound heals; Then treat with the ointment accompanying this, until it is healed;
And if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, it's necessary that you color with your hand whatever amount of pus you can reach on all the skin, Then pierce the needle through the place you are holding with your hand, and make it penetrate, and have two threads doubled, so that you bring it from the other side. Then remove the abscess, as I have told you, or connect one of them to both shoulder blades with a thread;
and if you doubt that the threads will hold, sew another needle with all two threads across the entire abscess from the first incision site, and tie the threads in four loops;
then cut out the abscess until the excess comes out, then trim the excess neatly and leave what is tied.
then place one moistened cloth in vinegar and oil, then apply the necessary treatments and dressings until it heals.
from abscesses of nerves
Also, as with abscesses in the artery and vein, there are nerve abscesses when they are inflamed, or due to too much work, and similar conditions.
And this happens more often with appendages and bones and everywhere there are joints, and these are one type of nerve abscess, and their color resembles the color of flesh, and is in many positions without pain;
And when one restrains it, the patient feels pain, and it's not all throughout the body, but around the knee;
And move well in all directions, neither going forward nor backward, neither to the side nor above, and one who is connected should not be covered by iron: perhaps it would lead to constriction;
And that which is on the head or forehead, let the skin hang freely. If the abscesses are small, use forceps if you have them and clamp them at their root;
And if it is large, suspend it at the nape, and scrape it, then cut into the bone and stitch up the wound. The treatment should be continued until it has healed properly.
of large breasts hanging down Never happens in wombs and nowhere else, it's an illness called "fungal" by its appearance, and it has a subtle root, and large lumps; and there are smaller ones and much larger ones.
And I saw two homes that had two bellies each, which resembled fungi more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, had a fine root, and were slightly split, and they corroded even in moisture.
I copied them and found that one weighed 16 ounces in the balance, and the other was 5. And when you look at the organs during incision, if they seem moist to you, and the color of the fungi is white and moist with a fine root;
If you cut at the large veins, and place the fire cautery in front of you. For the surgeon encounters many times excessive bleeding, if you are unprepared for it, then quickly apply the cautery;
And if you notice that the patient is scared and fearful from the incision due to the metal tool's heat, then take a well-made lead wire, and join it in an 'L' shape as we have said, and leave it for two days;
And then hold it in place, and do not cease to pull the lead wire until you reach the join, and let your work be done through it. And if the roots are thick, you can feel this by touching the stomach too, but make sure you don't touch the stomach when cutting;
Then apply the cautery so that it doesn't bleed again; then treat the wound, and ensure you don't cut through the vein which is of a dark color and has little sensation and produces milk.
For this is an abscess, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene after.
When it comes to the eye,
The appearance of the eye results from a fire wound or cut on the nose, and it can occur anywhere on the body, especially in other joints like hands. This is similar to what happens in other injuries where blood flows from veins or arteries as indicated by the preceding condition, or due to wind disturbances;
And if it's due to the rupture of the nose and through the opening of the nostril(s), its appearance is similar to that of gangrene, having a color resembling flesh, and it causes little sensation or pain, with openings from various directions. And if it's due to the output of the intestine, then it's more varied. When you press it with your fingers, it goes back up and then comes down again. Sometimes it gets stuck and swells significantly when entering hot water and due to hard work.
And if it's because of moisture, it is a simple matter, and opens well when you press it with your hand, not constraining; and if it's because of blood, it will open through these signs, the abscesses are large and hard, and are planted according to an amount.
And if it's due to wind, there is suffocation in the throat, and the organs are such that when you look at their appearance, they seem like blood from the artery, or vein, or wind. If you must leave the wound untreated. For there is doubt and fear involved, just as I explained in chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bladder, you must instruct the patient to bleed their ailment, and have it stretched out straight, then cut along its entire circumference around the wound; then command them to heal inside your hands, then go into the area you have indicated all over the entire surface, Then half of the abscess lies above on the entire large curve;
Then do the same for half of the abscess that's laid out on the binding, and hold down your index finger, and inspect the intestine; If you find it caught by the binding, release it, and push the intestine out in front of the belly.
And if you find the boil, take it at the base, and cut out the excess.
And if the artery or vein causes a counteraction, or if it is deeply inside, then return to your work and take two needles, and stick out two thread ends, and place the two needles inside where you pierced in a cross that you made to pierce.
Then pull the pus from the wound using four lengths on the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the wound heal until it crusts over, and remove the dead flesh by itself. Or you should cut it when it becomes thin and crusts over, then treat it as necessary, and pull out the pus in accordance with what we have said.
Or you should cut it when it becomes thin and crusts over, then treat it as necessary, and pull out the pus in accordance with what we have said. And remove the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as it requires, and stitch the wound.
and gangrene
We have discussed in the division the appearances of gangrene and how to treat it with medicines, and how to avoid iron treatment. We will say that gangrene can occur anywhere in the body where it is possible to excise it, such as gangrene occurring around the breasts, in cooking, and in similar locations. You should remove all of it when it first appears; however, if a gangrenous lesion becomes large and old, it should not be treated near it because I have never known anyone to recover from it before me; no one has ever recovered from such lesions in front of me.
And when the operation is within you where it can be excised as we have said, such that you cleanse the patient of black bile; then let the surgeon operate if there's evident swelling, then cut open the diseased area. That means a clean place to make an incision for the operation; then wash off your clamps or gangrene, and hair everywhere, and bone everywhere without leaving anything; and let all bleeding be stopped properly, and thoroughly dry the wound with your hand or any substance, and if it bleeds after healing in opposition to the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize until the wound is fully healed; then treat again until it becomes healthy.
Of cautery by fire, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. We have discussed the symptoms of erysipelas in the division, and how an assembly of water is formed, and the signs for each symptom, and the treatment done by medicine, and that which is treated by metal: these are clear; and should one not use metal in these four symptoms: this means, peritonitis and erysipelas, because it is a deadly thing; thus when you are treating this erysipelas symptom called 'flares' with medicine, and the treatment doesn't help, if you notice that the patient's health is weak, or they have another disease other than erysipelas, such as stomach solution and similar things; then do not touch metal, because there's a doubt; and if you see the patient very green in coloration, and they only have erysipelas disease and are neither too old nor too young, then you should proceed to operate: Lift the limb right above your hands, and have the attendants press the abdomen at the lowest part of the ankle with water being applied to the most basal area. Then take hold of the needle spine according to this form: And make it sharp on both ends, but not so penetrating that upon insertion it could reach until the intestines when placed inside, and do not burn it;
Then observe if the dropisie is draining towards the intestines: should be that you cut through beneath the belly .ii. inches vertically above the navel; and if the dropisie stems from disease of the liver, should your incision be to the left of the belly .ii. inches; and if it's due to pus, then place it to the right, and it is not fitting for the patient to lie on the incision so that excesses do not flow towards the weak one.
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pull it out, lifting your hand throughout the spongy substance between the skin and flesh as much as when searing to the size of a nail or more; then pierce the flesh until the spongy substance reaches nearly eight inches up, this is where you drain the water, then proceed with force, and use this instrument that has been described here: It resembles a slender silver rod, and could be made of bronze or pewter, and it tapers to half an inch in thickness; when it curves on one side, three inches; and another side, half-inch; and from another part, one inch. And the dislocated shoulder is cut as if with a feather pen, this describes the shape of the incision that the writers describe cutting the feather.
At the top is the bile duct, so when the instrument reaches the water, start pouring out now onto the instrument; drain then half or a third of it. For if you drain more than necessary at this time, perhaps the patient dies from the release of its spirit from the poison, or it swells uncontrollably, or it approaches death.
but adjust according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of that virtue mean for the patient, and their pulse; then take up the tool and hold the water, and it is held now by the cure that numbs the tip which is above the syphilitic sore, as I have spoken, in such a way you pierce it. Then begin using the tool again on another day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and use only a small amount of water.
Do this every day, and refrain from watering until it no longer persists but just a little bit of water. And if you doubt about the patient, and leave too much water, if the cure for the burial or sand heats up, and through much sweating or bath and in the sun, and turns red; and drink; and use the medicine-cures dryness until it is sane, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I said before.
Regarding the constriction of the penis No child is born without hairs on the penis, or if the hairs are small, or not in their place. If it suits to pierce both .i. (a unit of measurement) very thin spots according to this form: then put one .i. (again referring to a unit of measurement) small hair from plant material, and tie and keep it like this for .iij. (three) or iiij. (four) days. And when it wants to urinate, remove the cover, let urine out, and then put it back; and by chance nothing happens because the urine that comes out does not leave the cover closed. If the hairs are small, if there is a treatment with the stalk of plant material, as we have said, if it enlarges. Those who do not have the hairs in their place suffer from deformity, for no child is born with hairs on the tip of the penis, so they cannot piss before lifting their penis upwards; and they cannot impregnate because the substance cannot reach the anus, and this is a harmful illness.
And the method of the operation is such that the patient lies on his back, and the head of the penis and its surroundings are placed similarly to a feather's size, so that the hairs lie in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding which happens many times during this procedure, and if it occurs, stop it with someone who can control bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
The blisters of the penis Many times scabs appear on the penis, and there is an ugly appearance; among them are harmful and non-harmful. It is necessary that you weigh them at a quarter ounce each, remove and clean them all, then apply Egyptian ointment on cotton wadding; then treat with diafinicon ointment until it heals. And if the scab is harmful, it has a foul smell and discharges; it is necessary that you apply a cautery to it. When you have removed it, and if the scab is on the penis, and part of it is within the skin and part outside, then you must remove the scab inside first; and once it heals, treat the outside. For when you treat them together, they will not be properly secured at the head of the penis, causing blackness and corruption in his penis and around it; it is necessary to shave off everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made from the peel of pomegranates and flour, then treat with other remedies until it heals.
And when there is bleeding, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizing implements help in two situations: that being bleeding and corruption; if the head of the penis has become corrupted or retracted, it is necessary to pierce or guide through the penis a stick of opium, and let the patient urinate while standing. And when the skin becomes dry at the tip of the penis among those who have not been circumcised yet, or due to injury or abscess, then it is necessary to burn it with a single hair from the beard, until all the ligatures are undone, and remove the head of the penis from all sides;
And if this is the kind of thing you're considering doing, then it's necessary that you cauterize at half a spatal length across from the head of the penis and from the neck; then open slightly between one finger-widths, and insert a piece of fine linen wadding at half an inch under cold water, so that it doesn't scorch right there.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not just about cutting off continuation like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work of our own will and for infants, it's necessary that we do the best job, and cause the least harm for their health.
I say that the old ones did not mention circumcision of their children, for they do not use it in their laws, and we have only what we have gained through experience.
For I have wanted the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision before the age of one year, and at strength, and for all a new cut; if it went wrong because there are two layers, and by chance one might get this above and the other below.
Or they receive two copies, and the pain is doubled, and at circumcision which happens around one year old it is not properly sure the point of the limb; and in the formation of nails by chance the iron escapes from the cut and runs through the work, resulting in many times being born like that needing no circumcision, and I have wanted this.
From the formation that is done by strength to all the length of the thread I have found the value of experience, for the strengths cut exactly as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, cut it equally into halves. But let the thread be well knotted within the skin; and use the method of the first part so that it seems to the child as if you are only binding the thread around the penis without applying any force elsewhere; then make him relax in all the ways you can. Then make him stand straight between your hands, and apply forces in the middle or underfoot so he cannot see nor touch any tools; then move your hand to his penis and blow or sing softly, pulling it up as far as you can until the head of the penis is inside. Then clean well from the accumulated dirt, tie the head with a double thread, then tie around every .i. point on each side; and hold him by .ij. thumbs at the second level over the pouch and index finger, and press between the .ij. threads, then lift your thumb quickly and pull the head of the penis;
Then make him stand straight between your hands, and apply forces in the middle or underfoot so he cannot see nor touch any tools; then move your hand to his penis and blow or sing softly, pulling it up as far as you can until the head of the penis is inside. Then clean well from the accumulated dirt, tie the head with a double thread, then tie around every .i. point on each side; and hold him by .ij. thumbs at the second level over the pouch and index finger, and press between the .ij. threads, then lift your thumb quickly and pull the head of the penis; Then let the bleeding stop gradually, for this is pus; and sprinkle on it repeatedly with a paste made of one tablespoon of yolk from a cooked hard-boiled egg, mixed in water that's pinkish in color, seasoned with rose oil that's fresh. Leave him like this until another day, and treat him again with further treatments until he recovers.
The form of forces at creation thus is this: the two shoulders should be held and should pierce, and the shoulders should also be as large as the elbows evenly.
The error of creation thus lies in when the knuckles within move during incision; therefore it is necessary for you to extend up to your nail, so that the fingers make an abscess; and cut evenly, and if you cannot hold up to your nail, then use tweezers, and then cut.
And if they penetrate for three days, and the one near the penis is swollen, let it be until the abscesses are somewhat relieved, and lightly scrape; cut as you can move, and avoid the part of the penis, it will not harm him at all.
Then treat the left side of the things around the wound with powder, as we have said or treated about powders, and if you cut too deep into the knuckle and it goes beyond, it will not harm; then treat it accordingly, as we have said, until it is healed.
Regarding the retention of urine
Retention of urine is due to stone formation, or frozen blood, or blockage by a clot, or birth remnants, or similar issues that we have discussed in the section;
And if the urine is not relieved and you see that retention is due to a stone in the kidney or at the bladder neck, it's necessary for the physician to have the patient sit with their legs bent. The feet should be placed under the back, and the stomach stretched out from above the back part. And then the doctor should restrain the patient so that they strain as much as possible; and thus compels the opening of the bladder over the stone above, so that urine can be released.
And if it doesn't come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it's necessary for you to administer extraction with all the tool called "syringe", which is like this: use fine thin wire similar to a bird feather; and take a cane of about one palm long and half, and make it thin at its head.
And the method for relieving urination is as follows: take two threads of yarn, tie one end to a piece of wool or cotton at the head and thread the other end into the catheter. Remove any excess wool until it reaches just the tip of the catheter. Then grease the catheter with oil or butter and egg yolk mixture. Have the patient sit on this setup; let him stretch his bladder and penis in lubricated olive oil and water.
Then lightly insert the catheter into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis. Then fold up the penis towards the opening. Next, position the catheter just before it touches the bladder and let the patient relieve himself completely until he is empty. This must be done precisely following this order because if it doesn't lead where one wants it to, it will cause twisting; then tie the yarn firmly around every strand, and when urination follows along with the yarn, remove it, and properly dispose of the urine.
Continue with the catheter until the bladder is emptied, and ensure that the patient is comfortable.
Illnesses of the bladder
When burns or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled, and you see distilled waters and medicines there, then make for all the instrument which is called 'clepsydra', and this is its form:
It is closed, and if it has three parts: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and let there be holes through which the medicine can flow such that it numbs well the penis without addition, so that moisture can be removed, and to be pushed out when necessary;
And when you see the medicine flowing in the bladder, place the tool in the moisture and pull on the one who is pulling it; if you pull out the moisture from the tool, and then firmly push back the puller; if the moisture comes into the tool now, and goes to the bladder, so that the patient will feel it;
And this is the form of the subtle bladder stone which one treats with cathartics for the bladder: thus it is:
And it is of silver or of brass, and the head is positioned higher; and between .i. hand or at the sides lies urine; then take a sheep's bladder and place it in moist heat to treat the bladder, then join both sides together with a thick double thread, and heat one end of this moist heat on fire; then insert the stone into the urethra, then squeeze your hand onto the bladder until all moisture has reached the body part, as long as the patient feels that the moist heat has reached the bladder;
And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle, and pierce it roundly inward; then thread a strong string through these holes, then join the circle together as you would join one plate to another, and put inside that which you see of urine, moisture, and water, and join it in the instrument; do this just like how you did with the bladder, squeezing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
from the stone
We have discussed the methods for stone division and extraction together with medicine; and we explained the differences between stones in the kidneys and all their signs, and when to operate on a kidney stone; and also about the bladder and the penis; and I will clearly and briefly explain this to you.
I state that stones that occur in the bladder often happen to children, and this is a sign that there is an obstruction of the bladder similar to the obstruction found within it; one should open the bladder canal and cleanse the patient's penis several times, then apply a bandage; and after many of these obstructions they find their way down. And it takes gentle healing for infants until they are around four years old, it causes much distress in the elderly, and occurs moderately among those in middle age, between childhood and old age; and it is easier to treat those with larger stones than those with smaller ones.
And when it comes to treatment, it is necessary to first cleanse the patient thoroughly through urination, in order to drain out all the waste that is within the intestines. For there will be no obstruction seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the elbows and lift and move them downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and emerges once from under him. Then make him sit between your hands with his knees apart, so that the bladder is fully sloping down. Next inspect and touch it inside;
If you feel the stone in space, act quickly and cut on the stone now. And if it does not pass under touch throughout, moisten your index finger of your left hand with oil; if the patient is fat, or moisten your middle finger if the patient is young and complete; cut into its base, inspect the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, take it out at the neck of the bladder. Then press onto your finger, and cut towards the front of the area where you see it.
And instruct the surgeon to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand upwards above the genitals, and have his left hand hold the skin that is over the genitals in the part where the cut is made; then he pulls out the urethra smoothly, which looks like this:
And make the division between those who are in between the caillois and the foundation, not midway but at the edge of the left snowbank; and be straight on the stone, and let your hands rest either on the wall or foundation, and ensure its size goes through such that it is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
By chance if the press is where it's on or the foundation, she should not go far without work; and know that there is a piece of stone where angles and margins are: if they are to exit; and if there's a part that's under, resembling a knot, and round, whose issue is light.
So at the ceiling where there are angles and margins, make the size larger; and if it doesn't go, you need to use the tongs that are like a file at their end, in order to constrain the stone so it doesn't escape; or you push underneath .i. tool thin curved instrument at its tip; and if you can't arrange it this way, make it slightly wider than half of its thickness, and if there's no gap then cut it; and when you don't get it out with this, widen by one eighth of the thickness, and if there's no space then force it out with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stone, start by removing the largest at the neck of the bladder. Then move upwards and take out the larger ones first, followed by smaller stones should there be any more. And if they're very large, you may need to make a bigger incision and create a greater wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine starts to come out through it even when his legs cannot join; but all the same force yourself on removing them, or on breaking them with pliers, as long as you are able to remove them piece by piece;
And when you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and tighten it, and place one moist wadded cloth in oil and wine or oil and cold water and rosewater to soothe the hot abscess; then tie up the patient at their neck until even three days later.
And when you untie it, make sure to dry and clean the area very well, then apply an ointment of laudanum and a balsamic ointment until it heals properly.
And if there are pus and corrosion in the wound, and blood clots in the bladder, which if it is retained causes urine to be inhibited, known as such a condition that urine cannot flow without it: then you should wash the wound, and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and deteriorate it;
Then cleanse the wound with water and salt and vinegar, and assist him in all manners that you know, until he is healed; it's necessary that when you treat every wound, you tie his two legs together, and gather the medications on the limb.
And if the stone is small and it's located at the exit of the penis and blocked in such a way that urine cannot come out; then when you treat it like I've instructed, cut several times, making allowance for the loss due to this treatment. I have already proven this method effectively.
Take one iron tree according to this shape and have it pierced with three pegs on one prong.
Then take one thread and tie the loop around the rod near the stone so that it cannot return to the bladder; then drive the iron tree into the rod gently until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron tree in your hand near the stone gradually, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if urine comes quickly, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the rod. If it breaks quickly, flush with urine and let the patient recover;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie one thread around the stone and another on top of it. Then place the rod in between the two threads where the stone is, then pull hard, and release the threads, and cleanse the frozen blood that is in the wound; and treat until it has healed.
From the stone of women
It happens that a stone becomes enmeshed in women, and if it occurs once, then the treatment is difficult, and forbidden for three reasons: one is perhaps that the woman is virginal; and the second reason is that we cannot find a woman who knows how to protect herself from looking at men, even when she is chaste.
And the third way is that perhaps we cannot find a woman who truly knows this art of handling things; and the fourth way is that the stone in a woman's body might be larger at its base than a man's stone, for which reason it must undergo deeper incision, and great fear accompanies this.
And if you need to proceed with this, it is necessary that you seek a capable midwife, and find the true method. If you do not find one, seek out a clever chaste man instead; and present him to a wise woman of life among women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and instruct her as you command regarding the investigation of the stone.
And look very carefully at the woman to see if she is a virgin: then it behoves her to push her husband or his foundation and try to find the stone; and if she finds it, force it down under her husband's hand and advise her to push her husband or where the illness lies, and press her left hand against the bladder.
If she finds it, she should move it back and forth from the entrance of the bladder until down below, as long as she reaches the root of the thigh; then apply pressure on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the man's member, where its protrusions are located, and feel for the stone in that area; and do not move her hand over or under the stone and cut it with your first small incision.
Then cut the muscle in the waist, if you feel the stone increase the wound until the stone can exit forcibly, and know that many types of stones exist: namely small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and with edges. Know their appearances to determine the way out.
And if it doesn't heal on its own, put it under the heat of vitriol, and keep it there for an hour until the wound is sealed; then return to your task, as long as the stone remains intact, and use the tools I've told you about in removing stones at home to assist you in your work.
And if it doesn't heal on its own, and it's the artery that has been cut, apply the powder to the wound and bind with strips and bandages, don't repeat this again, leave the stone alone and do not remove it by chance which might result in killing the patient; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of blood has been calmed, and the wounds have healed, then return to your task, as long as the stone remains intact.
Of fatty hernia
Glandular watery substance is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white pus, which is found within the skin of the testicles that contains an egg; and it's called "pus", and it's never properly in the membrane of the egg if one thinks there could be another kind; and this is the skin under the testicle where we have said the white pus lies; and this doesn't have a pore.
And the production of such glandular matter is due to weakness that affects the testicles, and this substance spreads.
And it never comes from beating on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a yellowing color leading to jaundice, or it lacks redness, or it's black, or watery white, and this happens more often;
And these are the signs to recognize this gathering, because if it is white like we have said, then the abscesses are round, that is, long as the shape of an egg, and do not open inside, because there is moisture throughout.
And if there's moisture in the proper skin, then the abscess is round with part of an egg, and because of this, we think it's another egg;
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white that's pale, you'll feel it well; therefore, when you know the color of the moisture, prove everything inside the square, from which its shape was described before. So according to what comes after penetration, judge on this one that is inside.
So according to what comes after penetration, judge on this one that is inside. And when we heal it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be cleansed according to our ability and the restoration of their body; then support them on their back, on something slightly elevated, and place a cloth under them.
then sit on their left side, and instruct the attendant to sit on the right, extending the stick towards one of the two ribs near the heart.
then take the spit and grease the skin of the chest between it long until past the elbow, and make the cut all straight in dividing the skin of the chest up to the white flesh, and gently scrape it off according to our skill.
then pierce the white flesh fully with water up to one small width, and remove all the water, then put your forceps in and keep the white flesh at the top; and do not touch the heart of the chest but only let the white flesh alone; scrape it off completely or piece by piece carefully from his side, for if you don't scrape it off properly, it will return the water.
And if the fetus jumps towards your work, you should reset it in its place once you have completed the delivery process thus far; then join the two skin flaps from the kidneys to one seam, then treat it as with other wounds until healed completely.
And if you find the fetus corrupted by another disease, it's necessary that you tie the suspenders of the veins, while being cautious of blood flow; then cut all over the suspensory area and extract the fetus, then treat it as we have said.
And if the wound has healed into two parts together, know that these are two branches. Then cut the other part in the same way you did with the first equally, then bleed out the blood and apply wet wool soaked in rose oil to the wound;
And dip another piece of wetted cloth in wine and oil, and place this on the two kidneys, and cover with doubled cloths, and bind it up like this around the entire area.
Then take two pieces of fabric, and fold them with frayed wool in this manner until they are sewn together in the garter of the breeches, and one piece is placed on the base up to the back, and the other at the part near the knee; and two more pieces go over the two angles, and be completely assembled into the tightening around the garter;
And once this fire cautery has been treated with medicine instead of a metal size, take one surgical cautery that is fine and cut it into the skin of the kidneys. Heat it up just as we have said so that the white liquid contained in water can be exposed;
Take the cautery according to this form, and make an incision at that spot with your needle, and apply the delicate cautery burn there:
And the fire in all ways you can, until you have burned everything; and be sure that the heat doesn't touch the egg; and know that this work is more healed; and keep from bleeding out, and avoid opening up the wound further.
And if anything opposes you, or if pus comes out or bleeding or any other thing, do the treatment that stops this opposition, according to what has been said beforehand.
And if the patient is afraid and cannot wait for this operation due to its horror, then perform a puncture as I have instructed you, and know that when you are thoroughly convinced by the meanings we have said that the watery branch is there,
Make the patient sit on a raised seat; then make a puncture in the middle of the swelling area as wide as possible, and ensure the hole runs along the length of the body; and widen the incisions so that all the pus flows out.
Then place cotton on the site and bind it, leaving enough for the pus to flow out, then treat until the wound heals.
And if the white cloth does not allow pus to drain from the wound's opening, then you should fill it with a feather or a tool used for draining pus in those affected by dropsy, as described previously. And widen around one inch around the wound, and know that pus will return and gather together after about seven months or more, and once it is gathered together just like before, then this process will see the end of the patient's suffering.
From the discharging of seminal fluids
Know that in this part of the branch there is more fear with various arrangements, because it seems to me better that one leaves it;
and I will tell you about the work and appearances of the discharging (or emission).
So I say that many emissions come from veins or arteries, and even from semen; and this happens through a variety of circumstances.
This is to know by excess of bitter and fever, which spreads throughout the body, or from impact;
and the color of the abscess matches the body's color; and no pain is felt, it is an abscess that causes grief.
And by chance there is an abscess that is hard and puffy, and of a red color, and it never comes from the heart or from swelling veins.
When it's due to blood clotting, you can tell by the placement of pus when you press with your fingers; And you should not touch it at all.
That which is filled with venous enlargement can be identified by its arrangement when you press on it with your fingers,
And one can do well to measure this kind of appearance, and the other marks; And this is how you prepare the knife for cutting, then place the egg above, and hold the tool's white part steady, and release all around the suspension of the egg.
If the egg is already stuck with these old strings, then you should pull the egg and the knife.
And if it is white at the handle, or inside the vessels, then you should release all of that thread, and cut the egg roundly.
And if the birthplace of the string is at the back or front, then you should cut the egg entirely, and remove the egg, just as we have said.
And when your tasks are completed, if you dress the wound with wet wool in oil and wine, then continue other treatments until it heals.
of the pus of the glands
This is an abscess covered by an envelopment resembling one and a half buttons, with the swelling of the glands, and the patient experiences severe pain in the affected areas when it moves;
and the treatment of this disease is indeed as difficult as this has been shown to be,
yet we will tell you about its workings according to what the old ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then lift the testicles up with your fingers, ensure all parts of the genital area are close to the penis, and stretch them out in an orderly fashion;
Then cut through the fatty tissue widely across the vessels, until they are exposed.
and then burn from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples;
then insert a needle or there be one thread doubled, and tie it at the original site where the thread came out, and tie it immediately to the other end. then cut straight through in the middle, according to the length of the body, and drain out the corrupted fluids;
Then treat the wound as you would with others or cover it with a bandage, so that none of its parts exceed the growth of one of its sides.
for this brings no harm, and if all the parts come into contact, it is necessary to treat both sides of each part. so that the eye does not lose its growth due to the cutting of the parts, and dries out and cannot be helped.
from the rupture in the kidney The occurrences of this matter happen through the cut, or when one is pushed upwards on the belly in the area of the hips, thus causing the intestines to descend from that opening into one of the ureters.
And this opening is where one is pushed upwards or from the push, and these two ways of the animal come about due to various reasons: through impact, or jumping, or bellowing, or lifting up of the belly in labor, and by similar actions.
And when it's due to extension at the belly button, it means that things happen gradually and over a long time, not suddenly. And the abscesses are even up to around the belly button, because the navel compresses the intestine.
And the signs are when it is due to intestinal section, causing sudden pain at the beginning, and various abscesses appearing, near the skin area, and this is due to the exit of the intestines and body at the rear of the intestine.
And there are times when the loops separate with the intestine, and are retained in place, causing great pain for the patient to endure, even when they are pressed.
And in these iron treatments involving fear, it is advised to avoid them.
And the method of performing this operation is to command or guide the patient to pull out the intestine by its end inside the wound with their hand, if it can be inserted. Then wrap around his neck between your hands, and lift the legs;
then stretch it upwards, and remove all the skin of the buttocks as long as possible; then cut into the belly skin inches according to how you need to open the wound, and do it in such a way that it can easily come out;
then shave off the scrotum where the skin of the buttocks is, until all sides of the white scrotum are exposed;
Then apply your thumb on the first bone near where it joins with the second bone in the egg, between the white yolk and under the skin.
and move towards the back of the egg and between the second bone; then pull with your right hand inside the canal of the testicles, and place the white bone at the top on your left hand, and lift the egg forward to all the bones towards the waist; and instruct the attendant to extend the egg upwards, and release the one that's behind the junction;
and feel with your fingers if it has any part of the intestine wrapped around or white bone hard, and if you find nothing, then apply to its belly under.
Then take one needle with a thread of ten threads that is .i. (.1.) in size and the end of this thread is after the skin of the testicles; after cutting, then cut off the testes that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads left; Then join them one on top of the other like a cross and bind this thread, which we have said is beneath the skin of the testicles, with a strong thread of two parts; Then cover the testes of the threads and bind them tightly with two parts so that none of the needles that pass through them can enter inside, preventing any abscess from spreading. And place the band in a straight line according to the first long line of two inches from that, and after these two lines leave an interval equal to half of the width across the knee bone, which is about one inch.
And after all else according to the roundness that he has placed; then cut in the part where it is close to the skin of the knee bone, as long as there is no resistance and the joint, just like we said previously.
Then apply moist wool in oil, and place it on wounds, and put the bandage that we have said. And once the white flesh that we have said is cauterized, after the incision, due to fear of bleeding.
For this happens many times, and let the patient remain until he can urinate by himself; and if he takes too long to urinate, then use hot water, and place on him what we have said, until he can urinate.
Then continue treating the wound with other remedies, until it heals perfectly.
regarding fatty hernia
In this branch I never see anyone daring to do the iron treatment.
And the old ones said that it is done like a branch that sticks together in a bundle, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting them slightly on your palm;
Then continue with me, and treat the abscess of him who works, as long as the vessels bleed; and treat it in the same way that we have said, until it is clean.
No breach comes in the lungs, as we have said, and open them; and do not let any of the intestines come out at all; and if some do come out, it is little, and repair every hour.
And even if it stays too long at this point, if the wound or gangrene is suspected, until the intestines descend;
And this happens through the extension of gangrene which is at an angle, just like we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swollen around the limbs and open;
And the treatment involves using a cautery, as we have previously mentioned; and there are times when it is treated with iron in this manner:
And the patient should place the affected area on their back between your hands, then press the limb from the swollen part outwards according to the size of one and a half fists;
And then remove the fat that is under the skin which follows, then take hold of it and place it in the apparent area of the fat.
And then press at the very front of the belly, then cut both of the apparent wounds on the fat above the head of the rib, and cut one and the other.
And then remove the head of the rib, and do not cover the fat or stretch the egg or any other thing, as I have instructed you in the treatment of removing the root from the intestines.
Then treat it according to wound healing methods. And when you have covered the children, if you cleanse and heal the wound, until it is healed.
The surgeon is constrained, lacking any appearance in the operation, and the cautery is heated in this place, closer to healing.
of the softening of the skin around the buttocks
Many times the skin around men's buttocks becomes soft due to the softening of the substances inside them and it is visible. When one wishes to treat this, one must make the patient relieve themselves on their back and loosen the soft skin over natural skin; then join the two edges together for a seam, and if you see fit, stitch the excess of the soft skin at three seams or four tightly thereafter; then suture between the seams, treat it like any other wound until it heals, and cut out the thread.
of sexual restraint
Know that chastenings and sacrifices are part of our law, and it would please me not to discuss them in this book; they're necessary for only two purposes: one being to have the beast respond when asked about its punishment and what cure is needed. And the other purpose because we often need to discipline animals to help us, such as with goats, sheep, cattle, and others.
Regarding Hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites can be divided into two forms as follows: one where between the two openings are located just like a woman's natural figure, with hair present, and sometimes excreting urine. The other form is like in women, having near the belly button something akin to a penis and two openings. As for treating them, both sexes are treated similarly to any wound; concerning the second type of hermaphrodites, for those who ejaculate through their genital skin, there's no particular treatment needed.
From the pustule
Tentigene is a spot attached to the natural part, as long as it's too ugly to see; and some women have it so large that they can touch their hand with it, and this needs treatment. You should remove the excess of tentigene on your fingers or nails, and gently scrape it off; do not press too hard for fear of bleeding, then treat it again until it heals; and at another spot that appears near the woman's mouth, and the neck, and by chance a sudden eruption, and follows the pattern of a cow, hence they named this old ailment "cow disease". You should scrape off this spot as you scraped the tentigene, and treat it until it is healed.
Regarding the erratic one
Erratic refers to when the nature of the woman is not understood completely, or when there are deficiencies that are minor; it is naturally occurring by birth, or accidental due to disease that has come about. It could be through an attached spot, or due to a subtle or prominent syphilitic lesion, and is formed in between her thighs, on her side, underneath, or anywhere else; recognizing this requires knowing the woman's appearance and understanding her pregnancy. If the protrusions are close and visible, feel them with your fingers or under your arm pit. If it's due to a subtle syphilis lesion, and they're close to the two lungs, you need to act quickly: place your two index fingers together, have the woman lie on her back, spread out her legs; then form the two lungs into place until the subtle lesions are removed, covering them over completely. Then take the ashes of a burned bone and mix them with oil, apply it onto her belly, and let the woman rest each day until she can heal by itself. And if the lesion is hard and prominent, you should scrape off the protrusion as if it were a leaf of myrtle. If the protrusion is due to an attached birth, hang it on your wrist and scrape it; and use medicines that stop bleeding, such as aloe vera, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with enough egg whites; then prepare a pillow of poppy seeds wide enough so the wound doesn't heal by itself; then have her rest under a tent made of clean linen for a long time. And when syphilis is present in pregnancy, if it requires scraping off as described here, because an abscess that's inside the womb should not be touched with fire.
Of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that occur without regular exercise, and when hemorrhoids become thick; we mentioned their appearances, signs in section division, and I will speak about those that require treatment here. Hemorrhoids and thickening, when they happen internally in the anus, are not perceived by touch unless there is cure with iron. Those located at the opening of the anus can be felt, so they can be cured. Therefore, it should be that you put the woman in a cold room, then place the anus towards the tongs, and the thigh under her roots, then apply powder with medicines to stop bleeding such as juniper and dragon's blood and incense, among similar things; then pinch her feet for an hour on her skin, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding occurs during this process, she should be placed in a decoction of sumac and peel of pomegranate shells and rhubarb and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and butter, and apply as paste on her back. And if they stop bleeding, that is good. If not, heat suction cups on her back and nipples without piercing; then take wool, and mix it with the juice of plantain or elderberry along with old wine, and heat them on her body.  And when the abscess rests, you treat her body with ointment until she heals; and that which is called 'albathir' is red, looks like .i. hard head, so it should be treated as I said for thickening; and then she needs to heal fully.
of the abscesses of the anus
Many ways of abscess formation occur within the body, including gangrene and bone abscesses, herpes, cysts, fissures, hemorrhoids, and other abscesses that I mentioned in the division. Therefore, it is necessary for me to discuss this specific type of abscess which forms within the body, not one that heals without medical intervention; and when you see its onset, if there is inflammation along with fever and heat, and it turns red when you observe it, then don't rush to pierce immediately but wait until the pain subsides. Afterward, make the patient lie on their side, placing two small pillows under their hips, and four small cushions where they are leaning, supporting their back and feet towards the part outside of the leg; ensure their arms are spread wide with their elbows down and tied firmly with a strong bandage; then guide the abscess towards the right side, applying the tool used for opening the body from the mouth of the wound, which is described later in its form. It should be that when you see this tool being applied, place it first to determine the depth of the body cavity, so that what enters into the tool does not go deeper than necessary and does not hurt the patient; if the instrument is too large, cover the depth of the body cavity with a cloth, ensuring that the tool doesn't irritate them; then attach the nozzle of the tool at the top, and apply heat to the tool. When the abscess opens and is handled by hand gently, it should be covered on top, over the tip of the tongue; and once the pus has been drained out, apply wet ointments made from oil roset or green oil; then place the bandage directly under the cavity of the wound, covering the wound and the clean knife blade with a moist cloth made from water that has been boiled with mallow leaves. Then, cure it for another two days using ointment appropriate to this method until it heals properly. And if at any point you must lift the body and wound through douching with water and honey, then afterwards, use water or water with cooked lily roots and long aristolochia; then resume applying the ointment. If the wound has healed within the body cavity, ensure not to treat it with metal heat but instead, cure it as we have instructed in the division.
Of childbirth
Craft is first to know the form of natural birth, and here are signs when you see a woman about to give birth, and wishes to smell it: then the baby quickly comes out; thus you can tell that this birth follows its natural form, and is from under her head, and the second part accompanies it; and when these signs appear, gently press on her belly so that the baby comes out promptly; for when it descends under its head, then the second part also comes with it, and leaves behind in the waters through good cleansing; and anything else like this does not come naturally. For it happens sometimes under its feet, and comes as force of her body or shoulder, and hands, or under her belly, or back, and is turned by chance over its neck, and by other harmful figures; so craft must be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the forms on how to assist properly.
When the baby comes under its head by natural issue, and the woman labors heavily, and her strength is weak, she should sit on a stool, or have women hold her; then let her return to her nature where fenugreek has been cooked, and then place the midwife between her hands with this small spatula which has the form: And cut the second part, and hold it up to her nail until all the moisture inside has come out; then press on her belly until the baby descends; if it does not descend, you should cleanse the woman with fenugreek musk and sesame oil oil. Then have her take a breath of cologne and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child comes. And if the two hands emerge, gently guide them in and out; if they cannot enter, place the woman on a seat, lift her feet up high; then remove the seat from the ground, cut on the woman so she does not leak during delivery; and if the hands cannot enter and the baby is dead, cut your fingers as shown here, extract the child, and guide the guidance equally.
Concerning the exit of the child from its feet When the child comes out from its feet, it should be uprighted; and then turn it gradually and gradually, until it is even;
then hold one of the feet and stretch it gradually and gradually.
If it jumps up to the thighs, if one commands it to do so, and makes it snort with consideration; If it could jump, may God will it.
And if it doesn't jump as we have said, if it twists little by little, as long as it follows the natural figure. For then he becomes slightly easier.
And if it does not come out as we have said, take the substance of althea, and oil from safflower, and dissolved gum, and grind all in a mortar to one part; and apply this ointment inside and outside the woman's body. then have her lie in warm water up to her chest;
And when it becomes moistened everywhere, make one ring of myrrh paste, apply it everywhere, and let it sit for an hour; Then place it on a flat surface, afterwards make it sneeze and restrain its mouth and nose, and gently massage its abdomen, for the fetus jumps now. From the birth of the child on his knees When the baby comes in this form, I place their hands gently and softly.
From the birth issue of a child who comes forth with one hand hanging down It is necessary to engineer to bring back the hand: If one cannot bring it back, then have her stand up and walk;
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed of one meter length, and support her legs straightly;
then proceed with the treatment I have described;
and if it does not give birth, make her sit on a stool for one hour, then try to get back the hand; and guide the baby according to its natural form, and make her sneeze, and command her to breathe deeply until the baby comes out.
from the baby's exit from its neck, and spread its hands, and its buttocks turned towards its mother's back. It is necessary for you to clean your hand,
And when it is even, place it on the natural muscular tension of elevation and oil,
And when you have done this, make her sit on a one-legged stool, In the same manner for the rest of the second part.
In the same manner for the rest of the second part. When it comes to handling this process for the entire second part, ensure that with your first angle, as long as the moisture is drained.
And if they begin to move around on its face and neck, start cutting from the mouth, ensure it's not held back, and let the child die;
Then force out the child until you place it in accordance with what is suitable and instruct the woman not to give birth at any point.
From the emergence of twins Know that twins often are born, and in some instances three or four; and this is not an uncommon occurrence, and there's nothing unusual about it. Two are rare occurrences, and they do not live long, if they happen at all.
I know that when they are conceived and fertilized by the seminal fluid, which is connected to the womb.
And they also come out naturally as with all of them underneath, just as we have said.
And if they come out painfully, with the treatment as we have said, and if the bones are subtle, then do what she does quickly and lightly; Do it like that for the sake of healing. of several children
of several children No matter the number of times they are formed in marriage,.i., or .ij., or .iij., or .iiij., or .v., or .vj., or .vij., and so on up to .xv., and they are all shaped like a child by the measurement of their glorious body,
And it must be that the groom knows everything about this, because such a thing might happen to him; Then do as what is fitting.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman who has died or miscarried, as I've explained in the section about cutting open (division), if it doesn't come out and you're forced to operate with your hands; It is necessary that you know whether the woman was in good health, and did not have an accident or fear of death;
It is necessary that the woman be supported on her back, and have her hips inclined forward, and her legs raised;
and apply the hot iron to two inches of flesh, or if she is lying in bed so that she isn't treated while giving birth to the baby;
Then rub the mouth of the mustard seed with a mixture of tamarind and fennel seeds and linseed, then let him smear his hands with these oils and these muscillaiges. Then support her gently, then let her drink up to half of what she can consume, when it comes to the onions that are suitable for this.
and take care so that the child is dressed properly that he may descend from his bed; if you place the onions in his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or on his palate or under his beard or on his necktie or near his sides.
And if it descends in bones, then insert or pierce it near the middle of the ribs.
And you should cut the tendon with your right hand, and place the bend between his fingers of his left hand, and push it lightly with all his hand towards the empty thing, and insert the tendon into none of those things we have mentioned until it reaches the hollow.
Then insert against another tendon, or the third one if you need it, so that the removals are equal;
And then it grows evenly by moving from one side to another, so as not to move out, and whether the teeth hurt because of the movement, just like this shape:
And if it leaves a part behind, if there's any oil beneath its nails, and they're placed in that part, and pull the other part;
And if it leaves nothing behind, place this tooth or higher up on him, and do this until it comes out completely.
And if one hand goes before the other, and it cannot be pulled back due to being held tightly, If you need to wrap it with a piece of cloth until everything comes out;
Then apply pressure at the joint of the foot or on the palm, and in doing so, you should perform this with your other hand, and for both feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is tilted in the birth canal, or if there is an acute angle assembled, If you need to push on the sharp spine of the shoulder blade with your fingers, and lift the head and pull out the acute angle. you will find it at the instrument which is named 'almidach', of whose form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
and in such manner make it so that the child gives birth to a large head naturally; and then pull on the bones with the tongs,
and if the shoulder joint jumps out and is held by force, so that it breaks, until the moisture in or beyond it has flowed away;
And if it cannot come out, you can extract it piece by piece until you can.
And if it is swollen in the abdomen or around the sides, it is necessary that you pierce it as far as the moisture extends.
And if it is located on its feet, it has a slight attraction, and the connection to the mouth of the wound is also slight.
And if it is located in the abdomen or on the buttocks, you should extract it to one and a half cubits wrapped around the hand; And let the belly or the buttocks, as long as the moisture is within.
and if another limb has bone disease and the head stays in place, if they can't take his hand out by pulling on the joint from the front with the knee, and guide it until it reaches the mouth of the knee; then pull the (third) bone or two bones, and guide him with force;
And if the mouth of the womb is narrowed due to an abscess that has come about, then it does not require labor. Rather, it requires administering moist and fatty substances; And the administration of plasters is required, and if there are any in water that are soothing and moisturizing.
And if the child is on his side, and you can place it evenly, then administer what we have said about live infants;
And if we cannot do it all at once, then divide the operation into parts and leave nothing from the second part behind.
And when you have done this, proceed with what we have instructed concerning abscesses that develop around the anus.
and if there is bleeding during this process, then place it in warm water to restrict the flow, and proceed with other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose child had died in the womb, then she was pregnant again with another one, and this second one also died. After a long period of time, there came an abscess in the abdomen, and it swelled so much that it opened, and started causing intense pain.
I was called to treat, I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
I placed on plaster of great strength, and out came a bone, and after some days another one. I was greatly amazed, for that belly does not have any bones.
If I thought they were bones of a dead child.
I wanted to examine the wound, and with my hands searched for bones, until the woman was at her best condition; And he tended to the woman long in such manner, and it reached a point of some blood from the wound.
And I remember this chapter only for when, whenever the masters find an unusual thing, they should know how to offer aid.
To return the arm to its place
Following this comes the form of pressure, which is described in the books; and at two turns for each of two shoulders for each joint. Always, let the horns be more delicate than a restrainer, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the tube be two fingers wide, and the edge of the leaves one finger, and in length half a palm; And between the two joints let there be two adjustments of this same staff, which must be firm in one and the other, of half a palm's length or a bit more;
And these two adjustments must be placed in the mouth of the groove to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, resembling it more subtly and lightly, may be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of pincers. and have two horns with two adjustments, as you see, one hand in length, and two sticks that are wide.
And when you see the belly being opened all the way with the instrument, then make the woman sit on one and a half bed, with her hands hanging down and her legs spread apart, then hold the two adjusted joints together in the belly, and keep the tool's head between her buttocks; then work your hand with all the instrument, just like you did with pliers equally, according to the amount you see opening the mouth of the belly, as long as the fetus does what she wants.
This instrument is entirely set up, and has many duplicates of its kind; and when you have the preparations ready for it, your work becomes faster, and your position higher in relation to their size.
If you do not breathe out the instrument that you have prepared, because your need is not excusable.
When the second stage is retained during childbirth, it should be that you instruct the patient to retain their breath and then make them inhale through their nostrils, and hold your hands at their mouth and nose. And if she jumps over this, well done.
And if that doesn't work, take two pots, and make a lid or cover for each. Place herbs inside that might open the mouth of the maris, such as calendula, rue, anise, chamomile, casuarina, and horehound.
All these herbs, or any of them, whether cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then take a reed or twig from under the pot, and place the other end into the mouth of the patient.
And hold it until the steam goes inside the patient; then have them sneeze as we said to do. If the second dose is taken quickly. And if she remains after this treatment and is not cured, command her to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or rosemary ointment, and then rub it into the natural skin.
And seeks the second one; and when she finds it, if you grasp her and extend her gradually very little by little straight, so that there's no resistance in extraction; but you must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it will come and be released.
And if there is constriction in the mouth of the maris, as we have said, the treatment for sneezing and herb smoking is applied.
and if it doesn't respond to all that we have said, be sure not to forcibly pull when extracting it.
but it is necessary that the one at the woman's mouth bind him to her thigh, then anoint him with fourfold medicine ointment;
if it penetrates and returns powerfully; but still, if she puts in too much, it causes a bad smell in the stomach and head, and injures the patient.
Therefore, suitable fumigations are necessary for this: none of the old remedies have proven effective with fumigation using sow thistle and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used to fumigate a woman during labor is as follows:
And it appears like a cane, and one places the subtle head into shape, and the shoulders wide above the fire;
and let there be fumigations over the coals, and the worm until it is digested, and begin another one.
to pierce the foundation
And infants are born who have not had their foundation pierced, but rather made sensitive by an intricate art. So then it is necessary at the bed that she punctures him where he should be placed, and does not puncture her completely through any sharp point, and guards the placement so that it doesn't touch.
Then put on wet wool in wine and oil, then do the greasing procedure until it's clean.
And if you doubt that it won't recur, then apply or introduce a dose of opium, and let the patient rest, and have it removed when the child wishes to move around in rooms.
And there should never be sudden healings of a wound or an abscess; if you need to handle this suddenly, then treat it: if you apply the cure as we have said with the dose of opium.
from the fistula from its base fistulas that originate at the base are congealed and thicker than those that originate just below it, or in the space of two parts,
if there is one fistula or multiple; and when this congealment has been around for a while, if it produces and keeps up moisture that appears white or subtle,
they are always Persian fistulas; and they are recognized by those who experience an expulsion or windiness when the patient expels something, and sometimes in their movement from one area to another.
And for those fistulas that pierce up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and extend up to the knee joint, and up to the base of the testicle.
And thus one knows if the fistula persists at the root, and not persisting: and mark it when you press your index finger or root, and insert a fine needle or spider's leg in the fistula if there is no winding.
And if it has winding, you should insert a fine tentacle or one of horsehair, as long as you feel the tentacle or hair at your index finger;
And if you don't feel it, and there's no sign of drainage or windiness nor smell, as we have said: you'll know that it doesn't puncture; then hurry to treat.
And when the fistula extends up to the bladder or up to where urine is conducted, if it jumps with urine, and cannot be sealed by medicine.
If it passes only up to the ankle joint, then there is the vein leading up to the top; If there is no tortuosity and the pain's origin is not inside, then it means that there's a swelling beneath, and it doesn't benefit from medicine or simply through application of ointment;
And in these Persian fistulas there is no remedy but work and the vanity of those who interfere, showing their foolishness.
In the one that's neither Persian nor old, there is hope for healing through iron, as I have experienced.
And it is when the body lies in your hands on its back; and lift its legs up to its hips, and incline its hips towards its abdomen; Then use an arachnid's tentacle, or that of a snail if there are twists, until you know where the tentacle comes from.
If the patient feels pain in the depth of their body, it is necessary that you press your index finger there.
You will then feel that the tentacle has penetrated; and find it out where you sense between your index finger either a softness or the bone, then you know it is deep. If there's no movement in that place, one cannot measure it.
One must know though that one can indeed heal many, but this happens rarely.
and in assisting with this, if one is to apply the delicate cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been explained previously; and immerse it completely hot in the fistula until it reaches the base; and perform this twice or three times, as long as you know that these heated particles are burned away, which resemble a bird's feather;
and then treat with wet swabs soaked in butter until the heated particles are expelled, then apply ointment that hardens and binds.
If it is thus healed, that's good. If not, then there can't be another way to heal it;
And if you try to pass it through and only pierce up to the base or foundation, then in between your finger and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or fat, and you see the fistula at that spot where the covering meets the skin. If you remove through the beginning of the fistula and push until before the tent, then after that apply the cautery, as far as it reaches to the tip of the tent.
And you will remove the tent, and it will drain. Then cleanse those fatty tissues that resemble a bird's feather, making sure not to leave any remnants.
And if you can't see it, cut between yourself and the wound, then apply either a fire cautery or an ointment in its place.
For the fire cauterizations combine two things: that is to say, the application of these charred substances and the bleeding out and drying off from moisture.
Then remove wet bandages with butter or ground things until the blood flows out, and let the burned substances finish in the fire.
Then treat the wound with bindings soaked in hard wax, and use dry medicines.
For when it has been restored, if it is healed, and does not return again.
And if the fistula comes up just to the bottom edge, and is far from the body, then you should press your finger or the bottom part of it, and inquire about this.
And if you feel the membrane and it is inside two layers or if there's pus or scabs present, close to piercing, should only find a path of infection and hope; through the application of one of the three methods:
or you apply cautery as we have said, or you stop it just before the bottom, or if you can, place a needle and a cure like the first;
And do not go too far forward, that you might grasp the substance that supports the foundation, and bring about the evacuations by your own willing action; then apply the cautery, as we have said;
then apply the cautery, as we have said; By chance if it is clean, or you remove that covering and cleanse it since it has been separated from the foundation, either by accident or with another tool. Then remove with your hand the pus in the wound as much as you can;
then try to heal the wound, and delay the pus flow in the lower part of the base: if it is lighter for the patient.
And always drain abscesses in this way: and when you squeeze the tentacle into the abscess, and it is close to the base of the skin below, take a tentacle piercing at the head according to this form: And tie two twisted threads together, and keep the thread taut within the duct until it reaches the head.
If it is Persian in the margin beneath the foundation within, then extract the thread from that twisted one, just as you would bend your finger or base.
and pull the head of the thread, and join the two shoulders together, and tie one to the other, and let it be for an inch or two;
and restrain it each time, until the threads reach these points that are between the two and meet;
Then treat the wound until it has healed and is clean.
If a fistula does not puncture, make it puncture in all the ways that you can, provided it is not too deep.
It is not proper to make a covering for it when it is too deep, and then treat it as we have said, until it is clean.
The form of the spicular pus-filled fistula that one makes for a fistula is hard and from another, part and cutting it. And on the other hand no, because what we do not handle, we should also not handle, as you see here:
Emboli can be in two ways: either they are inside the vessel, like bits of resin, and there are both small and large ones, and they cause blood clotting, And if there is one or more of them, and are outside the vessel wall and at the base of the vessel's wall; but those that are outwards have little moisture,
And also even just a little bit of yellow water or even just a little blood, and has the color of a corpse;
And for those treated internally within the foundation, you instruct the patient to take medicine that causes perspiration until the foundations are exhausted, and this becomes evident through their sweat and they reveal themselves. if you need to, twist it with pliers, or hold onto your finger, then apply pressure on its roots;
and if the nail does not stay because of its moisture, take it with thread, or cotton, or a piece of leather; And remove them with your hands, then clean them, and apply some hot powders on them that are used in the fire cautery; or you might cauterize them as described or according to the cautery chapter, then treat them with other remedies until they are healed;
and if the foundations cannot come out, you might cauterize the patient for a bowel obstruction that is sharp and rough to wash out what is in the foundation, so it can come out freely;
if the patients cannot pass their stool, and if there are threads in the foundation, then the treatment should be light; And you should grasp them with your thumb or forceps and extract them, then treat if according to what we have said, until they are healed, and they fear the metal incision.
It is necessary that you suture according to this manner: take one twisted thread and place it in a needle, then pull the thread upwards and make the needle pierce from another side, and turn both ends of the threads around the needle. And if it is broad; and tie the thread in a knot, then tie the thread itself, remove the needle, and do so for all others, and leave one to cover excess blood;
Then place on the wound one moistened pad in oil of rose or poultice, and place it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
And let them until they reach full length, and when they are fallen off, apply oil treatments and other remedies, as long as it remains healthy.
do the drying by fire or foundation Many times there has been drying from ashes in the intestines, and due to the nature's compulsion, and when the disease is old and medicine no longer helps.
It is necessary for you to place at the tip of a thorn or on your nail the skin above it, which should not be left wet; Then apply the treatment until it is firm as it should be;
And if it cannot harden, start rasping more forcefully than before, until some healing occurs, and leave it burnt. Then continue the treatment until it is healed.
A tremor Antlworms is a false small appearance before the body, and goes most around it.
And whenever blood flows to the heart, and one feels it also like death due to trembling, and comes throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is that you take a rod from a goose feather or a strong vulture feather, and place this rod on the trembling, until the red circles eliminate the trembling completely. Then turn your hand to all of the cane until you capture the entire tremble and put it forward, and eradicate the tremble from its roots.
And if you see something like this on an arachnid or iron in this form, and make it slender from underneath and draw it upwards:
Don't pierce it though, but hold it at the two ends and squeeze it. And if you see something like this, cauterize the tremble in front or chapter of the cautery.
of the shape of a bladder No silver paste or copper paste is ever made, or melted spider or wax; and no small or large instrument is ever made according to the one it's being applied to.
Therefore, when dealing with the treatment of children and those who are weak and in pain, they need small things.
The shape of the small or large paste is like this, or the stomachs are bound in this way:
And it allows the stomachs to be bound in this way, as you see, and the shoulder is pierced within; and there are two parts on one side and one part on the other side.
And if it is the stomach where you place medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierce it completely through with tiny pieces.
And have between each piece one inch of space, then insert one strong thread in these pieces, winding it through ten times or around the entire circumference, and join the stomach as if it were a goat. And when the medicine is inside, seal it with a strong thread in front of the tool, then cauterize; and this forms like a circle:
And ensure the medicine is neither too hot nor too cold, and grease the edge of the cauterizer with oil or yolk, or something similar, then gently insert it.
Then the surgeon operates with both his hands together, as long as he can see it clearly, then removes the bladder stone, and lifts the patient's legs onto the operating surface.
And if the medicine is supposed to come out, let it come as much as you can; and if he sleeps through a whole night, then it's more effective aid.
And if you administer castor oil for the ailment of belly evacuation, and the medicine is meant to quickly come out, then repeat it until he feels better.
And if there's bleeding from the anus or its base, or an abscess, then use a castor oil as fine as one for half a child.
And it is this form beneath the subtle lymph node where the skin is constrained:
Of wounds
We have discussed the treatment of wounds in the section on healing; now we will discuss hand care and medicine according to completion.
I say that wounds are varied depending on how they are made, and where they are made in the body, and why they were caused.
The ways wounds are made include through the impact of stones, and cuts from swords and knives, or from spears or clubs or hammers, or by similar means.
that are made according to the anatomy of the body, such as wounds that occur on the neck, or head, or chest, or belly, or liver, and similar parts;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, starting with simple head wounds since their description will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head or face, and if the bone is not broken, take care whether it's due to stone or similar things, and all the skin has been torn away and the wound is large, and you slightly suspect an abscess in the middle: if there is a little blood from the wound immediately after it was injured, and then heal with the cephalic method; or if not, heal against the part affected.
And when the patient's body is filled with wine and heavy meats.
And if they do not want to recover, let them reduce their meat intake, and abstain from drinking wine or eating meat.
And place a dressing on the wound, if there are abscesses present, use moistened cotton in oil rosewater only, or in vinegar.
And if there are no abscesses present, place something on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and has not moved due to air, use a powder that I will mention later;
And if they have healed, then apply certain ointments until they are clean.
And if the wound is large, like that of a tailor's cut and similar injuries, and the lips cannot be joined together by stitching, then join them through sewing, as I will say for wounds in the belly, with stitches.
If the wound exposes the bone and is deep, holding only to a small part if stopped; then treat the wound with medicine and restore hard tissue in place of skin. And instruct the patient to consume large meats, such as testicles and cooked wheat, like chickens, and similar items.
And if you find or smell flesh rotting, and it doesn't touch the bone, then cut out the whole rotten part, flush with water, then treat it;
And if there is blood flowing in the wound or vein, without stoppage, and it cannot be stemmed by medicine, then you must tie the artery, and if you find that it has been dislocated, then fasten it with a thread. And if this does not help, then apply cautery.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you put this powder which seals in such a way that when the fire touches it, it stops moving.
And the way to make this powder is as follows: take a part of incense; dragon's blood .ii parts; fresh garlic .iii parts, and finely ground powder, and apply it to the wound, press it firmly until it dries well and joins completely with all its blood;
then cover it well, and leave it without letting it loosen, if it doesn't swell; for the medicine should not be removed until it heals.
And never do this with charcoal alone, when one doesn't have the incense or the dragon's blood oil, but only that the surgeon has treated the wound.
And if the surgeon has treated the wound, in the same manner, do not put this powder anywhere else;
but apply some prepared bandages or on oats flour mixed with water and honey until it starts to flow; then continue with other treatments until the wound heals.
And if bone-breaking comes along with the wound, and it's small, then use delicate probes to treat it;
and I will tell you about the breaks of the head later.
from the wound in the neck
This wound occurs in the neck and is simple, if there's no difference between this and those of the head, but if it affects the throat or the artery, then that makes a difference.
If it's the nerves, if there is no other thing than to leave the treatment alone, and not to put any restraining thing, because it harms the nerves and causes them to recede; and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuity here is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but use warm medicine instead, such as rose water washed with soft water, and also wash the cloth in soft water, and other herbal remedies in this manner, and moist applications.
And if the wound is large, sew it with bandages as long as it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and covered with hair and full of pus, pierce them or do so lower down.
And if the artery is cut and bleeding occurs, causing it, open it, set it right, and burn it as necessary;
And if the throat or ribs are cut, or the passage is disturbed, through which meat travels, if you apply heat to the throat bone, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then allow the swelling to subside, and let it be for some days, then treat with dried ointments until it heals;
and if there is a mark on the bone from the wound, you should remove it; and if there are bits of bone, you might chip them out thoroughly, and leave those that you cannot remove until the wound heals, And when it has drained and healed, then its nature will show.
And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I've mentioned. And if there are bones in the wound and it has an abscess, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
from the wound of a spear or a knife
If it's due to a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, when you observe that there's wind flow out of the wound instead of air: know then that the wound is fatal.
And if it's not deep and all its blood is fresh, then don't put powder there at first hour or bind it without the blood moving properly to the extremities. and revive the heart, and keep the patient calm; but apply a drawing ointment, and bind it twice a day;.
And if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture.
Let the patient rest on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more if needed; If there is no pain, nor bad trembling of the heart, nor sudden movements; And when you see good signs, know that the wound is saved. Treat with remedies and other treatments until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal and grow, know that there will be a sinus; treat as you should for such cases.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision and it's simple or worse, or on the back, treat according to who is present.
If it's large, stitch it up; and if it's small, use powder; and if it is close to the bone, or has penetrated bones, then clean the wound and remove any foreign objects inside. And if they are not evacuated, let the wound fester, if it lightens the extractions;
And concerning other wounds or other parts, we have made our judgements as we said.
from the rupture of the abdomen
The ruptures of the abdomen are large, medium-sized, and small;
From a large wound jumps out an organ of the intestines or of the bowel cavities, which causes an invasion by them.
And sewing it up is more troublesome; indeed, there is nothing that matches a small wound better than a large one.
Thus, when we place the intestines back in, if they are not placed carefully one by one; Because the intestines swell almost immediately upon feeling cold, hence they cannot be forced further into their original positions.
And for this reason you must clean the wound, for this reason we move to reposition the intestines in their place like the others.
Know that there are four ways of stomach rupture:
the two common incisions occur in the abdominal incision,
and the other incisions for injuries to the body and two other specific incisions are common with other injuries;
And still they are more suitable with the stitches under the belly, and I will say each one and explain them.
I say that when the wound is small, and there's nothing of the intestine exposed, and for the matter of replacing it, one can do this in two ways: or because of the size of the wound, as we have said, Because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Soak a sponge or two parts of a towel in water only, or you cook in boiling water with quina and thorn needles, And let the intestines grow until they are cut off;
And once this has been done with the wine restraining and medicating, it should relieve swelling.
And when you see the swelling leave, moisten the intestines with water or broth that has been cooked and seasoned. because through this, the entry allows for little passage of substances;
And if it cannot enter, they make a small cut with the tool from which one removes the hemorrhoids;
And the first treatment is to apply heat to the wound, That we should not cut it without great necessity or avoid it;
And this is the instrument to open it:
If you cut inside the bend and not outward, and see this form:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, if you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place, if you have the strength, for this is valuable movement.
When the wound is wide, and it's located on the side of the belly, It is necessary for you to treat the patient on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it's located on the side of the belly,
And also if there is a rupture in the belly at one of the two sides. And place your understanding such that the severed part be higher than the other;
And thus, it is to administer what I say about large and medium wounds.
Treat small wounds with what you are equipped for,
Then hold them in your hands, minister remedies that heal all the rupture to their hand, and bring together the lips; And this is the common way of sewing,
And this is the common way of sewing, and it involves taking one or more needles, according to the width of the wound, then leave at the edge of the wound enough space for two fingers, and insert one needle with plenty of thick thread; and pierce both ends of the leather with both needles from the skin,
then pass a double thread through an eyelet in each of these two parts, and stitch the two edges of the wound together.
And then leave one dot of space, and insert another needle; then sew with the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue doing this according to what you need to do with the needles, until all the wound is restrained;
And use needles of medium size, between fine and large ones, because the very fine needles cut all the flesh, and those that are too large do not fit well to enter: for this reason they should be of medium size;
and it is not good to have the needles sticking out too much from the flesh and the skin,
They do not cut and bleed the wound before the stitch;
and then remove the needles from the wounds so that they do not irritate the patient while sleeping, and I place tents or cloths over the insertion sites of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is stitched.
And this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because one uses a needle or two.
The second stitch is common, And it involves sewing together the two layers of leather and the two layers of stuffing onto one needle with one strong thread in the middle; And when you have pierced these joints all together,
And when you have pierced these joints all together, then pull the needle at the part where you started, in the way one sews linen;
and leave a space between each stitch as big as a small coin;
these stitches should be even.
And here I am to heal a wound where once there was a large lump or belly,
which had been made by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in size, and contained the intestines well up to two palms in length,
And there was a wound between the belly. I brought back his intestines, and it had been xxix hours since it occurred.
And the wound healed up to fifteen days, I treated it, and he was well.
And they had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
And I would not treat it with ointment, for I was in the first year where one could not find any, nor any medicine; And I would change the cloth covering the wound two times a day, and wash it with honey water until it healed.
I will tell you the two proper methods of sewing:
Take the needle, and at first from outside to inside until it reaches there;
When she has pierced through to the heart directly on the direct line, if it hits the head of the syphilitic or causes chest pain, you have punctured the needle.
And make her pierce from another side starting from inside until it reaches this point outward;
And the understanding of this stitch is such that you sew it in the same way as the mink does with its fur, And let the siphac once on one side, and then take it up from the other, until the stitch is fully completed.
The second method of sewing up wounds, as Galen truly explained,
It is just like how everyone does it, uniting the two parts in their natural position, And they press one part of the wound with its edge against another part, in this manner:
Insert a needle or point of the wound near the mouth, and make a hole only on the surface. And let both of these shoulder heads grow. Then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outer part until inside. like both shoulder heads;
Then pierce both from the outer part until inside, using two other shoulder heads that are on the opposite side;
And this is the way to sew and the most common method.
Galien said these words, and no one testifies to them,
One should sew the belly with two needles, or if there is thread in each;
And one should place one needle on one side and the other on the other side, like those who sew tinned items;
and know that when the rupture is within the belly, then the stitching is more painful than in other parts of the belly.
The judgments on wounds are similar to those for other types of wound:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, as if the art has made it, If it is placed back in the intestine, and at the cut; then place above the stimulating powder,
If it is placed back in the intestine, and at the cut; then place above the stimulating powder, And if it has burned it, so apply any present salve until the wound heals; And sew the thread, and let them fuse the cuticle, and make the incision heal; Then treat the wound as usual, until it is healed;
And if you don't have medicine, place it above, as soon as it begins to drip oil, and move it twice a day until it becomes healthy.
For you don't need any other medicines in various preparations when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound might spread to the main members, If you need to moisten wool lightly in oil of warmed heat, or in rose-scented oil, and put it inside the joints, and over the armpits;
and if there is pain or gangrene in the bowels, and this happens repeatedly, if you use black wine enemas, and especially if the gangrene has spread up to the intestines;
And insert inside, and know that when it's large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The intestine which is called 'young' cannot be healed when it is injured, And this is due to the positioning of the veins and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and its alignment with its nature towards nerves.
And if the lump from the wound jumps up, then reset it as with the intestine while it is still fresh;
And if it's old and turned brown or black, then you should tie the black area, so that no blood flows there, for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the tie, and place both shoulders down to the area over the wound until beyond it for ease of extraction when the sockets move, and let the wound heal.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestines are ruptured, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in any way,
because I see that some were pierced by a spear in their belly;
And there was a wound on the right side of the stomach, and became stenosed and turned into a fistula, causing malabsorption and gas production;
I performed the treatment according to my ability, and continued refining it until it was effective, ensuring proper closure of the wound.
And when I saw it properly healed, I worried that there might be problems with the patient's stomach; And there was no harm, but it remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
And it was said by some experimenters that when there is a small injury in the intestine, it should be treated like this: take large bulbs (of garlic), then join the edges of the wound, and when the garlic has opened its mouth, place it on the two edges,
then applies another rub to in that manner as before, until the wound has been thoroughly rubbed;
and close the wound. Those who become hot in the intestine, and do not cause any harm to the patient,
and one can bind the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such a manner: take the end of this intestine thread so that most of it has been dried, And then to the head of this thread .i., a fine linen thread twisted, Then thread the needle with the thread and sew through the intestine, then remove it at the incision;
And this way of sewing like a seam is only according to the path of faith and hope;
And if the wound is large and broad, especially when it's in one of the intestinal loops, if there's no child or health, it requires subtlety.
regarding a fistula or if it be Know that any wound or abscess, as it matures, is universally called "fistula", and likewise when it is sealed and begins to heal.
And a fistula is according to the true swelling that lasts and is white, or where one does not feel pain, It is also as hairy as the feathers of a bird;
And not once in clear white flesh, and another time thick; Not always little, and sometimes enough;
And I have spoken about the division of wounds in that section; that any wound that is not healed and has no flesh, This comes from none of the eight reasons:
it is to say, due to the smallness of blood or pus; or because of its maleficence; or because there is hard flesh inside and against the lips that prevents new flesh from forming; There's too much blood; the lungs are inflamed, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine used in treatment isn't good; or because the corruption resembles pestilence; For by the nature of the area being late in digestion, and delayed healing, and flees naturally; for there are veins or bones:
and I have shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicines in this division.
It is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of fistulas which is performed by manual labor.
Know that fistulas occur in all limbs of the body; for there are fistulas that originate from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the stomach, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs, or in the spinal column of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this manner cause difficulty with healing, and there is nothing else but labor, and ignorance;
and if there is no fistula that does not end up at the place I have mentioned, and you have begun the treatment, and you will know it, take a spider's web or iron wire, if the fistula is straight, try to insert it;
And if the fistula is twisted, seek out with a subtle probe to uncurl it, for the probe bends and moves along in the twist;
and if the fistula has no branches and you cannot find it well by trying with probes, then irrigate it through one of its branches,
because moisture can travel from one place to another, and gets purified;
then feel it carefully with your hand, so you know if there is bone or nerve, and check the hair around it.
and ask the patient precisely about the pain they feel when your hand presses on it, and where in their body does that pain occur;
and when you truly understand the location of her/his pain and whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, In any of the limbs that I have told you about, if the application follows what I have told you,
In any of the limbs that I have told you about, if the application follows what I have told you, and expose the bone of the patient and the rotten carcass that is within; and then continue the treatment until it heals,
and if the fistula is deeply and correctly opened, it is fitting that you seal it completely as much as possible. Then I place moistened bandages in medicine water, and let them soak up to the tip of the fistula.
Then I place moistened bandages in medicine water, and let them soak up to the tip of the fistula. until the medicine dissolves what has remained at the bottom;
and then I apply clean bandages until it heals.
and if it doesn't heal through this method, then cauterize it as we have explained,
And if the bone is rotten from the ulcer, then operate it. If a vein or nerve is being pressed or affecting main limbs, as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed, and there's decay and darkness, then treat it until the decay has been completely removed, Then cleanse the wound with various remedies until it heals properly;
If it's not healed, and if you move it back as before, Know that you haven't gone far enough until the sound stops:
Search deeply and thoroughly until you reach the bottom, and remove all the decay; then return to its original place.
And if it's like this healthy, then indeed it is well. But if not so, know that the corruption has spread too far, that you cannot restore it; if there is no other way than to leave it to nature;
and if there's just a small corroded bone, and you can extract it with forceps, if you extract with an instrument suitable for this,
and if there are many, treat them all, don't leave any;
and should moisture oppose this and there be neither error nor fear, if you have bone and moisture along with heat, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then apply something to the wound that promotes healing, and let it stay until the joints are softened inside the bones,
then the bones will then come out more easily;
and if it's a large bone, like from the thigh or leg, if you remove them only until the blackness is entirely bone, then heal the wound;
and if there's a large portion rotten, and it reaches up to the bone; if it should be to cut right up to the decay and then heal it as long as it is joined together;
And I will tell you of a case where a fistula occurred in someone's leg. so that you may take this as an example and aid yourself in your work.
There was a young person of around thirty years old, who had pain in their leg due to an issue that came from within the body.
The matter would travel to the leg and there formed a large abscess; there was no external cause for opening it.
yet they opened them so wide that the abscesses were opened, and removed very little of the contents, and formed a tunnel, and there was much loss that all caused sweat and moisture from the body;
and many physicians treated the condition for two years, and there was no expert in the art of healing.
until I arrived where I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines used to treat him, And that which moves through the narrow parts with great force; And his body would turn red as if in youth, and had a yellowish color.
I built a tent in one of these narrow parts, and then sought all the narrow parts,
and found that some came against each other from all sides of the leg.
I hurried then, and scraped one of the fractures until I revealed a part of the bone, and found it decayed and pierced, and the decay had reached inside to the bone;
I saw what appeared from the decayed bone, and thought there was no other decay, just the one I found;
and began to treat the wound with medicine over a long period, but could not heal it;
And then I restarted, and exposed the bone as before,
And I found the continuous corruption within the bone, and the arrowhead, and then extracted the bone, and bent towards soldering the socket;
but I could not manage it until I cut out about half of the bone, and then I pulled it with all its strength; then I returned him to medicine treatments; and he quickly recovered and was joined together;
And can no longer begin the operation again except due to the weakness of the disease, which cannot endure, and for fear of death that I have for him. For by the blood evacuation often occurred, but it was fully healed,
For by the blood evacuation often occurred, but it was fully healed, And in the place of the bone there developed a hard flesh, and it was well arranged and did not cause harm or opposition at all to everything, neither from inside nor outside.
And remove the head if you bring the putrid flesh away, and uncover the meat at the place where you see sinew, that the sinew not harm the meat; and place one ember or a board under the bone to make a barrier against the putrid flesh; and you should do this as much as you can see and feel the corruption, and again do it another time.
And if the bone is spoiled and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if you uncover all the flesh; then place one ember over it.
and then apply the embers from one part to another of the corruption, and let the application cover for as long as the length of the corruption is two inches, just like we said;
and if the corruption is at the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint, and apply heat to the bone on the other side;
And if corruption exists at the point where two joints continue together, if there's no other artery that overlaps this location;
And if corruption is found in the part of the hand or around the foot, such a thing occurs quite forcefully, However, it still needs to be ascertained how this corrosion opens; and cleanse it in all the ways you can, but without opposing the vein or nerve.
And know that there are many knives and saws for cutting these bones, according to the shape of the bones and their appearance, and their size and their delicacy, their grandness and their smallness, their hardness and their softness; and thus it must be equipped with each form of its instrument for its work.
And know that the task will show you the tool you need, according to understanding of this art, And the testimony of the manners of diseases; so choose the instrument you need according to what is suitable.
with fire The shoulder dislocates either internally or due to heat;
And when you have cured that corrosion through the use of medicines, and if they do not benefit, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to its joint where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient does not escape from death or through cunning which is greater than the fault of the limb;
so that the patient does not escape from death or through cunning which is greater than the fault of the limb; and it's a sign when the limb becomes black, as if it had been burned by fire. And after the darkness, then come those corrosion of limb by limb, And take over the whole body; if you hurry with copper,
And if it's through the impact of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and snakes, and similar ones,
And if it affects the head from the neck downwards, if you treat it, and do not give it room to reach up to the hand.
And if it reaches up to the hand, if the cut is made at the joint, so that the wound does not extend up to the elbow;
And if it reaches the arm, if the incision is made at the arm; and if it goes beyond the cut, then many die. And its value is not to exceed that which its virtue allows;
And do it in the same way whenever a cut comes or piece: if it comes at the first joint, then after the second joint;
And if she comes to a bone or joint, then cut all of it; And if she ascends towards the leg, then cut at the knee joint;
And if it comes above the knee, there is no other option but to let the patient die.
And the method of tying or securing a limb is that you tie it above and below, Stretch one surgeon's hands on the lower ligament, and another surgeon's hands on the upper ligament. And you cut through the flesh that is between the two ligaments to an extent of one spatium wide, until the bone is exposed;
Then you cut through the skin and place one piece of linen on each side, ensuring that the healthy part is not touched; And instruct another surgeon to inspect any other wound or abscess.
And if blood spillage occurs when you operate, quickly cauterize the wound. or you put some constricting powders; then return to your medicine until its completion,
then bind the unaligned member with a reliable bandage, and treat it until it heals;
and I will tell you what happened to someone once in such a situation:
He experienced a blackness that seemed like fire.
And this corrosion came first to his knee joint, until it consumed the entire leg.
And when the honorable saw the corrosion, he sought to cover his leg, and became healthy;
And for many years after that, the corrosion came to his hand again, and it reached me.
And I placed him on things reactive after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosion.
And it was that I would pass my hand over him, but I would not, for I had hope of reflecting the matter. I also doubted whether if I cut off his hand, he wouldn't die from it. For the strength of the ome was weak; and he completely lost hope, and returned to his land. And if they are able to cover their hand, and if they have sanity;
and I have only included this for the sake of doing something else, if necessary.
No abscess ever comes in a person's inner flesh, and stays for so long that it causes an assembly of worms; And then they grow and penetrate, and the worms jump, and remain in a person's veins, just like vessels; And the skin above is also as delicate as one tunic of fine material, and do not extend up to the bone or nerve, and such diseases are called 'sane' in this way,
but if it extends so far as to reach the bone from within, then it is called 'fistula';
And the cooking process is such that you must thoroughly cook this skin all around, and likewise when it's delicate, just like a piece of fabric; and doesn't rot due to its corruption.
And if you have chosen that the skin dries out, and the corruption isn't at perfection, and if the skin is thick with flesh, then cleanse it like this:
Look to see if his breasts are large, and the nipple which is on him has a stinking smell, Then administer an Egyptian enema made as follows: Take aloe, and oil, and litharge, equally, and cook them together in one liter pot over the fire, Continue cooking until the medicine turns red, and thickens to the consistency of honey;
And then take from this according to your need, and do it with water and honey, and catheterize the bladder, and constrain the urine flow; let the medicine sit for two hours, then drain it by pressing;
do this number of times until the bladder is empty and the urine flow is restored;
And never once are they charred with water from ashes, And when this medicine is unavailable, and you take vinewood ash, and pour water over it,
Then let the water drain, and administer as a cathartic, until you know that the intestines are well cleansed;
and if the patient cannot endure it, neither can the Egyptian medicine nor water from ashes, If you use a enema of water and honey, or if there's a bit of strychnine mixed in; Or you can use an enema of honey and wine mixed together, where the honey has properties to cleanse and wash. and the wine helps to purify the body;
and once you have done this and ensured that the organs are well cleansed, if the colic affects the one who brings forth a child within it,
and if you need to apply plaster to it and it is done with oil and wine; or you treat it with certain medicines and applications, about which I have spoken or written concerning the uses of the applications;
and if the chest is too small for it, and the colic cannot enter in; if it becomes broad by a little iron, and then applies an Egyptian ointment, with the basilic ointment, as long as it becomes broad;
and if the wound is too wide, they stitch it up so that only half or one unit can fit in, where the finger could possibly enter,
and if the place from which blood is leaking is above, let them dig a hole or deeper than I am. For when the bow is full, you do not let it pull freely. and if you cannot cover the breast under so much as you see, so equip yourself in such a way that the bow reaches as low to the highest level it can.
And if you cannot cover the area underneath just as you see, if it is done in such a patchy manner: let the wound heal smoothly downwards, and do not leave any part of the wound unattended; and take healing medicines to be applied on the wound,
and place them under one and a half linen cloths that cover the entire wound; Then guide the force to that part of the heart which is slightly below the breastbone, i.e., a bit wider than its initial position. Apply the herb ointment at this place, I mean, on another cloth according to the size of the lesion. And put it on the part below the breastbone to relieve the wound, and do not remove the large cloth except after several days once.
And for the one that is under the part below the breastbone, it is often removed to relieve the wound, And know what flows from the bow (bowel), whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and watch so that the patient feels pain or no pain, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has spread in this way and you see the condition that jumps on the heart's edge, then know that the heart is already inflamed, and bring the health closer;
And then release the tension in the morning, or on the third day, and when you relieve the wound, if another change occurs, and renew the dressing.
And if after many days the stomach is still giving off undigested matter, know that the stomach does not digest properly. And if subtle poisons linger for a long time, do not despair of recovery of health,
For health is close at hand. For there are men who delay healing of their wounds with fire, and those who do the opposite;
and if he leaves undigested food in his stomach for many days, know that his stomach does not heal.
and if the lungs take a long time to heal, and are far gone, then adjust dry medicines in substance and wet medicines by their virtue, likewise with the balsam of anise, because it contains a large part of vitriol, and this is the last remedy;
Take some pure oil, and mix it with rose oil, then soak it in old vinegar of equal substance;
then cook it and apply it; and do the same preparation for cooked honey to thicken it. when the application of pure oil is not available,
or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them, and apply the powder to the flame until it becomes a paste with honey; And then with glue of a piece of cloth, and it is stretched over the breast, and every time an application or an ointment is administered or a surgeon longs for it, And the roots of celestial lily, which is also like flour of times and cumin;
And the roots of celestial lily, which is also like flour of times and cumin; And in using simples or compounds: grind them, make a powder, put it on the honey that I said, and use it; And if the treatment lasts long and is not cured by this remedy,
And if the treatment lasts long and is not cured by this remedy, Then you will understand that corruption spreads from within, and it appears in the bone, or in parts of the body that are hard, or in joints. if the treatment for the abscess, as we have said before.
of the incision of the nail
Panarice is an abscess that forms under the nail of the hand, In the case of a broken bone, or perhaps an oddity arises from other bones;
And when it has aged, and if no care is taken, so it comes to one pus bubble. And runs and pours away until she reaches the root of the nail, and by chance reaches all of it;
And comes to corrosion up to the bone until there is stinking pain, and the shoulder blade becomes two wide, and its color is gone.
When you treat it as we have instructed in the section of division, and the treatment does not benefit. It is necessary that you cut to the root, removing all excess that has remained from the nail, Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterizations are very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound;
And if the angle rushes into the flesh and begins to pierce it, and irritates it, then you should place the blade under the nail so that it does not cut the flesh. and hold the tool above, and scrape this fine and gently the flesh. and apply on the fatty part of the flesh hot and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is within the bone, cut it out and treat vigorously, for as much as the bone has rotted, it cannot be healed;
And if you see that the tooth is rotten, cut it out in one piece as described previously, Then treat with ointments as long as they are clean;
And if it is stuck and stubborn, and he feels great pain, then you should first heal him; then cut the nail at the cuticle diagonally above.
and make sure that the cut does not go all the way to the flesh under the nail, as the patient would suffer too much pain;
And if it happens, place something on top that soothes.
You should adjust what is born in the hands of some men by chance and are thick, And by chance it contains or it has bone, and sometimes it contains nail,
And none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in no one of us the doer. Those who are born without any bones do not move, And those who are born with joints of the bone may, by chance, move;
The size of a well-muscled one is light in such a manner: Cut it at its root like a broad spoon.
Those born at the root of the joint have pain to cure: if you hold onto copper.
In one who is born or should be at the base of it, it is necessary that you first cover with fat up to the bone. Then cover the bone with a suitable thread for this, then treat it until it becomes clean.
The fusions that occur at the joints come about through birth, or through the healing of wounds, or through the welding with fire, or through similar things.
If it is necessary for you to fix this healing, so that it can repair according to its natural forms; then place between two wet tents or pieces of cloth in oil, so they don't stick together. or you place between two pieces of fine plaster, until the wounds are joined, as it should be.
If joining occurs with neither of these methods using the palm, then fix this healing in accordance with what is right.
Of cauterys of fire, commandeth to the malaise to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they pricked at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Vices are fat veins tightly wrapped full of melancholic superfluities that come from many members of the body;
And it happens more in legs of those who walk on foot and work, bearing loads, than in others.
Therefore, you must then administer one purging of collyrium to it, and afterwards heal it with basilica.
The iron treatment follows two ways: One involves piercing the wounds and extracting black blood; And the other way is to open the vein and drain it entirely.
The bathing procedure follows this manner: Heat the first leg in hot water very strongly until the large pulse becomes subtle. Then hold the leg of the patient above the knee until it reaches the part below the knee; Then cut the vein at one finger's width, or at two or three, with a size that is broad;
Then lift and drain the black blood to your hand from one end to the other, as long as enough blood comes out as what the properties of the patient can bear;
and then clean it, and instruct that person to bathe in meat juices that turn this blackness.
And start evacuating and cleaning when veins are full, and harm the patient.
The removal of the limb is done in this manner: raise the leg from the patient, if there's hair; Then immerse it in water, and raise the leg from a hot bath until it turns red, and the veins swell;
And if you don't have a bath, heat it over the fire, and then place it on the vein along its entire length from the thigh to the knee, or in the part below at the ankle;
Then cut the skin to the bone, and sear the vein from each side, until one sees when one feels it;
and it appears red and black, and when it enters or seems like a white thread in the skin;
then burn with fire until it rises above the skin, and then cut to the bone gently.
then make three more cuts above those, spaced one inch apart; then sear the skin over the vein until you see it. Then lift it from the fire, as you did before, and move to another hook, as you moved initially.
Then take a different size or several if needed, then lift it, and place it at the very tip of the fire.
Then guide and lift until you reach the second size; then strain it from size to size, until all strength comes out, then place it.
And if you cannot guide and lift it, you should insert a needle with a single thick thread. And hold it there for half a pace, then turn your hand from side to side, as long as you can do so; And keep it from being twisted, for if it twists, one cannot squeeze or lift her, and this causes harm to the patient;
And when you have squeezed her completely, place wet wool in wine and oil over the wound; and apply treatment until it heals.
And if her body is twisted and crooked and wrapped together as a whole, and she isn't laid straight, just like we said, If it is necessary for you to sever it roughly, but do not cut it fully; treat it as we have said before.
If it is necessary for you to sever it roughly, but do not cut it fully; treat it as we have said before. The shape of the iron tool with which one cuts the screw is curved, and does not slice, so that it does not cut into the vein;
And it is made of thick curvature, because if it were too fine, it would cut into the vein but being thick as we have said, and this is its form:
From the civil vein
This vein is placed in legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees are born, and in soil that has no moisture;
and by chance arises elsewhere than in legs, and this occurs due to corruption that comes from under the skin,
just as it originates within the body snakes and worms, penetrating between the skin and flesh.
And if you notice the symptoms of this vein beginning, it will result in a severe inflammation in the leg, Then change its position, and begin to have the veins start coming out, as if it were a root of a plant.
When the shoulder is open, you must wrap it internally with a piece of leather three and a half to four fingers wide, and secure it,
and let the leather hang down from the leg, and every time it becomes too tight, you should wrap it internally around the leather and secure it; and if it becomes too long, cut off a part of it and rewrap the remaining part, making sure not to cut its root until all of it is exposed; For if you handle it improperly, it enters the body, causing pus and decomposition or infection, leading to a harmful illness;
Through that reason, it is necessary that she be treated gradually over time until the head settles, and nothing should remain of her or in its parts.
And it is never once that vein when it is treated with the length of five palms, or ten, And I once came to a person, from whom the vein is ten palms in length, and when you handle it, if it gives one or two drops of pus or pus, and pierces until the bottom,
If everything proceeds as planned; and let the substance inside be drained out, and apply curing substances to heal from within on a daily basis, then treat it similarly to abscesses.
And never use hands here, and equally when it opens at the joint of the foot, or the foot itself, And it leads to much damage, and which gets worse; therefore treat it as we said before.
Worms that are born between the skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "cow disease", because it happens many times to cows,
and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and muscle, and travels throughout the body going up and down, and one feels it moving from member to member, as far as the skin where it was going, and jumps out;
and is filled with corruption of some fluids, like worms and roundworms or in the stomach;
And there's doubt about its nature, for when it travels through the body, and ascends to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being treated and healed, one cannot but observe when it is going:
So it follows that you should bind the wound above and below with a strong, tight bandage,
Then lift it up and pull on it gently, and if it is turned around inside the body cavity, you won't find it, if you apply a fire cautery to it, until it reddens;
and the larger damages that it causes, if they run into the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near to the eye or head, then restrain over him the eyelid, lift it up and pull on it gently;
And it is necessary to use the means of purification of bodily fluids from medicines, to combat the impure humours.
And it is warned about eating spoiling meats that cause putrefaction.
Of the pain that comes from wind disturbance This illness is called in our land "vakiiri", and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, And thus from member to member; and I saw what I told you.
I was summoned to care for an afflicted woman, and she showed me her arms, revealing a small swelling in the vein of one arm;
And just .i. inches later, I saw it rise as high as a worm on its shoulder, quicker than nothing at all, like quicksilver when it's cut from one place to another;
The pain departs from that side, and pierces into the shoulder,
And then a little later spreads throughout the body, until it reached the other arm;
Then I noticed that it was twisting inside the body, just as I saw.
I marveled much at how she moved from member to member in this manner, for I had never seen this disease like this before. In any case, I have wanted many that well had wanted to move pain of him to another, but I did not want it as much, as I see in the woman;
and I thought it was because of that which caused the woman to have a wet body and her veins exposed, and from this, this weakness becomes apparent;
And they do not appear according to this reason among those who are delicate, and have moist bodies and responsive veins.
And when you see the treatment of this illness, and if the patient feels pain, if it opens like we have said, if it rises quickly from above and below, then apply pressure until that wind's force is released out of the body; and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it at your eyes,
If you are treating someone whose veins have been disturbed, as with stinking pills, pills made of snake venom, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are various, depending on their shape and where they pierce the body.
The variety of their sizes means that there are those with large points, and small ones, and barbed, and soldered; And of those with two angles, and those with tongues, and of those where there are fragments; And the one who urinates in no member but does so according to two ways: or in the main body it urinates,
just as in the brain, heart, liver, kidneys, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. And when it urinates then in no part of these organs, the signs of death, which I will tell you later, become evident to you: If you need to perform the extraction of this arrow, because death comes later in multiple situations; And if you don't notice the bad sign and the arrow isn't fully out, then pull it and treat the wound.
And when the sign of the brain occurs when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and the wind springs up that is above the brain. It's when blindness and numbness occur along with swelling in the eyes, and redness of the tongue, inflammation and redness of the mouth, and muscle spasm and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile; And perhaps it is without strength in the nostrils, or in the ears; and by chance it loses speech and voice; And from the wound comes white moisture resembling pus, and also in the leap as burnt flesh does;
And if this sign appears to you, take control of the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it hasn't become embedded.
The sign of the arrow when it strikes or pierces is that it's near the left breast, and also if it seems to be embedded in something hard rather than empty. And by chance the patient might lose sensation as well as the hair, with black blood bleeding out, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: Therefore, you must be aware that many die in doubt.
And the sign of the arrow that never comes out is when there's no foam escaping from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient has a changed complexion, and breathes loudly and feels cold.
And if the arrow exits through the armpit area, it is located beneath the ribs; and there's copious bleeding and intense pain, with labored breathing; and all limbs move freely from the shoulders.
And if an arrow or stomach is stuck, by chance something from the undigested meat comes out of the wound.
And if an arrow or stomach is stuck in the chest or abdomen, and nothing comes out through the intestines, there's no hope for treatment, nor in extracting the arrow.
And if an arrow or stomach penetrates into the bladder, and urine comes out in spurts and exits, causing great pain to the patient: you should know that this wound is fatal.
The other parts of the body, such as the limbs (including arms and legs), neck, throat, shoulder blades, shoulders, shoulder girdle, back spine, ribs, and buttocks, along with any similar limb, are safe according to various dispositions. When an arrow is in the muscle or artery, and it isn't poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you did this other thing.
It happened at the first house when an arrow struck him in the middle of his face below the nose: I tried it, and I pulled it out from the other side through the fat behind the ear; there was no severe damage.
And removed an arrow that had fallen in the fat by the eye, under the eyelid, And the arrow had been removed, yet one could not reach even its tip towards the shaft, And the arrow was as long as an Oriental bow, not even one inch heavy without any ears; the wound was cleansed, and no unfortunate events befell it.
And drew out an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with ears:
I pulled at the barbs, I was skillful as I drew it out, and the Christian was cleansed.
And try to extract an arrow from his right side, where he was pierced or in his belly, and I thought that he was dying;
and then since it had passed thirty days, if it did not change its position; I cut near the arrow, and I tried to remove it with force, and there was no bad incident.
And if you see an arrow has fallen or been struck on one of your two sides, and the wound is healed up to;
The arrow stays within, not reverting to its natural positions. There is no harm found in any of its natural works.
And to another man, who was hit by an arrow on his face, and the wound was sealed;
And thus it did not allow him to endure great pain; and many others were like this.
And there was an arrow shot from one and a half yards away at the king's princes' home, where it was stuck in the middle of their nose, and was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was completely inserted.
I was summoned for treatment after it had been stuck in for three days. I found the wound extremely tight.
I tried to remove it with all my skill, yet failed to feel any movement; And he felt a wound and pain spreading over his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow.
I placed a healing and digesting plaster on his head because the ears were not inflamed; And I saw that the tip of the arrow was in the ear.
And I saw that the tip of the arrow was in the ear. I placed the plaster on for days, and resolved the wound quickly, and thereby kept the patient under treatment for a long time.
Until he felt the arrow within his nose; and I told him about it. I applied corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was opened up.
and I probed it, and felt the tip of the arrow moving towards the top. Then adjust during the opening of the wound through this medicinal application, until the head of the arrow becomes visibly apparent;
and make sure to pass well the ends inward for four months,
then loosen so that I could grip the edge of the wound, and press with both hands on either side, and it couldn't come out;
so I continued to refine and engineer ways for instruments until I took it on the second day using well-made pincers, According to how its shape will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I'm treating it, and will heal the wound.
And they judge that the cartilage near the nose cannot be restored: I will then treat it, and缝合 the wound, and healed the patient completely.
And I told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, if you place your treatment on what I do not say, for books cannot encompass everything;
but let the wise masters compare well to a small number of things, and to what is present and lacking. Discover nine works, and nine instruments, for the removal of foreign matters that occur in this art.
I say that arrows do not stay in the limbs where they are stuck according to two ways: By the arm where they enter, or from another side;
And when it jumps in through a wound or where it enters, that is the arrow entering the flesh, and it will now occur for no other time.
And if it does not jump in now, leave it until the wound is healed internally, and wait for its natural exit;
And likewise if it has been driven into the bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for several days, and remove it every day;
And then she jumps, and if she does not jump, it penetrates through to the entire depth of one slender hole, as long as the lungs are wide inside, and then removes it.
And if the arrow is returned inside the body so well that one cannot see it, then seek for it with all the means; And if you can sense it, guide it with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot do so due to the tightness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, cut as much as to make the wound large; and remove the arrow if you can, and if it has ears that hold it in place,
and remove the arrow if you can, and if it has ears that hold it in place, If bone has become embedded at two parts within you, then remove it as far as you can. and then break or bend the arrow's ears (feathers), until you can drain them;
and then break or bend the arrow's ears (feathers), until you can drain them; And do this carefully so that you don't break the arrow, but draw it out more forcefully.
And if you can't do it in one go, let the shaft be broken up to where its fletching is, then try again, for the extraction should be done quickly. And if bleeding against you runs contrary, then apply what we have said about treatment within our chapter;
and beware of incisions near nerves and veins, and use your skill to draw out the arrow without risk,
or quickly or carefully, firmly or gently; and guide the patient according to the shape they were in when the arrow struck them. because it is of great help that he be guided like this, and if you cannot do so, follow the instructions shown to you by the sign.
The arrow that comes from elsewhere, or if it exposes any part of him, or if the skin is swollen in such a way that one can see or feel it clearly:
Then cut upwards, as long as the tongs can take hold, and then draw [the arrow]: if you can jump now.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand around as long as it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull it.
And if she cannot come out, let her still be there, and then try the extraction again until she comes out;
And if the tip of the arrow is there, it is pulled all along the shaft;
And if it's at the base, and you see an arrowhead being administered, if you administer with a needle instrument of one kind,. so that the tip of the arrow enters into the hole of the tool; and then force it.
And if the arrow is stuck, I use another needle tool with an entering point to facilitate extraction.
And if an arrow has touched it, then you must cover all the flesh around where it entered, if you can. Then treat the wound as it should be treated.
And if an arrow hits the head or wounds any part of the body, including the bladder or ribs, and it's close to vital organs, you should cover it; if you can cover it, do so.
and protect yourself from covering the vein and nerves, then remove the arrow, then suture the wound if necessary. And the treatment until she is healed.
The form of the tongs used to remove arrows resemble an animal's beak, and here is the form:
And they come in different sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
of veins from common sources The veins from which we bleed are thirty-one, of which there is an outlet for sixteen.
This is to know: two small things which are after the ears, which are called 'the two herbs'; and the two arteries which are in both temples visible; and the two veins that are in both eyelids of each eye, which are called 'aspirants'; and the vein that is embedded in the forehead; and the vein that is behind the nose on the head. and the two kneading hands that are on the chest; and the two veins that are above in the lips of the mouth, and they are the veins that are called "aughers"; and the two veins that are on the tongue.
The veins through which we usually bleed are five in each arm:
The first is the one called the cephalic, and it's situated on the left side of the head, and they call this 'the vein of the head'; And the middle one is called 'the fast,' and it consists of the cephalic and the basilic; They call this 'the vein of the heart'; and the basilic is either on the right or left side. They call this 'the vein of the belly'; it is located near the groin. And this is for the cure of which one becomes aware, which becomes manifestly apparent through the pouch.
And the salvation is the vein that's located between the index finger and the ring finger, and if it's at two inches;
And in the leg and where the foot is, there are three veins: one of which is below the knee on the left side of the body, And the second one is located above the ankle on the right side of the body; and there's a vein called "the nesse", which is in the ankle on the other side.
And on the other leg are two veins under those.
The health of the veins that are behind the ears is aided by ancient catharsis and in migraines; And the qualities of good health, as I tell you, and that you heal the head with herbs,
And the qualities of good health, as I tell you, and that you heal the head with herbs, And rub the arm where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the herb's neck to a thread. Until the two veins appear behind the ears in two parts depending down from the head: Take then to your side, and where you feel the pulse under your side, if lordly it is swollen;
Then take the scalpel, and by under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all above the vein. And cut and the skin and the vein well two inches deep, and let out blood until you see it flowing;
Then strain and bind her until she is healed;
And I have already spoken about incisions and cauterizations in the first book.
The treatment of the two arteries that are located at the temples, if it involves removing ancient [something], And also, and habitual ophthalmia, and in cases of cold water tears, with their eyes;
And the quality of a surgeon as I say: And indeed, the sick person is squeezed at their throat, until both two veins are clearly seen open; And you will feel the pulse all over your two hands, and then take the measurement.
Then lift the knife above the vein at your right index finger, and hold the scalpel nearby. and open the vein at the top, and the lid, just as you did with other veins, and draw out the blood according to your need;
then free the patient from the discomfort, and place your right hand on the vein for an hour, then put a cotton pad there;
and then let it heal in this manner, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about such procedures and their extraction, or the beginning of the book.
The treatment of a vein wound on the forehead is just as important as the treatment for ancient diseases of the face, and headaches, and fever;
And it's characterized by disorders where the body twists its neck, until the vein appears. then take the tool called 'the digger', whose form is as follows:
And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another thing, and let out the blood according to the amount you see; Then free the patient's neck, and bind the vein as long as it is healthy and without any operation having a broad flame.
Always, it is not advisable for the flames to be too close; and make them lie diagonally, as the bone is nearby, and by chance they might break the flames when they are subtle.
The health of the two veins that are in the two eyelids should be treated with care, and around the eye socket, and on the cheek, and inside the ear canal, and for diseases of the face;
And the quality of their health is such that the patient feels a constriction in their neck by twisting some ligament, as described before;
Then heal it, and make the wound go through, slightly longer than the length of the flame, somewhat wider. For there is nothing in it.
And if the flames are thin, by chance should they break; then make it correspond to blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind with cotton, and bind it well.
The wound of the vein near the nose is treated with bleeding, and hot fomentation, and diseases of the face, similarly for migraines and redness that comes to the face, and likewise when it is old;
And the quality of healing is such that the body narrows its throat, then tightens its nose to your left hand. and take the delicate flame long, and place it inside the lip in the space that is between the two nostrils, because the vein doesn't open well yet, and the artery will now begin to flow;
and don't go too deep in this operation, and do it gently according to your need, then let it rest for a night, because it is soon restored;
The health of the two kidneys aids in the tightening of the alaienne (a type of intestinal disease), and at the beginning of melerie (melania or melanosis), and for many diseases, and in impetigo, and in corrosion, and in herpes, and estimomenes;
And the quality of health is such that the diseases draw their neck from one to the other, as we have said; and when the master stays on the head of the disease, and the diseases congeal at one site,
Then make a cut along its entire length, somewhat wider than necessary, then drain with temperate blood flow,
Then redo another cut in the other vein, then untie the knot, and pull on the veins moderately. Let the patient rest until morning, so that the wound heals.
Of the health of the liver The health of the veins above aids in collecting in the mouth, and it contributes to gum decay, and裂s in the lips, and nosebleeds and nasal congestion.
And the quality of health is to have the patient sit facing you, and hold his neck as I've said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left, And you recognize them because they are black, and because inside them there are small black veins: Treat both of them then, and if you do not know them and you are in doubt,
Treat both of them then, and if you do not know them and you are in doubt, If treating the largest one of each side, and similarly treat two veins above and below for both sides because it's the same method.
From cleaning under the tongue The healing of veins that are close to the tongue should be aided after the healing of the cephalic region, and this is around the neck area, and in diseases affecting the cornea, and diseases affecting the mouth;
And the quality of the surgeon is such that the patient should be placed with their hands under them facing the sun, and they lift the tongue, and look for a black vein on each side:
Therefore make both of them healthy, but do not let either one extend too far beyond the other, for there are arteries underneath.
The veins in the arm that we commonly heal are treated according to two methods:
If it is touched by any one flame of a large iron candlestick, or by an olive oil lamp that is finely made like a blade, and called "aneil"; And it is wide yet fine according to the width and narrowness of veins. The shape of the Miritin flame is very renowned, and it is quite wide as you can see:
And it requires to open the blood vessels filled with large visible blood, and that contain large and turbid blood; and it's like the form of olive oil flame:
and is more refined and pointed; it serves to cleanse delicate veins or has a subtle citrus blood.
The purification of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat, and neck, and chest, and abdomen;
And it's appropriate for the surgeon to purify carefully, and be aware of the artery that is nearby. And if it pierces the artery, and bleeding occurs, then it is necessary to stem the bleeding, as I have said; and should not be held with fire, but cut like a hare.
And if the basilica does not open clearly, it is necessary to extract it, and replace with another one; or you want no part of him, or you heal by replacing his vein with your arm: it opens clearly; And apply heat to the flame before it, as we have said.
And if you know how to find the pulse, it should be like this: you should straighten the arm, touching the body as long as you can feel the pulse; then mark the position of the neck, and then tie the arm, and apply heat to the flame beforehand;
and be careful not to cut into the artery when you see the pulse swelling, because that is an artery: listen out for it then.
And if you see it protruding upwards as much as a child's urine, and the pus is red and subtle, know that this is pus from an artery: Hurry then, put your finger for a long time, then remove your finger once the wound has stopped bleeding, as many times it happens;
Tie his arm down, and leave him like this, don't move the patient; and be afraid, don't move him until he is healed.
And if the wound has not stopped bleeding, and it's urgent, and you lack medication, if the artery is open, take it, because the head of the patient retreats; and stop the bleeding.
And take a scab from the elm tree, cut it, and take one of its halves and bind it tightly until you reach the other end;
Let it not bleed, that is good; if not, treat it as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding;
And the stoppings should not cause more pain in various positions for the smallness of the wound, and the strength of the arm's hold.
The healing of the vein in the middle helps to treat blood flow from above the head and below the chest, Because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic part, as we have said;
And it is necessary for the surgeon to be cautious about the nerve which is nearby, and if he does not go far enough, and he finds the nerve, And it swells and the health is hurt, and by chance cannot heal;
And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any of them due to its subtlety, then you must heal the cut with silver tongs; and feel the nerve by your strength.
And if there is a vein between the two thighs, cut it long.
The treatment for the scalp, if bleeding from the head, allows blood to flow from the head, and aids in the eyes;
And it is necessary to treat with the olive oil flame or the mint flame, for this is the safest of all veins, because there are neither nerves nor arteries present.
All right then, it's necessary to use the lightest weight, and don't worry if you fail at first, and try again; And sometimes swellings occur in some men, such as during the first time, but they cause no pain. The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
The first thing you need to know about surgery is that surgery is managed for the purpose of preserving health,
and to avoid future diseases; And let the healing take place through one of the three veins that are there; namely, the cephalic, the radial, and the basilical; And healing should be initiated at the beginning of prayers on one's knees, and in autumn and after eating in winter, when the signs of satiety become evident;
And healing should occur on the first or third day, after two hours or three days.
The healing applied to diseases does not have a set time, but it is when the need arises on a day or for food, at all times and in every situation;
And it is not suitable to nurse children up to twelve years old, nor pregnant women for only three quarters of a month until the seventh month. Neither should one nurse the aged who have passed sixty years.
And when any wish to be nursed in any manner, it is necessary that they evacuate their intestines with a gentle cathartic. If there's much wind being retained, so that the vessels draw off the unnecessary contents of the intestines that are harmful to the main parts;
One cannot heal those who are too full of meats, or who are drunk, so long as they have strength, nor those with dropsies;
And if someone is sickier after colic pain, and vomiting, and belly gas relief, and multiple pregnancies in women, and labor, staying awake and working, and that which uses up strength, or from something of the weapon or injury;
Then refine the body fluids. If they are too large due to meats, drinks and medications, use this for your purpose;
Then try bathing if there's no other way to prevent it, in order to refine the blood,
And heal from the wound deep within the third quarter of the body, as we have said;
And watch that day for work, pain, and excess, as well as similar things.
And be bound and joined, and let the bandages be higher than what you are being treated for, and rub the arm twice or three times.
Then slightly tighten the bandage above in the middle, because if it is too tight or not enough, you cannot correct it without.
And then rub around the area with hands until the veins swell up, and you can feel them;
Then dampen the wick of the flame with a bit of old oil, then place your left thumb on that vein near the area you want to cauterize slightly. so that the vein doesn't burn and rupture upon being pierced. For some veins behave like strings when they are burned, and there are others that are full of wind currents. If one places over the flame, it retracts to the flame, and cannot open the vein, thus being among those.
And if it opens the vein, the wound is too narrow for that; thus, it should be understood in these matters by the surgeons.
And if the vein opens on the first try, it is good; if not, start again very slightly near that spot or as soon as possible, provided the arm isn't swollen.
And if the arm is swollen and the flesh has gone pale, it should be left for one or two days without binding the arm: By chance it may come to an expulsion of pus. Do not enter or bathe, then continue the cleansing if she likes;
and if the wad is small, or the hole in the skin is subtle and you doubt that it doesn't expel as much blood as you see, then pierce that very wad straight through to all its edges;
and expose the wound a little more quickly, so that the limb swells; for this happens many times, when the wound is small.
If you see the limb swells, do not start cleansing again, and place a bit of oil on it, for it relieves the body from blood, and heals that area where the oil is placed.
And so administer the oil in each healthy part where you heal veins, to stop the flow of blood;
And in the same way try and distinguish it with your hands when you place it on the head; if the ear is too large, then delicately move it with your fingers.
And if you encounter large abscesses which occur repeatedly, particularly when it's not yet healed because in those cases where the opening of the vein is small, if you're in hurry, place a wet sponge with some warm water and a pinch of salt on the head for an hour;
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood issue from the vein, and if it stays in place for several days without any darkness or greenness, if it does not harm the person; And if you see this, place some aloes or myrrh in a juice made from calamus, mint, or something similar.
And many times there was pus and appearance in the healing of the basilica: so place your hand there, and if you find the part soft under the pressure of the hand, then it is an unpleasant appearance. Therefore, do not apply any of what we have said to it, for by chance on the artery; but make one poultice of it dry to harden the part, then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
And treat each person with blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
But if the patient's blood is dark, let it only flow until it becomes red. And if you see it thick, let it continue until it thins out. And if it's too thin, allow it to cool down.
And for the one who is robust and strong, needing blood extraction, it's advisable to make the incision larger, and have the flames wide.
And for the one who is weak, do the opposite; make the treatment suitable and frequent, and the physician should treat it by cutting across, not straight.
And this method of healing saves from bleeding and the constriction of nerve, and is useful whether the wound is long or wide.
And for the one whose body needs healing, it is necessary to give them a drink made from the juice of quince apples; if they are hot, they should be treated with bleeding three or four times.
And if they have a cold constitution, they should be treated before the healing with moilliet bread in a syrup made from muzé fruit; or in an aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, ensuring the syrup has a pleasant scent.
And if they faint during healing, after bleeding has subsided, it is necessary for them to inhale a broth of blood and an aromatic syrup.
And apply the other things that we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wishes to bleed his arm and heal again, should it be necessary, when he is weakened by much healing, let him heal little by little, according to the strength of his remedy continuously.
And if one wishes to bleed their arm after the first healing and they have strong veins, let them heal seven hours after the first bleeding or after the seventh hour.
And if one wishes to be healed on another side, they should be healed on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood inside the body that has already heated up, and it causes fever; so one must drain a large quantity of it, and widen the constriction until it flows freely. Since you have fulfilled all conditions of health, and place your hand on their pulse when it is healthy, so that death does not come to them instead of recovery. This happens many times when the healers are careless;
And it should not happen when you see a limb dislocated and blood is forced out the second time, and if the constriction is closed, press forcefully. If he is cuffed, stretch his arm quickly, because this would be harmful;
but let him until he heals the second time; or you touch the tip of the flame there, until the limb that is frozen from cold comes out, and place half an ounce of salt boiled in water and gently press it on lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be alone and do not compress it, until the abscess calms down.
And if the need is to bleed again from the second time, if it lies within its own place or in another vein, or on the other arm.
The vein is treated in its place within the arm because it's made up of that vein from the head, since she is composed.
And the method of treatment involves having the patient immerse their hand in hot water until the skin turns red;
Then it should be half bound, so that the vein appears clearly. Now treat him through, not wide nor long;
And if the wounds are wide, and if the veins are well close to the joint of the hand, and if one cannot let them out, then put your hand in warm water, and leave the blood to flow in the water, until you have enough.
And if it's ice-like, do not reset your hand in warm water, for you put it more into winter than into ice;
And this vein's laceration is safer from all others, for there are neither artery nor nerve.
The treatment of saving the right hand from all liver diseases is valued against all illnesses, and this is how:
Strengthen your hand, and hold it in hot water, as long as the vein is visible, if you can see it; and if it's inflamed from side to side, and if you hold it completely around everywhere, so that nothing hurts;
and don't overheat too much on the inside, for the nerve is all bare of flesh,
and then immerse the hand in hot water, if the wrist is frozen at the wound site, and it cannot come out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as your skill allows, place a hot iron on the wound and seal it for rapid healing, and thus proceed with each case.
The cure for someone in the left hand is akin to the sickness of the mouse [a tool or method], and do all as I have told you for the right side.
The cure for the spleen is effective against all diseases that are within the body, such as diseases of the lungs, and congestion of flowers, and spleen disease, and leg and old foot ailments, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of its health is such that the patient should immerse their finger in hot water, and rub it over the vein until it discharges. And above the joint of the foot; and the veins are at the ankle, and from above the heel they flow into many rivers.
Healthy therefore whichever larger river, or at the ankle, flows like that which moves.
And if you heal it above the heel, be aware of the nerves that are nearby, and heal through as well as when sewing; let the flames be after this.
And if they cannot come out, you should place the part in water, and let it empty well from the vein.
And when they are able to be inserted for the first time, if you try a second time above slightly more, because the limbs are salty; Nor should you doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and do the same procedure on the other limb equally.
The leg of the sciatic vein is at the ankle on the right side, and its health matches the pain in the hip, when it's due to hot blood.
And the quality of its health is such that the disease enters through bathing, and it is drawn up above the anklebone. Four times in twisting,
for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, heal it in all possible ways that you can, and across it; And be sure to hold onto her, for the liver is there, and she responds greatly to human hands.
And be sure to hold onto her, for the liver is there, and she responds greatly to human hands. And if you can't find it, if there's no opening or wound on its front or back and belly, and towards the small spine, and beware of the nerves;
And make sure to drain the blood as you see fit, then release the knot, and place cotton there and tighten it; now it is healed.
Cures with suction cups
Suction cups are made of horns, or spiders, or snakes; and suction therapy can be performed in two ways: by bleeding and drawing blood, or without causing bleeding.
And this suction which can cause injury is done in two ways: either immediately with fire, or without fire;
and two of them are on both sides of the neck; and one suction tool is under the chin; And use the suction for both shoulders; and use suction on the boils; And apply the suction cups to both arms; and apply suction cups to both legs; And use the suction cup on both ankles; and suction does not remove blood, but rather small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
And by this it does not weaken me at all, as one does with bloodletting; And it should not be administered, nor with any fire or without fire, in any disease that comes from overfullness, until all the body is emptied.
And if suction is necessary for a disease, or by habit, we should administer it each hour at the beginning of her period, or towards its end, and in between and at every moment;
because there are those who, when they need to suck, weigh heavily on the head;
and if for such people there is congestion and redness in their face, and on the head, and at the neck, and confusion in the eyes;
And those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and cough up blood; And if there are such things that worry them, and they see through the nose blood and bones and other similar items.
And when we observe these signs, especially around the month mark, we instruct them to take blood suction after three hours on the third day.
The treatment of the nose helps relieve headaches ... caused by the eyes, and it is not right for this to happen after the evacuation of all the body;
And this suction is used in the treatment of the scalp,
And it should not be used by those with a cold constitution, or who have fever, because this causes considerable harm to them;
And similarly, it is not suitable for those using the sweat bath, nor for those who suffer from cold diseases.
And the one who frequently sweats off with it, becomes forgetful, and for this reason it is necessary to place the suction cup a little further down due to the risk of forgetfulness.
The ventilation of the thorax is located at the center of health and the basilica, and it is good for it to be narrowed below the belly. and through the channel of the heart, and suddenly, and in replenishment;
And it is good not to press too much, for if she holds too tightly, there will be a lack of sensation or stomach and heart.
Ventilation at two places under the collarbone is useful for chest pains, eye issues and toothaches, as well as in strangulation, and for pain in the roots of teeth,
And it is in the location of the healing of the basilica; and you must instruct the surgeon to expose his hand upon placing, not to cut the artery, and not to anticipate blood flow.
The ventilation under the chin is related to mouth diseases and gum decay, as well as other similar illnesses that occur in the mouth; it is part of the healing processes of the two lips.
The ventilation of the shoulders corresponds to diseases caused by heat and congestion.
Ventilation of the arms is equivalent to three veins in the arm, for it has bled from these large veins;
and instructs the surgeon not to cut too deeply, because the limbs are naked of flesh, and there lies skin over nerves and arteries.
The suction cup placed on the buttocks is useful for bleeding disorders from the bottom, and for diseases nearby, it is necessary that the suction cup be large, and made of leather, for she needs to be treated well; and by chance, if it were thin, it would break; and I make large wounds.
The suction cups on the legs are applied openly, as they bleed throughout the body, and are useful for old pains in the kidneys, bladder, and uterus, and help to relieve swellings; and are at the places of the two shins, and the two ankles, and moreover, they weaken the body after long use, and cause fatigue in various conditions.
The method of using the suction cup is as follows: you should place it empty first, and apply a steady suction, then quickly insert it, move it evenly, and keep doing this until you see the area turn red and swell, and observe the reddening due to blood; then remove it, and replace the suction cups again, take care of how each part is placed because there are those who have tough flesh and clear pores: one should pierce once only, and make wide wounds that are somewhat deep; and suck gently.
And if the wound is large, it should be pricked twice: the first time to pierce through the thick blood vessel.
And if the wound is very deep, it should be pricked three times; and when we wish to draw out a little blood at a time, we should only prick once.
And if we wish to retain some blood, we often reapply it; and if the wound is deep, we pierce deeply through it, and the ends are such that the vessels are pierced sharply.
It is necessary for the one with thick and hard skin, who have contracted sores, that you grease their lips with suction cups where an appetizing and liberating elixir appears: if it is in the state of purple oil or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
and if it is yellow, use mustard oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or any similar.
And if the superfluity is large and cold, take turpentine oil, or balm oil, or fennel oil, and similar substances.
And if you wish to strengthen the flesh and large pores, there should be no need to apply any oil.
but it is suitable to wash after the suction with pink water, or cold water, or water from a rose, or water from a cucumber, or water from a porcelain dish, or other similar substances.
And for those with some moisture, if it is relieved by rest, or water from a myrtle and sumac, and similar substances.
And those who have large excesses rise from old wine, or water of sulfur, or decoction of fennel or chamomile, or others similar;
and there is no proper use of suction cups before the bath or in the bath, but one hour after the bath; and do not sleep afterward during suction treatment.
and it should be noted when he needs to be suctioned and when he has been suctioned. And watch over those who are being cured if they are hot-tempered, and they become too vigorous and inflamed; If it requires cold things, such as apples, endive and lettuce, and similar items;
And rabbit soup, and meat of a castrated male, and moist meats.
And for those with cold complexions, they should drink honey syrup and a half of aromatic wine that is between old and new, and eat small servings of rabbit soup, rabbit meat, young birds, and baby pigeons.
And on the day they are able to suck air, they should drink more than they eat;
And it is necessary to give no one three times or musk before venostation, or after, in order to strengthen the main members; And sharpen the knives, but it is not proper that the hot ones drink.
The suction cups that are placed to cause irritation are those placed on the liver, and on the kidneys, and in gout, and on the stomach and intestines and thighs; for this limb does not endure being injured by them on wounds,
And one does not make it forceful only to draw blood from limb to limb, As when we place them on the nipples when the child is born to reduce viscosity in the body, similarly we apply suction cups on the belly and on the buttocks to diminish the body;
And relieve pain when there is an obstruction or stone, if it relieves by its attractive power any obstruction, or empties the stone from its place;
And thus does it when placed on the liver and pancreas where there is retained suction.
And these suction cups are prepared empty only to suck up liquid; they are never prepared together with fire, and sometimes filled with water.
As in the diseases of those who weep heavily, and in such a manner can one fill the suction cup with hot water, or with water that has boiled herbs useful for this purpose.
The shape of the suction cup applied by fire is as follows:
And has two and a half inches wide at its widest point, and there is a small sharp point in the middle about an inch, as to stick out like one would place a needle.
And let it be made of horn, so that it does not irritate the patient upon putting it on the limb;
And in the middle there is a rod across like an eel or iron, for to place a candle grasped,
and they are both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
for the suck-pipes for children are different than for adults, and the skinny ones are different from the fat ones.
And one should place this suction cup thus on the limb:
Take a candlewick or one line of wax, and place it inside the suction cup, within the suction cup that is on the penis. so that the heat reaches to the bottom of the suction cup without burning the genitals;
and then place it on the member, and you should do this at the point we have mentioned, so that when desired, if there's a vapor, remove the suction cup;
and apply the liniment as previously described, and repeat this often, if you need to.
In the suction cup therapy for pleurisy disease, during all stages of the illness that are acute, there is no use of a tube or a plug, and it is administered only when it is full of water, and placed solely on the limb.
and this is its shape:
Tongue sucking pustules are only treated with suction cups in limbs where one cannot place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas. And on the desiccated flesh of wounds, such as on heels or noses, and other similar areas;
And if you find organs where they are that when you discover sweet smelling things in gentle waters without mire, then take them;
and place them in fresh water until they become familiar and have nothing in their bellies. and then bleed and cupping on the limb until it turns red, and place them on the organs;
and when they are full and bleeding, if it's possible to place cupping on the area, do so, as this is highly effective.
If not, raise it with ease then water, quite well, and then apply the cure;
And if it becomes too hot after the passage of the knives, moisten with one drap of linen in cold water, and place it until the cut is completely healed;
And if there are many cuts, apply powdered vitriol or gall and similar substances until it is completely healed;
Or you place half of peeled beans on the wound, and leave them until they heat up on the wound, which will stop bleeding now;
And if you need more expertise, take other veins.
And if the veins are not to be taken quickly, rub with fresh blood or pierce the wound and leave a needle until blood flows out. Then place them, and as soon as they sense the blood, start to move;
And when you see that they are bleeding, sprinkle a little aloes and ground wheat on them, or ash; now they will begin to heal.
This begins the book of fractures
These chapters are many times necessary in the art of medicine, and restoration of breaks and healing.
Know this, dear fellow, that the leaves of this chapter, which have been overlooked by the ancient books, no one has ever seen or read;
And for this reason, the knowledge has been lost in our land, because I have never found anyone good regarding it.
And I know nothing of this, having studied from the old books' knowledge, where I have treated the science so much and through experience, and by the habit of my life;
And in this chapter, I have described what is contained here and summarized it at the end, clearly showing the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I did in those two chapters before these.
Therefore, it is necessary that we outline or introduce the contents of this book with its principles and chapters where the mind accepts understanding, staying true to reality. So that those who have experienced it may know and learn this noble art and teach it to others.
I say that when fractures or dislocations or twists or sprains occur to any part of the body, it is necessary for you to quickly treat the patient from one side and then the other. If there's nothing holding up on either side, such as weakness in muscles, children, or the elderly;
If the place where you press is too tight, or too cold; and eat cold meats, meaning frozen cuts, and liver and kid meat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill up with foods that can fill the veins of blood, until you have doubt about a pus lump becoming hot, or spreading of matter in the body part; if the patient begins to improve after their first period under my treatment.
And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you introduce meats into the diet that cause substantial bloating or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and radishes, and onions, and peas, and beef stomachs, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar items. And with this type of bloating, the healing occurs more quickly and the breakage improves.
Know that broken bones in the old and the weak cannot be properly set or sutured according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs. Also, those that are too tender, such as the bones of young children;
But do not hesitate to reset the broken bone. Work on the protruding ends of the bone and join the limb together again while it's strong as it was before; and don't stop halfway with your task. And for this reason, you should nourish yourself with large meat portions, as we have said.
Know that fractures can occur in various ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the heel or leg, and in this chapter, I will tell you all ways of fracture. For there is cracking that goes to war, and another when sharpening, as with the size of a feather for writing.
For there is cracking that goes to war, and another when sharpening, as with the size of a feather for writing. And if at cracking with injury, and cracking throughout a small crack.
And each way has its own tool, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings to its place;
and when the bone crack is recognized by the fact that the limb twists and opens well outward, and presses against the hand;
And when there is no twisting or defect in its location, and the patient does not feel significant pain, if there is no break;
but it may well have twisting, or a crack, or small break. If it is not suitable for you to move it by hand, but apply the following remedies, and then gradually tighten it now in a subtle manner.
Know that if the break occurred internally, and the two parts are detached, now they should be placed evenly, so that abscesses are applied to both.
And if pus forms and comes out, if you leave him without any treatment, until the abscess subsides; Then place it evenly until you can gently and skillfully move it, and know that the restoration of this is easier than in cases where there are pieces. Then hold it steady, as we will explain afterwards.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if they extend by two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or near your hand if it's a small limb, or by two strings, or by one string and with your hand;
and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are healed, if you reset it by all means in their original positions as you can, and make sure that through your work no harm or pain befalls the patient;
And adjust well the two shoulder joints of the bone according to the best forms.
And feel well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: if it is done beautifully, and do not strain too much, not pressing as those do when they extract pus and muscle tension in the limb, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limbs are in place, carefully keep the wound undisturbed, neither by watching nor sleeping, neither when turning or in any other manner; And make sure that the limbs are secured so that no pain is felt. For when he feels no pain, it is not at all to his liking, and it should be put in such a state that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain, it is not at all to his liking, and it should be put in such a state that he feels no pain; and keep him straight, so that there is no twist when he is restored;
and the quality of the limb broken is according to what I tell you.
Know that limbs broken are varied in smallness and size, and in shape.
For there are small limbs such as arms and legs and alike: it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths;
And those that are larger, such as the chest and thighs: it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and firm bandage, because wide bands embrace the entire large limb and restrain it equally from all sides, so there is no difference;
Then bind the mid-thighs with lighter cloths, three times or four according to the limb, and press your hand slightly throughout the bandage, then move up to above the break and restrain less, so that the break can be moved away a little;
And soften the bandage gradually and gradually, until you cover a large part of the healthy limb, then take another bandage, and move back around to above the broken limb;
Then return to the break part again, and apply pressure moderately, not too hard nor too soft, as we have said in the first instruction above;
Then place the twisted threads of linen or cloths in between, until they are evenly toed, then secure everything with one braid, and then set your well-made stars on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something soothing for abscesses on top, and that relieves the swelling, and leaves it like that for a few days;
Then apply pressure over the stars, and make them half the width of a freshly sharpened reed, or from the wood used for making hoes, or from palm fronds, and shape them according to this form:
but it is necessary that the piece of metal which one puts on the burn be a bit larger and wider than the others;
and also as long as it fits the size or magnitude of the limb;
then hold it on the metal bars just like you did in the first treatment, then bind an additional thread above it, similar to what was done at the burn site during the first treatment;
tighten them less than before; and it is necessary that the thread be of moderate size, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;
For if the threads are thick, as I desire in works of the folk who make their strings from twisted linen cord, and this is great mistake, because the string cannot be even if it is too delicate, and it should not have less than half a two inches between each thread.
And if the wounds are burned by the marks of the pins after the constriction in their health, then put patches of linen or shredded wool on them, so that they do not blister.
When the wound is burned and the joints are broken, I will tell you the treatment after this.
And know that it is not right to restrain all broken limbs for the entire first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not appropriate to keep them restrained for as long as five or seven days, or even longer depending on the severity of each case that arises.
And here is the method of the old plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: and it involves taking flour that stays on the mill walls, mixing it with plenty of egg, and creating a paste that isn't too thin or too thick. Use this concoction and this is the common way of applying plaster to restore fractures in various configurations, just as well for adults as for women and small children, because neither too hot nor too cold, there's no mistake about its application.
Another method for applying plaster to restore fractures and dislocations: take 30 raisins, dainy apples, rue, and asafetida, along with gum Arabic and mastic, each in an amount of .x.3; myrrh and aloes in amounts of .v.3; vinegar at seven parts out of eight. Make a powder from these ingredients and mix them with plenty of egg. If the consistency of the mixture is warm, use this plaster. It has a good composition, quickly restores broken bones, and is worth more than many remedies for men.
Another method for plastering in case of twisting: take mugwort and wormwood, each 1.3 grams; myrrh and aloes, each 7.8 grams; castor oil 6 grams; boric acid from Armenia 10 grams, grind them well together, then mix with water or enough egg whites, and administer it.
Another method for plastering in cases of fractures and dislocated bones, to soothe the pain that arises, and when dealing with bone fragments and bruising: take new wool, and cook it in oil until it becomes oily, then apply it onto your body. These plasters do not heal completely, but they are better for soothing abscess pain, and properly caring for the pains of the bones.
Another method for plastering which restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves and terrestrial dogwood leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method for plastering in the restoration of bone fracture and for removing pus. Take roots of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, groundnut flour, from each one part; grind them, mix with wine, and if the limbs are warm, mix with coriander water or water, and use it.
Another way of plastering more forcefully than the first when pus hardens during member restoration. Take valerian roots, flax seeds, balm, lavender, and mint, and violet and chamomile flowers, from each one a part; grind them, mix with salt water or sweet water, or with wine, depending on the warmth of the limb and its rest period.
In his book, Ippocrates instructs that for restoring strength to a broken limb, one should apply a balm made of wax and oil, and nothing else more. He states it should be neither too soft nor too hard but in between the two.
And it seems that Galen suggests applying something to the broken limb for restoration, things that are dry but slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar substances, as we have said.
Another way to plaster for injury and pain: take mussels and omelets' feathers or bird feathers, and basil, and lime of equal size, grind them, make a paste from it, and apply it.
And then loosen a little afterwards, and be careful not to let the patient feel any pain, nor have the bone of its place move; if not loosen it by hands at all.
And if pain comes to the limb, or itching, inability to rest or swelling, hurry and loosen it, and apply the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a wet sea sponge, dip them in water, and cool off the limb, until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed. Then let the limb rest for an hour, afterwards place it on dry wool, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it with a cloth until you are sure of removing pus.
And let the inflammation settle in the limb, and relieve the pain, then begin the healing process subtly, with a bit of plaster, and do not apply pressure as strongly as before; and work delicately until it is healed.
And if you see that pus is yellow and red, pain, swelling are present, indicating an abscess throughout, then you need plaster and binding, start again as you did the first time equally.
And if nothing of what we've said happens to the limb, or if you can't release it until after three days, four days, five days, seven days; and each time leave it for twenty days, according to how things unfold, as long as the inflammation subsides, approaching the adjustment of the flesh.
Therefore maintain the restriction longer than initially, and increase his meat supply, as I have mentioned before; and if you see that the body is drying out more than necessary, know that no improvement will come. So regularly apply warm water to it whenever you reset the dislocation, and do this every third day, and relieve some tension in the joint.
Through this procedure then cut the dislocated parts of the limb and quickly counteract what the inexperienced do, who distort the limb: this is harmful, and such actions are foolish. I can only suggest leaving it alone or correctly treating it in its entirety.
regarding various methods of breaking up Many ways of fractures exist, and various shapes, and their causes are determined;
For there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the collar bone breaks up to the shaft at its junction with the bone, similar to a hatchet or staff strike; because this is how such a fracture is called, "hatchet break".
Or the sword penetrates through the bone from above without piercing it, and this is called a "complete" fracture; and the injuries caused by these two kinds of fractures are either large or small.
And if there is sequential impact, or crack, or break in the bone, or under a stone, or other similar occurrences.
And if there is a fracture up to the membrane that is under the bone or above it, and this wound can be large or small.
And if there is a wound that has gone into the bone as thin as a hair, and this crack is small, for this it is called this "hairline" fracture.
And if the wound is made by striking with a stone or falling, or by any similar thing, and causes part of the bone to come out, resulting in the limbs being fractured as when candle-makers are working on the candles; similarly, the stone enters from within.
And this happens more with those who have soft bones, such as in children's bones.
And it happens in all these ways of breaking that small fragments are evacuated as with shells; and I will speak about them in their order.
And let us know all methods of breaks through the removal above them, and the investigation on stakes, and by the putrid flesh which is upon.
The appearance of hair is known when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed inside it, revealing the dark break.
In treating a break, beware of adverse effects from the malady, and if you observe no harmful incident such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, extension, pallor, fever, and other symptoms appearing in various conditions, cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any alarming accidents, and you hope for salvation, then start the treatment.
And when snow first comes to you, and it's in winter, then you should remove the bone before the fifteenth day since you can.
And if it's in summer, then hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day so that the pus under the bone may be rotten, and bring about the accidents we have mentioned.
And if the bone fracture reaches up to the membrane covering the brain, you must cut into the fractured part in this way: and take hold of the skull from where the bone is broken, and expose as much of the bone as possible in every manner that you can, and further towards the shape of the wound more than you can.
And when the flow of blood begins to uncover the bone, or an abscess forms, you must assist with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the body with moistened linen in rose oil. And let the wound rest until the abscess pain subsides and there is enough flow of blood; then begin to excavate towards the bone, and it is done according to two methods: one method is that you cut in a narrow strip at the front, and this is the form:
And then make another cut larger than the first one.
And the second way is that you have many different sizes of cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of hard iron; and in operation lightly, so as not to wound the head.
And if the bone is thick and hard, it is necessary that you pierce inside, in such a way that you perform cuts with needles, not so deep that they penetrate beyond the thickness of the flesh, and there should be a margin above the point about 1 inch, ensuring the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each goes to its place under the thickness of the bone, having needles for all parts; and this is the form of the three ways of using needles:
The quality to pierce through the bone is that you place one needle on the bone, and turn with your hands until you know the bone is pierced. Then replace the needle a little later elsewhere, and do so throughout, then scrape out the space of the bone between the roots of teeth as precisely as possible, and do this more finely than you can, gently, as we have said, as long as you are able to remove the bone with your hands or any instruments you have like forceps, pliers; and make sure not to touch the brain or the sinus.
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is fitting that you reset the bone which has remained of the bone to all 1. another instrument similar to a canine tooth, but it should be more hardened and finer than the other canine tooth;
and if there is nothing of the small bones remaining, nor any scales, then reset them with 1. tools lightly; then treat the wound with the ointments and remedies that we have mentioned.
And the other method of treatment is as Galien said, which is safer; and it involves applying a strong lard, and this is his word. Firstly, you should uncover part of the bone, at or near where the break is made and moves, so when you have uncovered that part, place under the tip of this lens-shaped incision tool, as it's shown here.
And do not cut from one side only, and the limb should be divided into two parts, so that when you cut you are directed towards the bone; then with a small hammer above, so that you strike lightly across the entire bone, and take great care of the mesh that is there;
If it's pushed towards the bone, gently push it, for you'll feel no harm with the bone, and no pain.
And if the bone fracture does not puncture until it touches the tissue and only the bone is cut from above, and there are small pieces left, then after that roughness, you should scrape off the scales with a fine shaver you must have various sizes, in order to apply the most suitable for each part according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you stand before great razors, and afterwards of finer tools, and do not stop doing this until it is done well.
In every other haircutting and subtle breaking tasks, you should adjust the work according to its position; this is something that cannot be answered by someone who has devoted their study to this craft.
And if it is discovered that the wound is bleeding, you should take one and a half pieces of linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and soak them in rose oil, then apply them to the wound; Then take another piece of linen cloth, doubled either two or three times, and soak it in wine and rose oil, then place it over the first cloth; do this as lightly as you can so as not to weigh down the wound, then apply a second layer of string, but don't tighten it too much just enough so that it only touches the wound.
And let it do so for one or two days until the abscess drains, then dislocate it again and administer remedies such as roots of wormwood, flour of cloves, incense powder, and mustard seed, and similar things; make a powder from these and apply it to the wound, then give medications that reduce inflammation but are not painful.
And ensure the wound is clean, do not leave any ointment nor allow any pus to assemble. For when pus assembles on the fabric of the brain, it circulates and causes harm, leading to great suffering for the patient. As one applies a pungent thing to the head, it disturbs from above.
Take heed then, should any unfortunate events befall the patient as we have described, it is with doubt and without fear.
And if no fear comes out only because of the medicine that we have placed on it, should this virtue be present, then you must take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and one part of beeswax glue, and spread it on the affected area; Then treat with the appropriate treatments until you are healed.
Know that the two parts above the nose are never broken, or only one is broken if you do so, because they consist of two bones; and this lower part is cartilaginous, it doesn't break, nor does it weaken from twisting or bending, then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must pinch your little finger or under the nose and apply an equal breakage inside to your index finger, and outward at the nostril hole, until the nose revives according to its natural shape; And do this gently, and watch that the patient does not feel pain through your operation.
And if the break is above the nose part and cannot reach to the place on the head, then it is necessary that you put it at an equal distance from the tip of a somewhat thick reed.
And if the break is in two parts, redo the operation and try to restore it on the first day, if you can;
But if not, after the seventh or eighth day when the wound has calmed down, then bind to the tip of the nose with a linen gauze. If the break is in one part.
If you pull two from another side, if breaking occurs; and let the threads be so thick that they fill the little hollows of the nose.
And say that a restorative should moisten the threads in butter and change each day. I do not think it is proper, but they should be moistened during the preparation of an omelette mixture with flour; then leave the thread until the bone becomes firm and the cartilage hardens.
And sometimes use goose feathers instead of threads, and if with one egg you cover the inside, and keep it warm, and blow into the wound, do whatever you see fit.
And if the abscesses come to the nose in the same way as you handle them, put a wad of moistened wax or cotton in olive oil, or in a pot of snail juice.
And if pus doesn't come out, then apply a plaster on the outside, made of sawdust and incense powder mixed with yolk oil. Then place light wafers on top, without tying them too tightly.
And if the bones have been broken in small pieces and are thus fragmented, then use suitable tools for this task. Then open the wound, clean it with surgical procedures, and stitch, as you would apply bandages or salves suitable for such an area;
And if there is no injury within the nose, then perform a nasal treatment, and place cloves in it as long as it remains healthy.
Of the rupture of the jaw
When the jaw is fractured internally and there's no wound visible from the outside, and only the breakage is external, not shattered within. It doesn't crack into two halves but breaks internally, so it's easily recognized.
It is necessary; if the fracture occurs in the right part, you should press your index finger into the mouth near the jawbone. And if the fracture is in the left mandible, then use your right hand's index finger and press it gently into the inside of the injury, and do this with the other hand from the outside, making sure to do so evenly.
And if the fracture of the jaw is complete and affects both sides (.i.e., left and right), it is necessary that you administer an equal extension on both parts until they are even.
And when the movements of the teeth occur, or a rupture, hold them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk. Then place on the broken jaw pieces of beeswax, and put under one doubled piece of cloth; then on the cloth put a large candle properly made, or a piece of leather equal in size to the length and width of the jaw. Secure it in such manner that you can, command the patient to rest, and eat small pieces of light meat.
And if you see that the figure changes, then untie on the third day, and then adjust what has become undone; apply plaster, made with powder from a mill mixed generously with eggs or flour of almond meal, after removing the beeswax; then place under the plaster light wool, and if the plaster hardens, and the patient's position does not change, let it be for as long as they are healing. Many times heal in three weeks.
And if you encounter pus-filled sores, then follow what we have instructed many times.
And if there is both fracture and wound together, reward nothing of the bone that has been removed; such delicacy requires tools suitable for this task.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there remains nothing, if the wound is wide, place one dressing suitable for it over it, to promote healing, until it has healed.
by the power The forces break many times ahead of the shoulder, and breaking occurs in three ways: it breaks and is dismembered into two parts, and there are pieces, which makes it lighter to restore; or there is breaking with an injury.
And the procedures are such that when there is breaking with an injury, have two assistants so one strikes the shoulder where the force is broken; and the other extends their arm towards the affected part; then make the break equal with your hands, so that its form matches what it should be, and there is no appearance or movement.
And if you need to extend further, place a round sponge of cloth or wool under the shoulder to the skin; and make its size according to your need; then stretch and lift the force (which likely means muscle), and hold the sponge in your hand so that you can make the break equal as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head from the strength's force at the front, because it comes forward, it should be that the patient lies down on their backside, and places one shoulder pad in the middle under them, and pushes the shoulder downwards. Until the bone of the strength is raised.
And then strike the break with your fingers, and if you find small pieces, it should be that you split through them; and pull lightly on the fragments. And if the bone cannot join by any means, cut near one of the incisions you have made; but place this instrument against the strength's tool to hold the joint open:
And it should resemble a spoon, not be missing, and be as wide as you need, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and has two heads, as you see, and one is broad, and the other narrow, like the cut made in the wound when you treated the bones;
And when you are sure of the removal of pus, if you close the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt about pus removal, if you cover the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
And if pus comes out, if moist is brought in, oil rose and salt and wine, and place it on top.
The grinding of the bone, when it is near to wounds and close to surgery, involves placing on the bone a plaster made from ground powder and egg yolk, and place light bandages on top, and place a bean under the armpit if necessary. Then take a very large band about the size of a palm wide, then place two thick cloths on top of the bandage and plaster. Then take a slender pole about three feet long and wide, and wrap it around that band, making sure the edge of the band is hanging down. And place the instrument on the wound, and turn the rod up to the neck, and throughout the healthy skin, and across the diseased area; and reset it from each part. And when you see that the joint holds the wound in place, and clearly see that the instrument doesn't move above the broken bone, then reward each day, and when you remove the ligament, then keep it restrained;
Let the disease heal on its back, and apply it when he sleeps with a small pillow under the armpit, to raise the shoulder up; this will relieve the strain from the wound due to the alignment of the shoulder blade. If you tie his arm around the neck, do not remove it until 20 days without fear of any bad incidents happening;
Then reapply the bandage if you see that it's needed, and tighten and leave it like this until he is restored; and it will be fully restored in 28 days at most, and less time for some people.
Of the breaking of the shoulder
Sometimes the shoulder breaks completely or partially from its location, either at the top or middle; if it's dislocated due to impact rather than natural movement. Apply according to the shape of the break and reset accordingly with its natural form in every possible manner that you can. Then apply coarse mill powder mixed with plenty of eggs, gently rubbing until two layers are formed. Place a wide but fine, slightly larger than the shoulder on this base; ensure there's no disturbance anywhere around the shoulder, covering it lightly with linseed waxes to ensure evenness; then tightly compress it into one big band so that the base doesn't move at all, watch each day for progress; every time it loosens, re-tighten and adjust the base if necessary. Keep the patient on their side where they can rest against the shoulder. The shoulder will be restored within 20 days or 25 depending upon the condition. And once these numbers are completed, you should be assured that it's not just bone that has been lightly set in place.
And if a bone piece pushes forward and not within the socket, then it is a dislocation of the hip joint requiring the evacuation of blood clots as we have explained in the dislocation of the knee.
From the breaking of the foot
The feet are sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; they often break at the end. And when they are broken through, if you bend them downwards, you feel great pain in the patient, loss of consciousness, and all senses disappear, and by chance blood vomits out, and opens the joints within the broken bones, and one can sense it well.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back, and you place them in a sitting position between your shoulders, then press their shoulders, and join their ribs with two pieces of cloth under their shoulders, and gently assemble them together in all possible ways until the shape of the bone matches as it should; then place plaster and strips over the subtle salt bed, or any other lightweight material, wrap it once in a cloth, and bind it to the broken bone so that it doesn't move; and turn the patient's back round and press it against their body, and tighten each hour for this bandage, and if it loosens, tighten it again; and when it suits you to relieve them of the splint due to corrosion or itching, or pain or abscess, do so quickly, and relieve them, remove the plaster cast, and treat the one who has come with remedies as needed; then replace the bandage, and press until it is set.
Of the breaking of ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs comes only after the backbones are broken, and within them, and it happens only because they become brittle; and one feels this well in examination at the spine.
And for the repair, if needed, set the break equally, just like it should be. Then apply the plaster and bind it with a bandage, if necessary.
And if the break in the ribs is occurring internally, one feels great pain and throbbing, like weeping, because the bone rubs against the tissue; there are also pains everywhere, sudden and immediate vomiting of large quantities of blood, and it's a distressing illness. The elderly had to endure a lot of suffering.
And if someone says it is necessary to eat meats that puff up the belly, in order to expel wind from elsewhere.
We do not follow this advice, that we should apply antiseptic ointments instead of it, if it has not appeared. And if it has appeared, then heal it.
And let no one say that we should put suction cups on the body to suck out pus, for it is as if they are reasonable; still, there's doubt whether the suction cup attracts excess fluids to the body due to weakness.
And they say that when one must cover the body with wet wool in oil heated, and you lay out strips between the ribs to make an equal line across, then use the treatment for inflammation, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear through the bone piercing the skin, and there is doubt for the patient, then it's necessary to cut through his body from near the broken rib, and place one instrument over the wound to protect the lung; then you must cut through the bone, gently drain, and then stitch together the two edges of the wound if they are large, and treat with plasters until it heals. And if abscesses come about, then apply wet cloths in oil rose to his body, and place on him; and treat continuously with the substance suitable for abscesses until it heals, and be vigilant over his ribs where it should occur, until he is healed.
Of the cracking of the neck
None of the time does bone breakage occur at the neck joints, and there is no bending when it happens; similarly with the spine at the back. And when this happens to none and you wish to know if it will heal or not, take heed: if you see that his hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot be moved or extended, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel anything. Know that there are multiple fatal possibilities here, and if they remain unharmed and feel well when being held steady and then released, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the sickness has been cured, provided it was treated properly.
And when this happens to the spine at the back, and you wish to know if it will heal or not, take heed: if its joints have become soft, and if there are accidents that occur like those in hands and on the back where there's gusts of wind and loss without desire; and when one has stayed there on their belly, yet there's loss without desire. And when they're kept there on their back and want to stand up, but cannot. Know that it is fatal: if no labor were done in its cure.
And if this misfortune does not come to him, then it is a lighter matter.
And the treatment is that you should apply it if there's pus present; place oil on the spine or on the yolk of an egg where pus is found, until it soothes. Then place one of the soothing plasters and let it dry; tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. And do not sleep in that area where they feel pain, until they recover. And if any bone were to break open, then you should cover it with a cloth; extract the bone, and then align the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, then treat with ointment that promotes healing until they heal. And if the bone chips off, which are called "chips from the knee", when your handbag in your left hand, place it level with the other hand at your power, then put on the plaster and elevate it; if you need to do so. Then compress, and if any broken bones were to come out, then treat them up and remove the bone, and treat the wound until it heals.
of the breaking of the hip bone
It happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, there may be a slight numbness at the top; and it extends long, declines to the knee, and comes to the patient's pain in the thigh, and puncturing, and swells what is broken.
And for the restoration, you should extend your hand upwards as long as it is over the wound; and be aware of where the breakage occurred and its shape. If the breakage is only at the top, then apply an even pressure until it reaches its natural position.
And if the breakage is along the length or it declines inwardly, then guide the body upwards towards its abdomen, until you see that the restoration of this breakage has been achieved. And when you have placed it evenly, place it on the plaster. Then put a stick or wood base over it, and hold the burn wound still so it doesn't move. And apply the heat along the sides until the skin is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
And if the abscesses swell and come out, do not touch them until the abscesses are relieved, and place them as we have mentioned earlier; and then proceed with treatment, restraining them appropriately without any bad incident happening. And this is how it's done.
From the breaking of the shoulder
The shoulder is that which is between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder blade; if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of these two ways: in one way, you take a rod half as thick as your finger, like this form:
And tie the two ends of two cords each on, and place them upwards, then hold the patient's broken arm above one spot; then pour their arm broken downwards onto the rod until it reaches the armpit, having bent half the length of the rod, then place on any weight-bearing object or have the attendant extend it below; then put the eyes of the breakage evenly under both hands together, until the break returns as it should.
And the other way is that you place the patient on their elbows and tie their hand to their neck, then command two attendants that one cuts at the breakage where it touches their hands, and the other cuts halfway from each shoulder strap, and stretch each to their respective side.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, hold one band over the burn and on top of it, and extend each minister to their part. And if the burn is near the shoulder's head, then it should be that you place half of the band under the joint, and the other half towards the knife, underneath the burn; also, when the burn is towards the knife, then it should be that you apply a light one, without effort, until the burn is even on the left and on the knife; then make the incision even as it should be, and hold it tight, if no pus comes out.
And if pus comes out, do not hold it tightly for more than seven days, and place moist wool and oil on top until the pus comes out; then release the pressure, and apply the way of holding it tight like you put plaster over the incision. Then attach your arm to the shoulder rest, and put your hand under the shoulder or breast; and place the cover, hold it tightly on the rest and the arm, so that the arm is straight as needed, without anything preventing it, or if the bone is not dislocated.
And if you doubt that the bone doesn't move, then use elbows and place a larger and stronger brace over the incision than the others, ensuring there is one inch of space between each brace. Each brace should be large enough to pass the incision by three inches from each side; then hold tight on the braces as I said at the beginning of this chapter about the incision, with more strength but less in spacing out.
And if you see the base of the stumps and constriction, as we have said, in the place that you restore the broken member, and you doubt about removing the abscess, if you leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then observe every three days the binding, making sure itching does not swell or come around the site where it was supposed to be drained, or the discharges do not come up to the limb because it is too constricted. If there's a mistake, as we have said.
And if no such incidents occur, or if the dislocation does not occur for two days or longer, and the patient rests with the ailment on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; and place under the shoulder one cloth filled equally with wool, and observe every hour of the day or night, making sure that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or that the bandages are softening; if it heals through the virtue of medicine, and gives him the meat we had placed before, in such a way that the meat is at first tender; and when he starts to recover, if it becomes bulky. And it's customary for both the shoulder and the leg to be repositioned within forty days from then on; and thereafter you should release and administer baths and medicinal ointments to soothe the site of injury. And if the restriction is awkward and tangled, it may need another two days or one month to release.
from the breaking of the arm
The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the "foscile" duo. One bone is small and serves the pocket; while the other is large, being this one underneath, towards the small two. By chance, only the large foscile breaks, or the small one, by chance they come together.
When the small fosciles break, restoration is easy and healing; but when the large ones break, the healing is bad, and worse than when they broke together. If it's only the small foscile that breaks, then gently stretching should suffice, and setting appropriately.
And if it's the large foscile that breaks, you should pull more tightly; and stretch on one cushion, and adjust the pocket of your hand higher than the others, and the small finger lower than the other fingers, and make sure the patient crosses their own middle fingers, and another cushion in front them a little higher so they do not experience any discomfort. Then have the assistants extend their arms to the part below their hand, or at the elbow, and one helper on each side above that point. And then put the patient's hands level according to their best form.
And if in the breaking apart into pieces, you place each one in its own spot; and should there be none that gets caught with a bone, and you cannot return it to its spot, then proceed by making contact with the bone, as we have explained previously.
And if in the process of healing from an injury, I spoke about it specifically in chapter singular; then take the treatment.
And if during the beginning of the restoration, ulcers occur, then apply this: Take one layer made of beeswax and white beeswax, ensuring it is neither too hard nor too soft; and place another layer by carefully joining them together, until the ulcers are soothed. Then remove the beeswax bandages, and cover with a plaster made from powder mixed with enough egg yolks, then place the bandages. Ensure that one of the bandages covers more of the wound than others, and it should be further up on the wound than elsewhere, and each day less spread out, as I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter; and keep the bandages covering the wound moist and soft, but not hard or abrasive; and use threads made from linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And after a few days, support the limb and the joint. And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that comes upon the limb, it should be required that you immerse the limb in hot water, until that itch is soothed; and let not the limb lie idle. And then restart compression, and if the ligaments are torn and bones exposed, or similar circumstances occur, adjust them accordingly.
And if care is taken that no hardening should happen to the limb, because it is too confined, then it should be required that you soften it by rubbing, and leave thus for a few days, until the hardness disappears, and then tighten.
And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, or if it is not released until after twenty days. Or once this period has passed, then place your hands on his neck and ensure they are even, and be careful about movement and digestion, and let him sleep on his back; know that this healing has been restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and by chance in twenty, depending on the composition and nature of the virtues.
from the breaking of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and in our thumbs we have slight injuries, and nothing more than bending occurs many times.
And when the sole of the hand is broken or bent, it's necessary for the patient to hold their fingers straight and in front of them equally; then place their hand on an extended surface, extend the broken bones, and position them evenly with their fingers until they are properly aligned; and then apply bandages and splints if there are no abscesses. If abscesses do appear, he should then place a splint according to the size of his hand; and wrap it in one layer of linen cloth.
And if the breakage is near the base of the fingers at the edge of the sole, make a cone-shaped pad and instruct the patient to place it on their broken finger tip; then stretch this with a long piece of cloth. And the splint should be made to fit the thickness of the hand as well as its size, stretching it in such a way that it is appropriate.
And if the fracture is at the front side, it should be that you place one splint above and another below on the foot part, so that hands are open and straight, then tightly bind them altogether around the hand and seal off the connection between fingers.
And if the break occurs in neither of our feet, it is if it's on the knee, put them equal and as should be; tighten with the heel, and if you see that putting a small straight splint can lift the break, and don't let it move. And if the break is at another foot, such as in the index or one of the others, put them equal and bind with the healthy one which follows; or bind all together when your hands allow, taking care to set each wound properly and tend to who comes next as I've said.
If the thigh is broken
The bone of the shin is often broken, and one sees this when it turns both forward and backward; and for restoration, this means fixing over the break with thread, and another underneath. And the muscles lie under this skin, then stretch each ministerial muscle to its equal part; and this is when the break is within the bone.
And if the break is close to the root of the shin bone, then one should direct some threads towards the ankle and others below the break. And similarly if it's near the knee joint, and thus place some threads under the knee, and the extension downwards; then adjust the bone equally with its two ends until it follows its natural shape, and then put on plaster, bandage it, so that no abscesses form.
And if there is an abscess nearby, let it heal and then return to your work and treatment; the healing has been done in this manner. It is necessary that you wrap around the splinter. I. bandage thick doubled in II or III layers, and retain the excess. Then bend the leg until the heel reaches the root of the toe, and insert one long thread between the thigh and the leg, under the knee, and tie the knot at the top of the thread; then re-bend around the leg and thigh the bandage, then place an asterisk on the bone of the leg; then fill the left side with VIII strips of cloth in the space between the leg and the thigh for equal tension, then begin to bind it tightly three or four times around the splinter. And when you move further above the splint and loosen less; then tie two ends of each thread that you have inserted between the leg and the thigh together, then bind them three asterisks at the top, then return under the knot until you reach the heel; and tighten it so that it doesn't move from its place, then leave him like this, then there is no other symptom such as pus or inflammation.
And if this happens, and it is dislocated, address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that catch, one must remove them, if possible; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to cut the skin, and squeeze out force; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And at any time the thigh bone is broken in such a way that one puts asterisks there, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, no harm befalls the patient with such treatment.
And know that the digestion is restored within one day, or somewhat less, or somewhat more, according to the variations of the constitutions.
From the alleyway by the garden
And know that in the garden alley there is little damage, but it bends many times. And if it does break, it's usually just a crack or two small chips, and occurs everywhere, whether there is a wound or not, and one feels this well.
And the restoration is such that you should make it flat where it was rounded until it comes together and moves as can be done. Then put on plaster, and if necessary add a round support, and tighten it according to what's needed, then reassess all the preparations we've discussed for other breakages, like removing an abscess or similar; apply whatever is appropriate for each situation until it heals properly.
Of the breaking of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, from which one is called "humerus" and the other is called "radius"; and every kind of injury or breakage occurs similarly as with the arm, and thus its restoration is done in the same way as with the arm, and the operations are all similar.
And if both bones of the leg are broken together, then turn the leg from every side.
And if the delicate bones (perhaps referring to smaller or thinner bones) are broken, then turn it in front.
And if the large bones are broken, one feels great pain and sees it clearly; then return. Then apply extension, making them equal, and bind the joints equally; however, when the break is ugly and there are more pieces, the extension should be less intense and lighter; and adjust according to your ability.
And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that fit the leg from side to side and at both ends of it, and they should be as long as the leg from the knee down. Then wrap them with bandages on top and bottom, bind them in the middle too, and ensure that the leg can't move neither to the right nor to the left when done; this way it's well. And two fust fibers of a suitable length for the leg should be applied, they are of wood, and place the leg so as not to allow any movement. This is done properly where there was injury or an infection; and move the leg each day to check if there's pus or other complications; treat it until it's clean.
from bone fracture near the knee
At the ankle there is no breakage, but in the bones of the foot, some breaks occur and there isn't any force that justifies them in multiple positions.
And if there occurs a breakage in the foot bones, and you see these bones pressing one over another, place the foot's bones on the ground like they want to go somewhere. Then put your foot where the bones are lifted, just like that. Press it down strongly until their pulses revive; then apply plaster and bandages on top of it. Place a small table under his belly with two bowls full of water, then tighten him to the foot's insertion point. Wrap him in blankets all around, and do other things you need to do.
And when three or four days have passed, if the tie is released, because you will find that the bones are even, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the ribs are broken, set them back to their place, as we have mentioned for the hands' bones; then put under each broken rib an elixir according to its length, and make it slightly wider. Then place under that piece of wood the board I've told you about, and hold in place with this device; if there are two or three or more broken ribs, break them, then place on each one an elixir according to their quantity, wrapped in a single linen cloth, and secure the board underneath your fingers. And being placed at the top of the board above the belly under your fingers, make sure it is held well in position.
And you must not forget the other things that I have mentioned about other injuries, just as we have discussed; and assist each case according to how it requires.
Regarding the fracture of the hand bone
When the bone of the womb is broken, if it causes it to swell, then place her upright, lean her towards the lower back part and keep her rearward. Then fill nature's opening with cotton, and also put in an amount as big as a nut; then stand the woman up again, lift her back slowly and slowly, and then let the cotton jump, until it reaches the opening of nature, and brings the bone along with the nut. And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she's done, put her back in place. Do this for seven days or more: the break will be healed. If you see fit, take a goat bladder, tie a stick at its opening, fill the bladder into nature; then blow forcefully through the stick until the bladder is inflated inside. Nature would heal from that break. Afterwards fill it with cotton and let it sit like this for some days, till it heals properly.
And when the bone of the hand or foot is broken, or in the case of a woman, if it's restored as we have described for the hip bone; and these fractures should not be overlooked by those who apply their study and use to them, and understand my book. For this break indicates multiple orientations toward restoration: thus listen carefully.
In the case of a broken penis, take a goose's throat and fill it with the penis; then wrap it tightly around, and let it be for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
Of breaking with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it's large, such as in the thigh bone or shoulder blade or similar places, that they be treated now, so that the treatments we have mentioned prove themselves.
And if the wound is healing, you can apply vitriol to it, and if there's no other option, then continue to try restoring the broken bone in that same hour or day, or on that day, should abscesses not form.
And if abscesses do form, let the treatment continue for another day, until the abscess is relieved, and don't disturb it on the third or fourth day either, as you would be causing harm with that.
And if you see the bone has broken out from under its skin, it is necessary that you place it gently in your hands, with a slight extension.
And if the limbs don't allow you to place them evenly in your hands, then use this iron tool with it, which is made of iron and has a length of seven or six inches, and its width should match the size of the wound; for each fracture treatment, the surgeon must have three or four of these tools according to his need; they should be round and slightly thick, so that they don't bend under compression on your limb when you work, and they should be sharp in front, and rounded in the middle towards the front.
And it is called "palainche", so that the crooked bones should be placed on the exposed part of the bone; and use it once, until you see results, and ensure they are even against each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the tools cannot grasp the bone well, then hold the head of the bone as long as the tools can handle it.
And if you can't return the bone back, as we have said, if you have an instrument suitable for this purpose, or a scalpel or surgeon's knife, in your power; then cut into the bone that is stuck within it with roughness and small shavings.
And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it's not in its natural place. If you have to ensure it's in place, then apply a mixture of one part red wine and stoptic black powder and clean it properly if possible; and don't put any paste or other thing with oil on the wound as it might cause gangrene and decay. Then administer these when you've restored the bone, let the wound be uncovered, and cover it completely according to its size, and ensure that the wound is not strained by breaking. Many have done this carelessly and caused death or corrosion in the patient at times; and so make sure the tightening of the wound isn't with broken pieces. And many have treated this way, causing death or corrosion in various instances; and let the pressures be softer and more consistent than other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that harmful incidents might occur, as we have said before, and you find pain in the area, then it's not advisable to apply treatments; but wrap it tightly instead. If after one or two days you notice an improvement on the wound, remove what you had applied with all the wine and replace it with a healing ointment, such as the tetra-formula ointment or similar products.
And it is necessary for you to dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at vespers, until it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary for the limb to be bandaged in such a way that the joint slides easily.
And if the days pass and it cannot heal anymore right away, know that there are small pieces of bone causing this, so it is necessary for you to treat the wound with a tent, and remove all these pieces causing discomfort, which bring about pain.
And if a fistula comes about in the wound or some other form of corruption, it is necessary to treat it according to what he instructed before in this chapter. And when bone is broken and exposed within the limb, such as the bone of the elbow or shoulder, and others like them on the larger limbs; do not treat it immediately because many times death results from it. But let it decay until it putrefies; perhaps after 20 days or 30 days, then you can heal the wound if possible; but if you cannot, leave it alone.
The blows that come from sweat
The blows come many times after the healing of the wound, especially when it's near the joint. And there is much to see in the shape of the limb; and by chance cannot perform its natural actions on the limb.
Take care therefore when it comes to such things: if you give him/her stiffening medicines such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, sarsaparilla, senna, and similar others, do so according to which of these you choose or all together, mixing them with stinking wine or enough eggs or milk; then apply them on the knot in poultices, press well and don't remove it with your hands day by day; then reset it, and start again another one until the knots are removed. Or apply pressure onto a piece of wood well made; because the properties of wood is such that it removes all swellings from the limbs; and if the knot has hardened into hardness like stone and needs to be removed, cover it with a bandage, showing the excessness clearly visible; or take it off to any barber until it's removed, then continue the treatment until healed.
When the breaking of the bone is restored, and after that the limbs are weak and delicate, it happens for many reasons: because one was tied too tightly and wasn't tied as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and they couldn't breathe properly on the limb; or due to excessive swelling; or due to too large movements not in their time; or because he lacks blood in his body, being weak.
And the treatment is that you make the patient eat the herbs, and make their body soft until the swelling multiplies within them; then give them baths, and bring them joy and rest. Afterward, apply grease to the limb so that the grease attracts to the major swelling, and wash it often with lukewarm water until the swelling aligns with the limb; and restore its natural shape.
If a limb is bent after an injury.
When the limbs are twisted after being put back in place, and if the bones have been broken apart, and though the shape of the limb is distorted, it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those who say that one must break the entire limb anew; many such actions are done in our land. These practices are criticized and result in severe harms and even death; however, when the swelling and pain are still fresh, they should be treated with hot water or with herbs that soften tissue, like mint leaves, roots, and thyme, etc.; and one should apply a moistening plaster, such as well-made duck fat, and take the essence of mint and mix it with lard or oil from sesame, then make a plaster. Alternatively, take greased figs and grind them with cornmeal and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
And without fail, massage the dislocation with wet hands continuously and for an extended period. And allow the limb to move every hour.
And if the twisting is hardened and durable, like bone, and requires being treated with metal, so that it reaches up to the bone, one should do this gently at the precise point of incision. And include consideration and study in the treatment process.
This begins the book on dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, because it cannot move there anymore, and the limb is incorrectly positioned, causing great pain and injury to the body.
When dislocation happens without any reason, if it fits now to bring back without disturbing anything.
For if one delays, the joints swell up, and by chance one might put them back to their places; because it is not suitable to move him when his joints are swollen: many times caused pain and other aches;
When such a situation occurs, if you have a surgeon for the patient, then let them continue, until all abscesses are relieved; then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb according to where treatment would naturally come.
And I have organized the chapters on shoulder dislocations up to this point.
of the jaws
Sometimes the jaws are dislocated downwards, and the dislocations of both occur in two ways: either they are somewhat connected to their places and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the chin, and causing saliva from the mouth not to be contained, nor able to close his mouth, and wrapping his tongue with speech.
When a dislocation is small, it can return through various arrangements.
And if it is complete and accomplished, you should reset it quickly without hesitation.
And in such a way that the attendant cuts off the patient's head, and pushes his fingers into his cheek pouch with one of her hands at the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is .ij. parts; and the other hand should be out from between them for equality; and command the patient to soften his jaws, and move them in all directions.
And the fingers are kept equally placed until it regains its position in place.
And if returning it causes pain, similarly when these two jaws are together, using hot water and oil, as long as gently resetting them; do not overly force the reset, just as we said.
And when they are returned evenly, and the mouth of the patient feels well after being moistened, then place damp cloths as poultices made from oil roset and beeswax, then bind them lightly with soft threads.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and have their shoulders lying between two cushions, so that they don't move nor to the right nor to the left, but do not strain themselves too much, instead they should eat light meat until the pains are alleviated, and secure the jaws.
And then taste this to have it taken lightly, and does not struggle to open the mouth for eating and drinking until the jaw is well set and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be properly set in one hour and are not returned to their original position, they lead to fevers and chronic discomfort, and by chance stomach release, and by chance vomiting of pure contents.
And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times death befalls the one to whom it happens, within eight days.
from the lever principle
The strength cannot relieve from within the continuation of it and from its back, and is dislocated only once outside, and one feels this well indeed.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; and then presses onto the lesion forming to your palm, and it will return; then place on the plaster and cover it with a bandage, and it will be held.
And the head that is towards the blade cannot be resetted; if it does not, and if it gets reset once, then you must reset it to its place as we have said; then place on the plaster and cover with a bandage, and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are sane.
And similarly, the shoulder blades are brought back when it is removed from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one way is when it dislocates at the part of the socket below; and the second is at the part under the heel; and by chance dislocates at the top part, which happens rarely;
And it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside through the nerves; and several times dislocates near the socket, especially in those with little flesh, for then it springs quickly out of place; for those with enough flesh, it jumps to points and returns by them.
And sometimes happens to some men due to percussion or cracking, and the shoulder swells with an inflamed abscess, and they think that it is dislocated from this.
Thus, you must verify it as long as you are certain about it; then begin the treatment.
And when you recognize a dislocation as it moves towards the collarbone, and makes a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, you will find their clear difference. You will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder. From the collarbone to the armpit, the peak of the shoulder is like that of an 'O'; and it cannot allow the patient to bring their hand to their nose or move in any manner.
And also, if it is dislocated at the top and not completely hidden, because you clearly find it at the armpit.
And this method of dislocation can only be remedied when it is new or if it's caused by illness.
And the method is: the surgeon raises his hand above the illness, then places his fingers on the elbow and lifts the joint to full height at the top of the body; and the surgeon raises his hand and extends it upwards, then puts it under; if it comes too quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in our hands for several days, then the sick person should be bathed in warm water; and he or she should be treated with soothing warmth and relief, such as decoction of garlic and fenugreek and melilot in water, and it should be treated.
Then wrap the sick person's back with it, and place a pad of even thickness on the elbow. Don't make it too soft or too hard. Then place the heel on the pad, and lift the shoulder blade up properly, and guide the hand towards the illness.
And one other surgeon cuts the skin of the patient's back, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder comes back completely now, and if you see if you reset it according to this manner:
And it is that you make present .i. at home something bigger than the patient; and keep it straight towards the body side, and bend the shoulder against the back of the patient, and raise the back in high place so that the back hangs down in a row; And another surgeon pulls the hand of the patient towards the back and towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, then push something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return now.
And to reset it in another way: and one should stick a long stick into the ground, so that the head is placed as well as with a bullet, and not too big or too slippery; Then place it above the wound, but so that it has a sheet under it, and while the wound is long like the stick; then extend your hand below on the other side in form, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not return through all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take one wrist of two strong and four fingers wide, which has the head rounded to be able to enter almost straight into the socket, according to this form:
then tie it on the top of the stick with a sheet underneath, so that the stick does not irritate the wound; then place it onto the socket towards the wound; and extend your arm up to the stick from its tip, and fix the shoulder support onto the stick, and the arm at the base of the hand, then put the arm down on one pole as long as half a span wide, and let the other hand hang down now; the joint will return in this position.
And when it is so, no matter how, should you need to place upon the joint a thread that's even, then apply plastered with powdered mill grain, along with incense and yolk of egg, across all the shoulder and around it, then remove from the joint addition, and tie back on the plaster, and wrap the hand in its neck. And let your hands stay like this.
And it should be that he eats a little, until the limbs are strengthened, for it will heal more quickly; and then eat more after five days or seven, and move them; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is loose due to moisture that caused it or for another reason, you should apply three hot cauteries to it, as was detailed in the chapter about cauteries before.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint doesn't stay in place, and can't lift your arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is damaged or extended or weakened; and know that the joint would never be properly fixed in its place.
Dislocations that are near the buttocks and breasts, or behind, if caused by pushing and stretching of hands, are administered in other places; treatment should be applied as long as it remains clean.
And if after healing there comes stiffness in the limb, and late movements, then apply hot baths many times, until that stiffness is relieved, and returns to its first nature.
Of the shoulder joint's dislocation
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points and returns to these points; and if it has been dislocated from all directions, equally in front and behind, then dislocation cannot be fully restored, for you can see this clearly and feel it well; and it is dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the shoulder bone with the healthy side, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is bony, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder in any way.
And it is necessary to reset it in this way that the abscesses are close to heal, because if they were healed too quickly, it would be a problem to bring them back; and sometimes cannot be brought back completely, even when it's behind; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and in consequence death may come.
And the restoration is like this when one can return it to its normal state: you extend your patient's hand with both of yours; and his arms are spread outwards and downwards, and his hands are placed in front according to the length of the forearm, forwards, backwards, and sideways, then you push the joint towards his wrist area or at the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he holds both his hands together, and pushes with the base of his palm against the knife that is stuck out.
And if it does not return to its place, then apply strong extension; and when both persons assist in extending the arm, and they press against the extended arm with their hands, so that it doesn't move during extension. Then turn the arm from each side, once you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it;
And when you touch the joint to its place with your hand, if you smear some oil on it to soften the joint, then press and shape the joint until it heals;
And when it's in place, put some dry plaster with yolk of egg on it and press it until it heals; then stretch the arm towards the neck gently, and leave it there for some days, then release.
And if the joint is firmly in its place, remove the bandage and let it be; and if you see that the joint isn't set well, redo the plaster and the bandage, and leave it like that for some days, until it's firmly set; then release.
And if it feels sore after the setting of the joint, and it moves again, wash and rub it well, pressing until it's relieved; or you apply a layer of fatty sheep fat to the joint, then leave it for one day and night, then give him a bath; And when it sweats, rub the joint carefully, then place it on ice, and then dip in water; and do this twice or three times until he is well; and if you see fit, apply wet calf fat with butter to it, and apply it; should return to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
The hand's dislocated joint decreases gradually, more than other joints. When it happens, one should immediately bring it back to its original position during the dislocation itself, so that the limbs swell up or an abscess occurs.
And for bringing it back, you should place the arm on a board and extend the assistant's hand, then place your own hand evenly so that your palm is in line with the appearance of the joint, and hold it until it recovers.
Always, you must check if it's perfectly in place; then have the patient lie on their back with one hand supported on a table during extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, have the patient lie on their back with the back of their hand on the table, and place their hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it's correctly done.
If not, if the pressure bandages for abscesses heal, and then leave it so without starting over.
And if he cannot bear it, and you can't put him in place after a few days, then the joint will remain twisted;
And it does no harm to the patient as long as your hands are moistened and cannot strain anything completely: then you know that the nerve is cut, or the artery; if there's no other way except to apply a cautery when necessary, and perhaps in that case nothing else matters.
And when your hands are ready, if you place on the plaster that we have mentioned, then strain it and leave it for five days, then release it and leave it like that.
And if you can't move it well, and there's no fracture, then apply warm water, and rub it until it is clean.
From the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
The fingers of the hand are never displaced individually, neither on the back of the palm nor on the underside.
So the fingers are kept together, and the dislocation is confined to those joints until they heal. Then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it was separated.
And leave it for two days, then set it straight on the third day; and don't let it move, as we have said, and the dislocation will heal on that day. Bend the finger again, and let it move, and reapply the bandage later; and repeat this process until it is properly aligned.
And do the same if it dislocates at the wrist, and do like you did before until it stops hurting; and do the same when it dislocates elsewhere.
With ankle dislocation or back.
When the ankle, back or neck is dislocated, or if there are multiple dislocations, without any treatment, for the pain overwhelms the patient.
And the symptoms are that the patient's bodily functions lose control and cannot be held back, and many times parts of their body soften, or both knees or either two arms or one.
And many times, it becomes two parts; that which becomes behind is called "gibbousness".
The treatment is to reward when the gibbousness has come from childhood: if there is no treatment or healing at all.
And that which comes from falling, strikes or similar things, according to the old methods of treatment by great words, it doesn't bring any great benefit in all respects;
but I have summarized it according to my intention, and I have formed tools in various ways.
I say that when the illness comes to the breast before it reaches the belly, there is no harm or sickness;
And also this that comes straight to the two ribs, and we cannot cure from anything other than what directly affects the back, as I say;
And it is that the illness spreads over his belly up to one span evenly, and has some tension beneath him, so he does not blister;
Then place one ember at his head on the earth forming, and another at the elbows, and tie a band beneath the spots of the illness, and another at the hips, and knees, and ankles;
And two surgeons know how to tie them, one at the head and others at the points, among these two stakes;
And be sure they are well closed, the stake as we have said, and the mirror place her palms on the spine form until she regains consciousness.
And if she doesn't recover from this treatment, take a board of one and a half the length of a man's body, and place it over the body, and if the wounds are on the side, place the head of the board over the wound, then put the middle of the board on the spine; And have the mirror place her feet on the other end of the board, press well until she regains consciousness at her head; and if you see it happening to the elbow that turns toward the hand, do it there.
And you should place two needles into the head of the patient's arm from large ends to small ones, and on either side of the bones two others, with each needle in between them spaced about a palm's length.
And in each needle place one piece of bone or the joint socket, and ensure that the needles are firmly set into the ground so they don't move; and between every two needles place another twisted needle, since this is how the bones turn, and for turning the joint, have a pair of small needles about the length of a palm.
And then join the ligament located among the muscles at the joint towards the head and the other ligament toward the bones at the opposite joint; and each of the servants turns their joints to all parts of the ligament, while the masters place the spine evenly as we have said.
And when they are even, if you put on desiccating plaster with plenty of egg white, and then apply bandages, and then cover them with a tablet of one and three-quarters inches long, which protects the area of the gallbladder and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a string, as we have said, and allow the patient to move subtly until they are healed.
And if nothing comes at the end of recovery, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the tablet we mentioned previously; and each time it is administered there should be a piece of ghee.
And if any appearance comes at the bottom of the spine in the back, take care that it is a dislocation; and it's the bone that opens up, so one should not have presumption about this: it might bring death.
Dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and shoulder only suffer dislocations, unlike other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside, somewhat dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of such dislocation from inside is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer and allows the diseased knee to open more than the healthy one, and prevents the diseased knee from bending backwards. And it is where the legs are swollen due to an abscess, because the hip bone comes into contact with them.
And the sign of one who approaches death, if it is that this event is contrary to these before.
And the signs of one who approaches before [death], if it is that his leg is well according to completion; nevertheless, he does not even double the knee without pain, and if you want to make him walk, he cannot do so beforehand, and he retains his urine, and swells up the ankle, and when he walks, he goes on tiptoe.
And the signs of one who approaches behind [death], if it is that he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more bent than the other, and the ankle becomes soft, and the shoulder of the hip moves under the ribs.
The remedy for this appearance of dislocation is that you should confirm whether the dislocation is old and stays in its position, if there is no treatment; and it does not benefit to assume anything.
And for those in which the dislocation is recent, there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to correct it and stretch inside and outside, and move to the right and left; should it return successfully, requiring no other treatment afterwards.
And if it doesn't return this way, you should apply one strong remedy, and firmly hold the leg with both hands, or tie at one point above the knee; And apply other remedies by extending your hand above in such a way that it presses the hands against the buttocks, then pull it with one strong tug at the knee; and hold the head with another at the tie.
And stretch up and down at once all together, until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
This way of stretching is common for four similar situations, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is correct.
But if not, then you should treat it according to its appearance. When the dislocation is in the pardedens (a part of the thoracic cavity), you need to lift the patient onto their healthy side, then tie them up at the base of the foot, and above the ribcage, then lift the bandage towards the chest area and towards the strength.
Then take hold of another assistant for their arms, and embrace the large part of the diseased foot, and extend it upwards in this form: if it returns to its position now; and this way of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot compress it in this way as we have said, then you should bind the two feet together with a strong bandage below each foot and around both knees, and make sure that the bad leg extends two fists longer than the other one;
Then have it hung from the head of a post, and two feet above the ground about half the length; then instruct one minister to encircle the head of the thigh, and another ministers are hanging with the bad side, who should encircle firmly the thigh, for the joint is now returning quickly.
And when dislocation occurs at the front, if you place the bad leg as we have said in those with elasticity, and stretch a band properly on the bad leg and even on the foot.
Then place two needles, one on the head and the other on the toe, then insert one needle between the buttocks of the patient in the form; and place damp cloths around it, so as not to blister the patient, then have each doctor extend themselves towards him, and you should set the dislocated part in line with his hand.
If it returns, that's good. If not, place him on a table, and press him down in such a way as we have said in the context of gilbositis, and lie the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it's necessary to extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and make the patient feel their pain on the side of the affected shoulder, then press with the other hand, and pull forward towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, then it does not require stretching of the body below or lifting off the ground, instead it should be placed as when the hip was dislocated backward, just like we said about lying on both hips. And be at its face, and the neck stretched as we previously described, it must apply pressure to the joint on the table;
And it will be right when the limbs extend their legs, and they are equal; therefore adjust the hips, and place the plaster, and apply pressure with a belt, so that the hip does not move;
And let it rest for three days or four, then release it, and place the plaster again; and if you see that they are equal, apply pressure in the same way as before, and leave it for three more days; then release it, and move him around properly until the limb is strengthened.
From the dislocation of the shoulder joint
The shoulder joint can be dislocated in three ways: this means, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate in front.
And the signs for this are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if they cannot straighten it at the knee, know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all this is that you have the patient sit up straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back against their buttocks, and put their foot on yours.
Then take his kidney between your palms and withdraw it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the kidney form. And another attendant extends his foot until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he has bent his leg lightly towards his thigh.
and place the bandage on it, and let the leg rest at the thigh, and hold them together strongly for three or four days, then let him move around; and do not allow any work to affect the wounds, until the limbs are strengthened.
And if the limbs are not yet right, administer vigorous stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
Regarding the dislocation of the heel
The heels are never completely reset and still remain in or out.
And the signs of this are that the ankle swells up, and moves forward towards the part where it is dislocated:
The reduction (or resetting) is easy, and you should gently extend it with your hands only when it's properly aligned.
And when it is dislocated from all sides, it must be that you make the patient stand straight, and hold them with two assistants by their leg, above the ankle;
then draw the foot towards you with your right hand, and then also to the left four times, then lift them up, and firmly support the foot upwards;
and do this twice, as we have said, by gripping and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's well; if not, start the process again, for it will return.
and if it cannot return this way, lay the patient on their back to the ground, and place a stone firmly into the earth between their buttocks, and bind them tightly with cloths, so as not to hurt the patient.
Then doctors rub his feet, and some other doctors stretch out the leg up to his hands or up to two inches, he holds it on the neck of the leg; Then extend each doctor equally, and let the assistant be placed between the feet of the patient to hold the patient when stretching them.
Then place the mirrors equally at the dislocated joints with your hands, and some other doctors cut the healthy leg above the knee, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the right point, apply the dressing and fasten it with bandages, then tighten properly, and bind the leg to the thigh, and guard the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage does not become too tight.
Then leave it for 2 or 3 days, and if the joints are loose, hold them in place; then release it on the third day or fourth, and gradually tell the patient to move after four days; And if he proceeds beyond this period, it is not a certainty that he will no longer dislocate.
And if you find pus coming out, then it is necessary to soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it heals.
This seems like an incomplete line or a typo in the original text. It would be "dois" which means 'two' in Old French, but without context, I can't provide a precise translation for this line. The full sentence might have been something along the lines of: "Dois jours" (Two days), though that doesn't fit perfectly with the surrounding sentences either.
When the shoulders are dislocated, if they need to be beautifully extended due to work, it's a light matter.
And when the dislocation is neither in the buttocks nor behind the foot, it's necessary that you make the patient lie on .i. his entire back or on .ie. a table straight up, and place your foot where the joints open, then press firmly with your foot until it recovers;
And when it's even and there is nothing opening, put under the foot's sole a table for two shoulders, then press firmly, and let him rest for three days, then reset him; and have him rest until he has recovered.
regarding wounds and dislocations together
When injury accompanies dislocation and one seeks to restore it, many times the patient dies:
If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you lack wisdom in this art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful but rather sluggish, do not engage.
And start with calming things by draining pus, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see any hope for recovery. And when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, in such a way that the pus drains and heals.
And when the limbs are in place, administer soothing remedies for abscesses and incisions, and treat the wound accordingly, using dried ointments.
And if there is fracture along with dislocation, and small bones are broken, mend them, and do what we have advised for simple diseases.
And be careful not to fall into fear, according to what I've said, for this is done according to your Creator's will, and with the knowledge of you and your body. Amen.
