You dear children, I have completed this book which is the last part of the science of medicine combined with its fulfillment, and concluded it through my presentations and by making its statements. And in my vision it came to me that I would complete this with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is conducted in our region and is lacking everywhere, so it has been lost to its science and has been reduced, and nothing remains from it except small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have performed. And thus error and vanity came about, and minds are closed off, and the science is distant.
It seems to me that I should revive this treatise together with its organization according to the path of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together with the forms of the fire cautery tools and other implements for the work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And because there are no skilled masters found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected. And whoever intervenes in this matter should ascend to the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until they understand the judgment of limbs, and their shapes, connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones, nerves and muscles and the number of bones, and the arrangement and movement of veins and the static ones, and know their location.
And thus says Hippocrates that not with words but with deeds is great; and indeed in the art of manual skill.
We inform you at the beginning of this book that if someone lacks knowledge about what has been discussed, they may fall into error and deceive others; thus, I have seen many times people who interfere with this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
And I have seen a foolish surgeon who operated on a woman's neck for scrofula or a sore, and cut the arteries beneath her neck; because so much blood came out that she died in his hands.
And I have seen another surgeon who treated a stone in an elderly man's bladder, and the stone was large; he removed with it a piece of the bladder, and the patient died within three days.
And I have already been called to remove it, and saw the arrangement of the wound and the size of the stone, and indeed if they had cut him he would have died.
And I saw another instance where someone took care of .one duke from our land who had broken his leg, and along with the breakage was injured. And the attendants to this man filled their ignorance by forcing the break onto the injury as if it were healed already, without relieving any swelling, and allowed it to continue for one month; and I instructed them not to displace it again; and he remained like that until the leg fully swelled and the joints and ended up losing his leg.
I was summoned to come to him and I quickly came to relieve the leg. And when I heard it relieved so smoothly that he felt no pain at all.
But all paths of corruption were already confirmed in the body or member, and it could not be healed; and the process of decay continued within the member until the limb was completely lost.
And there is a second type of lesion that collapses an inner part of one abscess and then inflames due to the wickedness of its ruler.
For a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it is not advisable to touch it with iron if it isn't in its original place so that one can remove all that has been corrupted.
And for this reason, dear children, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is, where there are risks in several positions. And I will show each one of these topics in this book where they have fear and danger.
Because it is necessary that you watch over yourselves, so that no one might wrongly speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in hand, and treat your diseases gently yet firmly, and employ the best course so that through God's grace you come to salvation and be contented; and leave behind the terrifying maladies of grief for health; and remove from those who make you doubt your weapons, and have faith in yourselves so that you can go from this world to glory on the other.
Galen advised in some of his admonishments: "Do not treat with harmful illness, lest you be called foolish by others."
I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters deal with fire cauteries and medical water cauteries, and are arranged from the head down to the bones; and on the forms of instruments, and metal tools for cautery, and everything necessary for the work.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, as well as suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar matters; and they have their chapters arranged and the forms of instruments.
The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar matters; and they have been arranged from the head down to the bones, and specify the forms of tools.
Just as we recall our work, it is fitting that I should speak of the quality of each temperament and its harm.
I state that the qualities of assistance, and harm, are the longest word and subtlest science and the secrets answered. And many wise people spoke about this, agreeing with it; and I am satisfied with their words, for I dread its length.
I say that the cautery assists universally in any condition where there is matter, for there are two conditions: this means hot condition with matter, and dry condition with matter.
In the hot and dry condition together with matter, some planned and said that the cautery is great help; and another one said otherwise: that the cautery only helps in diseases coming from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and should never be treated with a hot illness by heat or drying; and someone who says the opposite claims that using a cautery provides significant help to hot and dry illnesses that come within the bodies of men. For when you compare the body of the man and its moisture to the disposition of fire, you find that the body is cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it true on every occasion through experimentation.
And every way, do not interfere beyond that which has been proven, and only those who have long experienced the art of cautery know the chapter on cauteries. They understand the variety of skin types in men, and the positions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and space during treatment; we fear nothing else, equally so for cold and moist diseases. And let all parts come together and agree with the cautery.
And know, children, that a combined fire cautery contains secrets of treatments and offers more benefit than a fiery medicine cautery.
For fire is simple, and comes forth only from the body that is heated, and harms no other body if it has no name.
Hot medicines move from one part to another, causing diseases within the body during treatment; and by chance they affect the person.
Fire, due to its height and the goodness of its nature, does not do this, if there is no excess.
And I have found this through experience and the length of my service and study in the art, and it is true about things. And because of this, I apologize for the length of my words, for I do not like to withhold from you the secret that is revealed by fire and the quality of the work, how it removes diseases from the body, as the philosopher explains in demonstrating; now receive this in your thoughts.
And know, child, that they determined when the cauterizations should be done, and read prayers.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, for the harms arising are minimized by the aid of the fire cautery; and likewise if the cauterizations are due to necessary pains that cannot wait for the time until greater evil befalls the limb.
And never think, poor child, as the fools do; for a disease cured by cauterization does not recur. And they say thus: but it is not like what they think, because cauterizations are only medicine that alters the complexion and dries out the fluids that cause pain, and works better than medicine for the quickness of its effectiveness, and for the virtue of its work and authority.
And the possibility is that sickness comes only once according to the complexion of the disease and its location, as well as its virtue; and excesses are gathered in him through the consumption of foods and similar things. If cauterization isn't administered when there's little excess and moisture, especially like dense pain-causing cauterizations, then such pain doesn't recur; but this happens rarely.
And no one understands why cauteries are called the last of medicine, and it's to be seen; but they do not believe that cauteries should follow medicine, rather their understanding is false, and cautery is indeed the last of medicine because when our methods of treatment in any disease fail, then we administer our cautery, and it works. Thus clearly understood, the use of cauteries is indeed the final resort in medicine, not according to the mistaken belief of others.
The old ones said that gold cauteries are better than iron ones, and they mentioned this not just because of the quality of the gold but also due to its high substance. They stated that burns from a copper cautery do not cause rotting, although it's hard to see, I have tested this and found it true in some people; and gold cauteries are better than iron ones, as they claimed.
And still when you heat the instrument of gold, you do not perceive it until it is heated by the color of the gold, and then it cools immediately; and if you heat it too much; it goes to the fire; and thus there is enough prevention.
And because we use our iron cautery that we have prepared for our work.
So you have ordered this chapter on the first shoulder up to the elbow, because the sight should be easier to find.
oil cautery
The use of cauteries is for moisture and cold in the head. There are two types done due to reasons associated with an illness called 'soda', and due to many fluids that descend from the head as ears, and due to abundance of dreams, toothache, throat pain, and similarly for all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, soda poisoning, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patient's illness be cleansed by a solvent medicine altering the head. It's done in three or four times, depending on what the efficacy and heat and habituation to the malady can bear; and then the head part of the malady is washed afterwards.
And then place it between your hands and put your hands under his nose. Afterwards, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two nostrils; and let it be where your middle fingers are touching, if it bleeds from there, heat up the cautery called 'olivare', this is its form:
And place your thumb in the joint's signet of ink, and move it down gradually and firmly while adjusting; then lift your hand suddenly, and check if you see the bone.1. If you don't see it, continue with the cautery until you do observe the bone as I've instructed; afterwards take one pinch of chalk, apply it smoothly inside a cloth, place in the joint, and let it stay for three days; after that put on a moist butter bandage; keep this on until the scab is removed; afterward treat the wound with the ointment known as 'tetrafarmaçon', until it heals.
And if they were to say that among the old remedies, when a wound remains open longer, more purging occurs; and for this reason it is advised to move [the patient].
And if anyone among these says that we should let the cautery continue until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone and treat it.
And they say that one must let the cautery burn for so long, and push it so hard that you raise from the bone as wide as a thumb which women place in their needles because the fluids flow out. And should we leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards, we must clean and stitch it.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good in all respects, except for in some people where there is a passage for fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them as they are. Because the joints become weakened by continuous exposure to nature's solutions, as we testify on other limbs; and even when the joints of illness are naturally weak, my first impression of using cautery is more healing and effective for me, and with this method I work together in assembling health.
of the old pain in the head
When throughout the head comes chronic pain and lasts for a long time, one must use the patient's herbs and pills which are called "cochies", and treatments of chief and ears and bandages; and if one performs the cautery as we have previously stated, it will not work.
Take care that the head of the sick person is of strong nature and not too cold; therefore, apply the cautery near the cautery point as we have said above.
After doing the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, do another one near where the horns meet; and make two cuts in the place where suction cups are put. And move your hand gently so that you don't touch the bone: patients feel much more pain with this kind of cautery than others, and I'll talk about it elsewhere. It should be noted that the cautery on the horns should be more delicate than that used for half the head, which is the form:
A cautery for a head wound commands the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. When there is sudden pain in part of the head and the illness extends up to the eye, and the shoulder joint is cleansed with purifying medicines, and other treatments that I mentioned in the division of diseases have been done, but none provide benefit: then you should perform cauteries according to two ways, namely with medicine ague and fire.
The cauteries using medicine ague involve taking a spoonful of oil, and applying the bark and dressing to each part for twice an hour, focusing on the temple area where the pain is localized. You should then properly place and tightly secure the oil in this manner; keep it that way for 12 hours after which you release it by removing the garlic paste, allowing the wound to heal for two days or three.
After the oil treatment, as long as it remains in a healthy state; and if you see that certain burning medicines which I have written about or those described in the eleventh treatise on burning medicines should be applied.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat up the shape of the cautery as described:
And call it "closed" because its tip is made in the shape of a bell with one and a half inches of curvature, and halfway through has a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, hold your hand and gently twist the iron for just a moment until half of the thickness of the skin is burned; then lift your hand to avoid burning the artery, allowing plenty of blood flow.
After placing a linen bandage, apply it to the area for three days; then replace with a moistened cotton ball in butter, and continue oil treatment until the affected area has healed. If you wish to cauterize this headache with the iron cautery across its entire point, take care not to cover the artery in this new wound which is not old.
As for the migraine
When treating migraines as we have discussed in the divisions of diseases, if you do not find relief and observe that the cauteries mentioned earlier with respect to medicine and metal do not help, then it is necessary for you to heat the cautery known as "cultellare" until it becomes white; and proceed thus by holding a line halfway down the length of your hand, and keep your hand steady so that you do not cut the artery and stop just before reaching the bone; and guard against the jaw becoming stiff when eating, and ensure only the soft parts are moved without causing spasm to the patient, and be wary of bleeding from the artery if it is cut or have considerable fear even in those who are unaware and inexperienced, and who have not been trained and experienced; and leave the work halfway through; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery has been cut, and show you where this occurs in this book.
And if you find that these cauteries do not help with the illness, and patients are suffering, then apply them to the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you observe this, use the cautery as we said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, together with a cautery that has two blades; and these cauterizations are better than others and more helpful.
of the pain of the ear from cold
When pain from cold comes in the ear, and we have applied solutions of medicines and other treatments that we discussed under division, and if the pains persist, then heat this cautery called "points", as follows:
After applying the cautery throughout the affected ear, or around both the places where pain persists, remove it slightly from the root of the ear after marking its location; place ten points around each ear; treat until the area is healed.
of the pain in the mouth
Torture that should be treated by a cautery is only those that move through the body fluids, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not apply a cautery to symptoms that come from dryness and pustules of bodily fluids.
When treating this manifestation of internal torture that moves through bodily fluids and chief's discharges and gargling, if it doesn't respond well, then you should apply the cautery to the ear for three times: one time at the root of the ear, another slightly behind the temple, and the third in the adjustment between the two lips. And place the cautery on the healthy part where it is exposed, and apply the cautery right above the ear near the outer ear, then another time on the temple as long as a finger; let the cautery remain there until half of the ear's skin is burnt; this is the form of using the cautery:
And the manifestation of cutaneous disease that we've described earlier, but it's a bit more refined. So when it comes to using surgical knives, they should be slightly larger than usual; after you've treated the area according to what I've said previously until it becomes healthy again.
When dealing with an old apoplexy and you treat it as we have said, and if the patient doesn't improve, and the sick person has fever, then make four cauterizations: two on the two corners of the head, one on the forehead, and one under the jaw which is called 'vassel' as we had mentioned before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we said previously.
"De liturgie" translates to "On Liturgy" in English. This term refers to a scholarly work or treatise about the rites, ceremonies, and practices conducted by religious leaders, typically within Christian churches. The phrase is often associated with the study of ecclesiastical rituals and the organization of divine services in historical contexts.
For this illness, you should give the patient large and pill-like substances that purify the brain; after this, wash the head of the patient thoroughly, and then place the tallow plaster on the back of their head. And this is how to perform the cautery: do it in the manner I have described.
If it is healthy this way, that's good; and if not, do the following:
from cold near the head It is necessary to cleanse the head of the old and what we have already discussed. After calming the head with the patient, then apply the cautery around the lesion, and on each horn of it, and once behind and three on the spine near the neck; and if you need more, and the area is moistened and the patient is suffering from an ailment that has spread, then add four more cauterizations on the spine at the back. Continue until the most sensitive part becomes dry and remove your hand. Then continue with the treatment until the health improves, and use the cautery known as "olive-shaped", which we have previously mentioned.
Concerning the epilepsy
The epileptics should only use the fire cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with years of treatment and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the body is large and suffering from physical medicine.
And if it's a child who cannot endure it, make them gargle and masticate often with good meats; after that, he places the head in the middle, and I do .i. cautery according to what we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the body is large and suffering from pain, make them do cauterizations as I've said for those with paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spine at the back and neck, and apply olive cauteries according to the method that I've explained.
If the patient is young, do this minor fire cautery like so:
When due to melancholy the excesses or the fluids become corrupted and form thick mucus, then apply a part of this fire treatment as we have explained for those who are paralyzed.
And if due to melancholy the excesses are declining towards melancholy and there is moisture in the body, then administer something for cleansing the brain as was explained previously in that section.
After removing the head of the body; afterward make one piece of linen well made, as big as a ring, place it on the head; and if the patient is comfortable with this, arrange that all parts hold it well in place; afterwards present the application, and cover it with old bee's wax butter; then heat it on fire until it can be applied without causing discomfort; afterward remove the ring from within through the head opening, and let it cool down; and do this once a week to each part of the body using another good method of governance until they are healed.
If you see multiple points being cauterized when making burns all over the cautery iron. This method of cauterization moistens the brain much more; and then place wet cotton, butter and gelatine fat on it.
of the movement of the eyes When the onset comes first for the eyes through the signs I have mentioned in the division, then start and make the patient drink something purifying the head, and protect it from all moisture, and make him sweat or take baths several times fasting.
After commanding him regarding his head, and make him cauterize under the head, and make two cauterizations on each temple when the decrease of the disease is in both eyes together, or if it is in one eye; then apply all the cauterization to all veins and arteries that are around the brain, and let them be cauterized long according to the width of the temples; and guard against bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it immediately as you have.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions using the cautery method, how to apply it; and any time a cautery or sear is made between the two bones behind.
of the tears' cheeks
When the tears from the eyes have been long and accustomed, and are located on the veins or under the arteries that appear outside of the head; one can see that they are cold excesses of phlegm. Therefore, I will apply the cautery method that was discussed at the beginning for descending to the eyes: .i. cauterization around the eye, and .ij. cauteries on each .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries where one would sear between the two bones; if there is need for more, then carefully cauterize above the eyebrow with a small .i. cautery.
due to the tears within their eyes
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it doesn't benefit, then give three spoonfuls of vinegar to the patient. After he drinks this, let him rest his head, and apply a cautery or mid-cautery olive oil; and make two cauteries with the cautery named 'claw' on the two spines, a little near the hair. And guard against the artery so as not to cover it. And this is the form of the cautery which is called 'claw':
When the paper of the oil has softened due to disease and moisture, then apply the cautery which is called 'olive'. Here is its form:
And if you see that you should make two cauteries on the two hairs as long as the hairs are; and do not let your hand rest until the third part of the paper is burnt, according to the method I have said.
Of hair that stings the eye No instance has occurred where the hair of the eyes turns to the gums and stings the eye; in such cases, one performs cauteries according to two methods: namely by fire, or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow.
When they grow long and even, then command the patient to heal; after this, on the paper of the eyes draw a figure that is as such as the leaf of myrtle, and be it the start of the sign beneath the hairs. Then place wadded cotton moistened in egg white and garlic paste on the eye, then heat up the cautery which has the shape here:
After this, apply heat to the figure you have marked gradually and several times, until the skin is reddened at that spot; and the signs of healing are when you see the paper receding, and the hairs raised in the outline of the eye; then raise your hand, and leave it like this for three days. Then place moist cotton in butter until the scab is removed; after apply ointment until it is clean.
And if hair and paper becomes soft after this, then begin the cautery on that same area as you did before. If all hair is removed, apply heat until the paper lifts to its natural level, evenly, and doesn't touch the eye.
The cautery of medical fire commands the patient to allow hair growth until it is long and even; then take parchment to form like the leaf of pine. Then take French soap and hot wax, one of each, and finely grind them together; mix quickly so that it does not cool down. Pour this onto the form like a pine leaf and apply it to the paper under the eyes; if the illness lasts for only one oil then you should open for one finger-width, and if in both as well; put moistened cotton near an egg over each eye; the patient's head is in your healthy hands and place your thumb on the medicine, pressing once every time the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, because it also feels like burning from fire. When this has been done for some time, if the medicine stays on your finger. And once the burning sensation is gone, if you lift your finger from the eye, and check whether you see the paper lifted as it would be when forced up by heat or through an incision; and if that's how it is, then everything is well. If not, apply more medicine to your finger or where the medicine has yet to act, until your works are even and your eyes are properly treated; then place moistened cotton in butter oil so that the arid parts of the skin are covered, after which cleanse the use of balm called 'dyafenis' and another kind, until it's healed.
And if it is necessary for you to take care of your body well in this work by great caution so that the medicine does not harm those eyes. And if the paper becomes moist later, and the hair sticks into the eye, then reapply the medicine on the spot which was softened by the proper clean paper; just as you did previously; after it has healed until it is sound; and this is how the oil of mireth should be used:
Know that the eyes of people vary in size and degree, and according to this let your constraints be; and do not completely close off the right way for those who are studying this craft.
regarding the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not benefiting, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your healthy hand; cut the ministers’ head between your hands in such a way that it doesn't move or remove its head; after this, put damp cotton inside an egg or garlic juice on the eye; afterwards heat up the cautery which is prepared: and be over the head as if it were the shape of a feather of a peacock, assemble it so that the cautery is over the head; if you see, let it be pointed from one side chief to another, and if you see, let it also be like a tent; but always remember, this which is above suits for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is opened, treat the putrefaction and dry it; and if it is closed, let it heal, and take out of the bowe; afterwards place a heated form on the cautery, and hold your hand with the cautery at the part below the nose above the eye, that your hand doesn't make a mess; then put the cautery in the grease of the oil, and let it be contaminated.
If you start with the cautery until the bone, it would be well. If not, then continue the application of the cautery one more time, and if required do so again elsewhere, leaving it for three days; afterwards place on cotton soaked in butter, and use the drying ointment cure as long as it remains healthy. Once forty days have passed without healing, then apply corrosive water medicine until the bone is exposed; and follow according to what is indicated in this chapter.
And there is a way of applying the cautery to a fistula that none of the old ones mentioned. Understand what a fistula is, and make it out; afterwards place inside the incision one thin cane made from this material which has this form: And make it to the size of three inches in length; and hold your hand or the cane firmly, without moving the patient's body, so that the melted wax does not run into its natural drain; and when the wax is inside the ear, then leave the wax to do marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed through the cautery that we have mentioned, this is good. If not, it is necessary to administer pertussis to the child, and bring the fistula back into the body according to what needs to be done in its own proper place.
of cuts in lips Often, there occur cuts in the lips which are called 'whiskers', and also in the lips of children.
When you treat these cuts with what we have said about divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then apply a small surgical instrument according to this form:
And put them quickly into those incisions until they grow as far as the skin; after that, cleanse the wound of pus while it is still sound.
of the abscess in the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or the lymph node, or under the tongue, or at the roots of the teeth, after causing gangrene and swelling and becoming inflamed it turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it doesn't benefit: then it is necessary that you have one cautery according to the size of the fistula; after that, remove or plug the opening of the fistula, and keep your hand until the iron reaches the bottom of it and all the way through; and do this once or twice, after the treatment as we have said in treatments, while it is still sound. And if it can be treated like this, it's good; and if not, you should uncover the wound and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in your manual.
movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but this does not work, then put the head of the patient in your healthy position; afterwards apply heat to the cautery which will come after this in such a way that you place one stick under the tooth; and immerse the cautery inside quickly, hold your hand so that the patient feels the warmth coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and continue the cautery according to your desire; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and leave it for an hour and then rinse it out.
And in this way the tooth that was moving is repositioned, and the softened gums are restrained, and the moisture is purged and dried.
from the pain of teeth
When tooth pain comes due to cold, or there is cold or frostbite involved, and medical treatments do not help, then it requires cauterization according to two methods: and the wax cautery and fire cautery.
Wax cautery, if that means you take butter from a cow, and at the end of a iron or spider's fork; after this, take cotton and envelop it on the tip of a tent, and cool the butter until it hardens, then place it on the painful tooth rapidly and hold until it becomes cold; do so frequently until its effects reach to the root of the tooth, and if you see wet wool and cotton in the cold butter, put it back on the hurting tooth, and heat one iron rod until the fire reaches inside the tooth's pain.
The fire cautery consists like this: you take a piece of iron or spider's web, and make it thick enough so that the fire does not touch the skin; after heating the cautery, which will then cool down soon, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery becomes cold; do this repeatedly, as the pain will be removed that day or the next. And ensure the patient fills their mouth with plenty of butter while waiting for the application of this treatment, and then apply force; this is how the treatment is performed.
When the scrophules are due to cold blood and moisture, and do not respond to digestion through medicines, then apply the cautery according to what is about to follow, and make two openings for the fumes to exit from the other side of the cautery. And place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice as necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size and leave it like that for three days; and put moistened cotton on with butter until the pus is extracted. Afterward, cleanse the area using oils and poultices until it heals properly.
When moisture invades the channels of the lungs, and especially when this comes from a cold temperament, then it is necessary that the patient be made voided with diuretic medicines first. Afterward, perform cautery at the root of the throat, and keep yourself not to come all the way up to the throat, but just a little bit, rather than a full burn. After this, do another cautery at the joint of the neck near the base of the spine, and use the cauterized parts which are called "clavile" from which we have the form in front; and cure yourself until it is healthy as we instructed beforehand.
From the context provided earlier, this line could be translating to: When all and any lung diseases are caused by cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever or dryness, and if it is an old disease, then do two cauterizations on their force (muscle) in their veins; and another cauterization under its tail between the two nipples. And use the cauterized parts that are called "clavile" according to the form previously mentioned.
And if you see this, apply the cautery by touching all parts of the fire cauterizing tool known as "points" which was described earlier in the illness concerning ears; and let these points reach up to .xxx., or further along. After that, treat the area according to what has been said previously, and leave the marks for .iij. minutes following this form:
And because these are lighter cauterizations, you do them three times in succession.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After that, wrap the limbs on his back and sides; after that, gently lift the kidney within the bladder with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated internally, heat the cautery which has two handles until it forms as shown here:
And apply the cautery to the kidney until it pierces up to the ribs, and bring together the figure of the cautery with four cauterizations; and for this purpose use a cautery that has three handles, because the figures of the cauterization consist of three cauterizations; and they follow the delicacy of a tent and is the form of the cautery which has three handles:
And always join this one on this first nerve because there are seven cauteries on it.
After placing the cautery, press with force; afterwards, let the patient rest, and do not move his limbs for a long time until he is well settled.
And if it is dislocated above, where little happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clavicle, or several cauterizations in that spot. For the joint is closed, and moisture is expelled from the body and healing takes place for the patient.
of a cautery made with plumb.
The old ones said that we should do pleurisy-cauterizations with roots of aristologe, and here's how: take a long root of aristologe, the longest you can find, let it be dried, and make sure it's as big and as long as your fingers; then soak it in oil, place it on fire, and cauterize once between the elbow and neck, and twice small cauterizations a bit lower in the area under the beard; and once between the fifth rib and sixth, slightly behind; and once below the buttocks, and twice more across two ribs further down from the cauterization that's between the shoulders; and don't squeeze your hand at all, instead perform it openly just as when you smell.
And the old ones said that no one should use fire simulation cautery with a single razor blade, and heat it up then place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and when the pain comes out, as we said earlier in the abscess near the liver. But in this work there is fear or perhaps the patient dies now, or a fistula occurs which cannot be cured.
Of the mouse
When you are treating the illness of someone for which we have spoken about various treatments, and it doesn't improve, then they should try three ways of applying a cautery that are all effective.
There is one method where you do this: make three or four cauterizations. Or in laying them out according to the length of the mouse [or snake], according to the shape of the stomach cautery as we said before; and don't hasten your hand over all the cauterization, let it be that the patient is often suffering at their back;
And another way of applying the cauterization is that you heat up the cauterizing iron which has two heads, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the knee where the snake [or mouse] bit, or where the disease comes from the left side, and according to the angle you lift your knee, according to the length of the body, and let the cauterizations be according to the width of the body.
After I burn the two ears until the other part is pierced by them, and then remove the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see that, fully cauterize three out of all four with the cautery. After the cure when it has expelled putrefaction for a long time, and this is better than the other cures mentioned before.
from dropsy
Cautery is not effective for dropsy, except according to the method known as "asclytes". When you treat it using the methods we have described in divisions, and if your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you perform four cauterizations around the anus, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one below the breasts, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place on the buttocks; and ensure that the cauterizations are close to the kidneys.
After let the cautery heated for a long time to smoke, and do not stop cleaning with the patient after the cautery treatment; and healing would hasten, and both measures would work together with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the abdomen is the clavicle, as we have shown before; and for the back it's an olive shape, according to what was set out earlier.
regarding the swelling of joints When the joints swell in someone who is affected by dropsy and are full of yellow bile, it is necessary to apply the cautery on the back of the joint between the thumb and the ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And don't enter too deep down the middle, otherwise it would let out the yellow bile, and use the cautery in accordance with this shape:
After doing this on both two legs. On each leg at the tip of the knife edge; and have the cauteries along lengthwise, one in front near the knee cap and the other behind, inside the leg; and leave the cauteries to burn for a long time without curing until the wound heals; after that cure the rest of the treatments as we have said.
of memory
When the stomach discomfort is due to coldness and moisture, as long as the memory-retaining and digesting properties in the stomach and intestines are affected and cannot be cured by regular treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong symptoms, then apply a large cautery on the stomach according to what was described earlier or the stomach cautery, around the circulating cautery; and apply four minor cauterizations inside the mouth for each subtle cautery, and two cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see the moistors abundantly present and the patient suffering, apply the cautery to the root of the hair, and one cautery on each armpit, and two small cauteries on the stomach in front of the large one; because the treatment benefits when there is good help.
regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are deep-set, whether singular or multiple, and they are old, filled with large cold and moist corrupted fluids, and if treatment as we have advised in sections doesn't help, then apply cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that one is cut out just below the base, little by little in triangular form, and one near the anus. Four times;
And if you think that the stomach is chilled and the food isn't being digested, and you see it inflating the peritoneum, then on the peritoneum apply one large cautery to the stomach as we've said before, and another to the liver, and a third to the spleen for all the cautery. Let the cautery last long. Afterward cure him until he has recovered.
Of the disease called "thelul"
When treating the disease "thelul", heat up the cautery to resemble a hot iron and then place it entirely ablaze over the affected area of the "thelul"; leave your hand until the fire reaches the origin of the vein from which the pus flows; do this once or twice, and if there are multiple cases of "thelul", cauterize each one just as we have said; after the use of beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you apply a large cautery over the affected area, it will provide more aid.
Of a wound poorly treated
When the patient cannot endure surgery or opening (of wounds), which we will describe in their proper place, then there comes a disease that cannot be cured otherwise than through cautery.
When there is no access hole and it has become diseased and corrupted by pus and moisture, if you must try a delicate attempt at cautery, then you should know this procedure. Always remember that you need to understand the extent of each attempt. After heating your cautery until it seems ready (like a blade), apply it to the fistula according to its depth, repeating until the diseased pus and corruption are burned away. Do one, or two, or three times depending on the size of your need; yet be cautious not to burn nerves and major vessels. If the fistula runs into the bladder or intestine, then beware these places, and do not perform the cautery outside them but in a healthy part of the body. Remember that you are dealing with a serious condition. After treating the area until it is healed, if the skin has closed properly and the contents have been removed for an extended period, then know that the fistula is fully healed. And if the contents haven't been cleared away, know that there's still pus and corruption at the root of the lesion; proceed accordingly with other measures we will discuss in their proper place.
Regarding kidney disease When abdominal pain comes from rain and strong winds, affecting a woman's health, then it is necessary that you apply the cautery to the sides of her abdomen on both parts and at the wrist cautery we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three lines of cauterization, which will provide more help.
of the bladder When the bladder is swollen and weak due to cold and moisture, causing discomfort or retention of urine, then you should apply the cauterization below on the bladder, where the hair starts from the wrist, one each side (right and left), and make sure each cauterization spans as long as a fist; and also do one cauterization below the back, or two if needed; and perform clavile cauterizations according to the form described previously.
Of the cautery When the liver is cold and moist, and does not allow conception at all for this reason, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come in, one feels great pain: then it is necessary that we do three cauterizations inside the womb, as we have said or to the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and may the cauterizations of the clavicle, as we have said.
Of the hips
When the viscous moisture descends to the socket of the hips, and because of this reason it becomes immobile in its place, and the signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and when you find the joints at their departure point on the view, it should be that you cauterize the patient's hip socket with one cauterization resembling a circle, and mark right before the buttocks inward from the socket as it turns, so that the socket be within the circle; and if you make the cauterizations like those that have been cauterized on the stomach.
And if the fire cautery is not present, do these three olive oil cauteries, and make sure that all of your patients receive them; and treat them as long as they are healthy.
of the pain in the thigh When pain comes in the thigh bone, and this is due to coldness and moisture, and treatment of such illness has been discussed in division, but the cure doesn't work, and the disease is old: then it must be that you purge the body of the large bodily fluids with stinking pills or other good similar pills.
After you perform the cautery; and regarding the manner of the cautery, there are two methods: that being the combination of hot medicines and fire cautery. The fire cautery has many ways as well, with one method stating: you should make three triangular cauterizations following this form on the thigh bone, each with a good depth and size, and leave an interval between each cautery the size of two thumbs, and use olive oil for the cauterization; no cautery is made in the middle above the head of the thigh bone, because there are four following this form:
And if you see it, cauterize with the fire cautery around the circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip; but do so in such a way that the circle contains all the hip and all the muscles around the knee be burnt.
And this is how we do it in sciatica, when the pain stays within the hip and doesn't reach up to the thigh or down to the leg. And if the pain reaches up to the thigh and the leg, then make two cauterizations there where the pain indicates its location, and one above the ankle three inches, on the left side a bit more; and let them be with a surgical cautery, burn away the thickness around the knee, and if the patient feels that the pain extends down to about four or five inches from their foot or near it, cauterize there where you feel the pain.
And if the need is there, then do more; and if it appears that the pain lies between the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize with a surgical or circular cautery, and be very careful in all your cauterizations to not leave even the slightest trace of fire until you burn through the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause further harm and constriction to the patient.
And I have seen many who performed a cautery on the ankle due to a bone issue, and they allowed it to remain until the leg was completely swollen, and likewise with the foot, causing all parts of them to become inflamed and rotten. After undergoing an abdominal wind expulsion process, they then died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, perform cautery on both areas, according to this method. // And they advised on the hip cautery, as described here, take one such iron piece and make it as thick as a small finger or slightly less, and place it between supports and between each support from one end to the other of space the size of a nut; let the supports be over two parts, and let them also resemble knots, and have two well-made iron pieces. And this is the form:
And heat it until it is all red and smells of fat, then put it on the malady lump on the hip bone, and twist it towards the healthy side; and apply one application of cautery and let it heal for three days; then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open as long as necessary; after ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use very little of this type of cautery due to the fear in his opinion, and we see few people using it; yet still, this is a good cautery method, which can be endured, and is beneficial.
of the pain between the two backs
When pain comes to the back, whether through coughing or percussion or due to too much evacuation, or due to exposure to cold substance, none of these appearances justify the use of cauterization, for it is that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is fitting after this that the patient should be emptied of bad pills or other such things when one performs cauterization on the back, at the place where the pain occurs, marking three lines with an incision symbol, and in each line from .v. to more cauteries according to the virtue and quantity that the body can bear; and you perform the cauterizations according to the 'points' type of cauterization method; and if you see fit, do three or four cauterizations at the intermediate 'claw' type cauterization following this form:
Many times this illness befalls young children, and the signs of its beginning appear as they stand alone, pale; and you find in the last spinal bone at the back and on us the appearance that comes over the other bones.
When you see this and observe it being treated, if you must cauterize it with the fire cautery following this form.
If you see this and wish to treat it with a blue cauterizing tool for each part of the spine evenly. And if you observe that, then apply the fire cautery to inside the spine at two or three lines wide, and have the points close together. Afterward heal it until it becomes healthy according to what we've said previously, and be careful not to use a cauterizer in a way that might damage the nerves surrounding it.
of the pain of joints
When joint pain is caused by moist substances spreading through each limb of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which they call 'gout' properly, and when it's due to cold reasons, and treatments with medicines cannot cure it, then they are treated using cautery like this: make the mouth of the cautery at the joint of the foot, and use olive oil as follows:
And if there is need to apply at the front of the foot, then you should make a cautery covering the entire part that we claim as 'point'. And if pains spread up to the knees and other joints, and this happens frequently, then you should make a cautery on each knee. Three or four of these, depending on the part, over the whole olive oil cautery; and if more is needed, then do so, but don't take your hand off until the heat of the cure is gone.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points inside the palm two lines; and if there is no pain left on the backs, then make points at each joint and at the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and give good governance to the patient and take medicines. For if you give him good governance and purge phlegm, he will recover with God's help.
Of the rupture of the scrotum
When rupture occurs in the groin and the testicles descend into the belly, this is new. It is necessary that when you have them cleaned, you do not touch him until morning; and use things that allow the wind to move, so that his intestines descend from his belly. After that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to shave his armpit until the testicles are repaired, then pinch them with your fingers, and apply heat under the rupture onto the bone of the wrist, making sure it resembles half a circle above the stomach; then heat up the cautery as described here:
Until it turns white and smells bad. Then pinch the testicles at their base; and have your assistants shave his hands so they don't turn back; and work well on his thighs by pinching them; and place two surgeons under his buttocks, and another one under his groin who shaves his hands; then put the cautery on the mark with all your hand, and keep it steady until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach the bone the first time, try again another couple times until you reach it; and be careful that the testicles don't escape when you're applying the cautery; that you don't burn them; and that through this means the patient doesn't suffer or any other harm.
And know that when you do not come to the bone at the cautery, your operations are for nothing. And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to their size, and of large people as big as their measure; after three days cure the area around the cautery with butter until the scab is removed; after this apply other ointments until they are clean, and let the patient lie forty days on his back until the wound heals well; and it should be that his purges be taken for a long time, so that the boil does not escape when he wills to go to chambers.
And after forty days, when he wants to stand up, have him wear a well-made bandage and keep it on for another forty days; and let him rest properly, work a little but guard against overmuch drinking and eating, and avoid shouting too much; and once this instruction is followed until he becomes completely healthy. And I will speak about the treatment of cutting injuries in my chapter next. of the rupture of the belly
When tears occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, make one application of the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it be the third part of the measure; after this cure following what we have said; and none of the old ones said that they should cauterize at the cautery in three angles according to this form:
But the first sign is that of enlargement and make a line across the width above the tear, and another below it, and hold your hand with the entire fire cauterizer tool. But the first applications are lighter and moister.
from old pain in no member When pain comes to any limb, due to falling or being struck, and that pain lasts long, and medical cure doesn't help, then it should be treated with a cautery called "poin", and the application of the cautery should match the length of the member and its smallness and weakness, and its ability to work and its location for twists and pain. If it is cured by the first cautery, that's good; if not, apply one more second round of cautery on this one, because these tools are designed to move with the body part they're closest to, hence you should make the cauteries as long as the disease remains present.
of malady
The remedies are given once a time with a cautery for significant help, and also the disease that comes from the putrefaction of bile and melancholy. If you see it being treated by cautery, take care that the disease is at the beginning stage, and if it's cured according to what we have said in the division, and doesn't spread or remain, and you doubt that corruption spreads throughout the diseased part, then do this five times on the head: one at the top of the head towards the nose at the end of the hair; and another towards the forehead from the back of the hair. And two more near the two horns, and one behind at the neck; and keep your hand so that the cautery goes until the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of thick humors can escape; and treat it on the face according to what has been said before.
And if the mix is spread everywhere; and it clearly disappears, so you should cauterize with these burners that we have said about or, one burner on the nose, and two burners on the spine of the neck, and five burners on the spine of the back, and one large one on the breastbone and another nearby, and two on the shoulders; and two each on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint in hands and feet, and on the pits of the hands; and beware of nerves that are at the heel bone, do not burn them; and never make a burner on the bone under the elbow, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more burnings I make, the more aid I give, and it benefits him; and know that the patient does not feel any pain during burning as a healthy person would, because his body is already thoroughly corrupted. And you must ensure that the burners are large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to how you find them in iron methods. After treatment, wash the area with flour several times with honey and other treatments until it becomes clean.
It seems like "de enfleure" could be a typo or an error because this term does not exist or make sense in medieval French medical terminology as presented here.
When swelling appears in any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and bandages, and if it doesn't heal, then you make a cautery on the limb according to its size; whether the cautery should be deep or shallow depending on the size of the limb. And so the cautery goes somewhat inside the wound's edge. Then treat it with ointments until it heals. And when performing the cautery, do so from hand and foot and back, at the point where the nerve causes the limb to become paralyzed, and thus the swelling is extracted; but no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and how nerves move in the body.
Of almonds
When the disease known as "albaras" is developing and medicines do not work, then use a cautery to cauterize, according to the size of the wound inside the anus, until the bleeding stops and its color changes. After that, treat it with a mixture of flour, lentils, rose oil, plantain leaves, and extracts from colonic and almond plants, each in one part. Mix all these together, wrap them with a cloth, let them air dry until they heal.
The treatment of a sore by cautery
When a sore begins, and you have to look at it and stop, if you use cautery on the one that seems like a circle, all around the circumference of the sore. And always, they say that you should also use cautery in the middle of the sore; and always, I do not seem that well, because I fear it might become ulcerated and rotten, and I want to avoid this happening anytime; and more reasonable is for it to be cauterized around, using the cautery called 'circulate', just as we have spoken about in terms of cauteries.
of swelling that cannot die down
When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it doesn't want to die out, either because of its excess or because of the age of the illness when it is old (meaning too old), and it has little blood, or because of the tension; and you see that it should hasten death: then apply small applications of cautery; leave it like this. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierced all through with the fire cautery, then heat up the cautery as described here:
And place your hand in the midst of that disease which is called 'adubelati', as long as the cauteries have pierced through the knee, and make sure these cauteries are hot enough for the patient to feel it pushing outwards in such a manner that the process of putrefaction's flow is alleviated. After treatment until it is completely healed.
The cure with fire using iron
Another way of disease is called 'corrodens', which is simply a member's malaise, causing the limbs to rot in a manner similar to how dry wood burns. If you notice this disease affecting someone who can withstand iron cautery together with fire, then heat up your iron cauteries making them both small and large as necessary according to their place on the body or where the illness is; after that, cauterize all around until you remove all corruption, leaving nothing behind so that no part of what was corrupted remains. And let it rest for three days, and while the flesh heated by fire heals over these cauterized limbs, also apply oil to relieve the pain from the burns. After that, complete the treatment with herbs for several days. If you notice after three days that healthy tissue begins to regenerate, this is a good sign; but if not, start the iron cautery process again where the corruption still remains on the limbs. And this malaise can be completely cured using only medicine and without fire cautery; however, it's more effective with fire cautery assistance, which I've already described in the treatment section for ague disease. Remember to use this fire-based medicine when needed.
of the hairs that come to stones
Often times, stones cause a disease that we call "cyst" based on our understanding, and it is a large lump that hurts the foot. And when dealing with this disease, there are two methods for the cautery treatment. One understands by fire cautery, and one understands by hot water cautery. Fire cautery involves heating up one tool like a feather from a goose, made of good iron at the size it can encompass all parts of a nail, and having thin edges; after that you heat the tool on top of the nail entirely until your hand turns around the tool so it reaches to the end of the nail; then leave it like this for three days until pus starts to form; afterwards make a plaster with ground wild marjoram mixed with vinegar and put it over the entire night, and when that's done, remove the nail along with its roots. Then heal the area with ointment until it is fully healed.
And if they are turned from within the body, and this happens many times in both hands and feet, it is necessary that you apply the hot water cautery; and do it like this: take a thread of spider or iron, or a goose feather, place it on top of the nail and arthelul (which refers to warts), and put the thread such that it touches everything around it. Then pour a little hot water, hold your hand well in place, press your hand as you rotate it until the edge of the thread reaches to the root of the nail, then ensure that the hot water penetrates deeply all the way to the root; let the patient endure this for about an hour. Afterwards leave it like this and will be completely uprooted from all its roots. Do this again with another session as long as you remove all those who are in the body, then heal with ointments that generate char.
The treatment for shaking
When some shake from cold or nerves, or from the quartan fever or other ailments, it is necessary that you apply four or five cauteries on the spine of the back. One cautery between each vertebra; and one at the bottom, and one under the stomach with the olive cautery; if this does not stop the shaking, hasten their recovery from the cold illness.
pus-filled boils
When boils or pus-filled sores appear through the skin, originating from large putrid matters. It is necessary at first, when they become apparent that one applies a cautery to each head of the boil: a fine firewood stick's tip, taken by fire, or an elongated root of aristolochia, or an incisor cautery. And it should not be cauterized right from the start when they appear, according to this manner, but its excess is relieved, coming from which they arise, and are healed; but it should be done after blood has been evacuated.
When the artery has been cut Many times great variations of blood flow from the artery that has been cut at the wound come to the outside or at the incision of an abscess, or in applying a cautery to the member, and similar things; it is much distressing for them to stink.
And yet, whenever this happens to none, if you quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein and hold it tightly until the skin is relieved under your finger, and no more liquid leaks out; then heat several olive oil cauteries of various sizes as long as they are all red hot; then take one or according to the size of the wound and where the artery runs, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the skin is completely dried.
And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries have cooled down, then quickly take another one of the cauterizers that are at the fire.
And do not cease to perform this one after the other until the hair is completely grown; and beware that you do not burn the nerve which lies within, and that no other harm come upon the patient; and know that when the hair falls out of the artery, it cannot be restretched properly even if the artery is large, unless it's done by one of these four methods we've mentioned: by cautery, or extraction when it hasn't been treated yet, or by strong thread pulling, or by applying medicines that have the power to re-grow hair; and then tie and restrain in anticipation.
Who will administer the reattachment by tightly binding with cloths or placing something hot on it, or other similar things, if they do not benefit from this method.
And if this happens to anyone and they don't have any medicine or tools at hand, if one must put their forefinger on the wound of the vein as we've said, and stretch it out well until it's reattached above the wound and above the vein; and not move the finger but keep it moist with cold water often that is very cold until the hair is frozen, swollen and reattached. And make preparations in advance for those needing cautery and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about all illness where it is necessary to apply a cauterizing heat or burning medicine, and we discussed the types of cauteries, their causes, instruments, and forms. I placed this chapter up until the knee, and I will continue through this chapter using the same approach as before for whatever seems more easily accessible.
And as I begin this chapter, it is necessary for you, dear reader, to understand that in this chapter there is greater danger and fear compared to the first chapters on cauterizations, hence extra caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and making cuts into stones, and similar operations; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I urge you that you do not embark in foolishness. For many ways of people come into cures. if they come from those who are so troubled by their illness that they die lightly due to the anxiety they find within their disease, and because of the severity of their wickedness; and one must have fear towards such cases. And from these there are those who give their sense and say: "Wait, I am brave"; and the disease is cruel. It is not suitable that you agree with those who come to your aid in this manner, but place more restraint on your honor than on your greed, do not act foolishly but wisely towards those about whom you are certain, and from whom you can take knowledge; use prediction and guidance in the cures of your illnesses for which health is converted; and this will help you gain good reputation, glory, and long-lasting memory. And it will assist you in acquiring noble renown.
Dear child, Our Lords give you good understanding and integrity, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of their hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter to you in devising by chapters, according to what is before the chapter of cauteries, that I devised from the head up to the toes, for you find it more easily what you will need.
from the head filled with water
Know that this disease often comes from childbirth in infants, and when the mother presses too hard on the head of the infant; and it happens without reason that sometimes it does not resolve.
And I have never seen this disease in adults or among all those I have observed, their deaths were hastened; and because of this, it seems to me that I must abandon the project of treating this part of the illness in parts.
And I saw one of these children whose shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled up each day until it could no longer bear it; and he thought so much moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled all over the bone in the syphac, between the heart and the bone; and the wounds are thus positioned as if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you open a crack through the head a wide fissure; and it should be so long as two fingers, until the moisture flows; and see this shape of the spathile:
If there is more moisture present, and if the abscess is larger, make two cuts in a cross-shaped manner according to this form:
And if the moisture is all over the bone and you see that the edges of the head open on every part, and water sprays when you press it from your hand inside, and this does not subside: it is necessary to make three cuts through the head in this manner.
And after making the incision, remove all moisture. Afterwards, treat the cuts with drapes and powders, then apply wine and oil, leaving it as such until the fifth day; then set it, treating the wound in stages and through ointments, and let the head be restrained equally, then start feeding the patient dry meat from a bird of prey as long as the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another way of making an incision is to look at where the opening of the abscess is, and combine it with water; because it is never in front; it's never behind; not to the right; and never to the left.
Cut there where the abscess is open, and where water fills it, and make the incision according to what you can do; and be careful not to cut the artery; watch for blood flow so that the patient dies from bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
When it comes to any illness that is called "catarrh" on the eyes or at the anus, and this illness is old, and the cure with medicine does not help, then the last treatment is cauterization using what one cuts off the two arteries.
So then, when you cover the eyes, they should be done after their head; after this, rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then pull out the diseased part of the neck all the way to one cloth. Then look where the vein is located and how both the leus follow after the ears, and when they have reappeared; then sign the leus from behind, then cover each of them with a sharp spatumile for about an inch until the size reaches up to the bone, and this should be done by the width around the head.
And if you see it, pinch the clot beside the artery and above, cutting also as two inches through.
And when the vein has been cut, let the blood flow upwards continuously outwards.
And if the artery doesn't open upon feeling for it, you should measure out an area of one and a half inches. Then press down until reaching the bone; what needs to be expelled is about seven parts per centimeter, and perhaps a little more or less depending on how the patient can bear it, and the filling of the artery. Then look at the wound: if there's just a bit left over bone, or if the incision is not bleeding anymore, then press down on the wound to seal it and bandage it, and apply ointment until it heals.
This phrase appears to be incomplete or incorrectly written in Old French. There are several possible interpretations based on context, but without further information, a definitive translation cannot be provided with certainty.
When old age comes, and severe coughing occurs, because of the moisture from tears and heats in the temples and on the ancient skin, and similar things, it is treated using methods for healing medicines, but this does not help at all. Instead, we should extract the arteries in the temples and apply a cautery treatment, as we have described.
And the method of extracting them is such that the patient feels behind their temple hair, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and responds only in some people who are too cold; and if it does respond, you hold down the neck with some fabric pieces, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and heat up the area with hot water until the artery can be clearly seen; then take a spatula of which this is made.
Then scrape the skin lightly until you can see the artery, then lead it up to the pincers, and remove all of the threads that are from each part; and if the artery is thin, turn it at the tip of the hook, then cut that part according to the size of both shoulders. For if it is not cut, it will not heal completely in every way.
And the drainage from two to three days, up until the third day; and if the artery is large, it must be tied with two loops of a strong silk thread for eight inches, so that infection does not occur before the healing of the wound, nor in the bleeding process; then remove the excess material between the two threads at that very moment. And later, should you see fit, apply cautery with an iron surgical blade up to the bone until the shoulder joints are cut. This is the completed procedure if the patient does not have fever and is of warm disposition.
For the cauterization assists in finishing off infections: because it provides more substantial help against infections. Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries: that one fill the hole with old cotton and place well-made bandages on top; and when they are removed, if you apply dry medicines that produce pus and bandages until healing begins; and if there's no artery left to cut from the vein, then as soon as you see fit, cauterize with a hot iron or fill the hole with vitriol and press it with your hand so that the blood is coagulated; and if you don't have this available, put salt on the hole until the blood freezes, and remove the cold water from there when the bleeding stops, applying it as necessary; and what's easier and more suitable for extracting an artery is to cauterize the vein of this iron trenching in two parts, but make sure that each trench lasts longer due to heat. For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat. And it must have an inch between the two knives, and one should allow a good space, then when you intend to insert both of them, and you place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, and incise the vein in two places; and keep them distant from each other, because there is no weld with this cautery across its entirety; and this is the shape of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears from the eyes are flowing through the veins located on the back of the head, and no benefit is received from medical treatment as it is done, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel or hear fainting; and when they remain moist and damp so that the papers' hair falls out, and the papers become heated, and burned by the heat of the tears, then this cure requires this method.
And they called the old "healer of injuries", and this is what you do for a patient with this sickness: have them let their hairs grow on their head or forehead, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to its length; and have one cut be as wide as two along the forehead going downwards until it reaches near the nose, and the other two cuts about these two ribs above the papers, and avoid cutting into the arteries that are above the ribs; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and make each wound the size of three inches through joins.
From the cut that is behind the temple up to the second cut; and burn off all the keratinous layer that's in between the two cuts on top of the bone, then make another incision from the middle cut up to the other second one, and then remove this pus.
If in the first incision you insert an instrument known as 'cultellaire', it should be extremely sharp on one side and blunt on the other, not sharp, and its shape is: And when making the cut towards the fatty area under the knee, make the cut blunt toward the bone, and place the blade until it touches halfway. And remove all vessels that descend from the head to their ends as long as the incision is continuous up until the one opening into the knee, then do the same around the middle cut up until the other end; and then drain equal blood, express the wound for the taken blood; then put a layer of old cotton in each cut, and place wet cloths with wine, oil and garlic over it, ensuring no abscesses form; and on the third day undo the bandage, and give a large treatment with water, then apply the ointment of basil with olive oil, and other treatments for wounds, until they are healed.
And the extraction of pus
When dealing with sudden fevers accustomed to occur, and you see the eyes strained and small, and weakening of sight, and burned papers; and hair falls out, and one sweats excessively in the face during fever, and the patient feels ague-like pains. Therefore, know from these events that those substances and that fever come only through many veins, and the cure to be given is this.
And you must instruct the patient to strain behind their forehead, then make a large cut down the middle of the forehead, and another wide. Start from the left temple cut to the right temple cut, and make the incision reaching to the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples' nerves that move during eating; when the bone is revealed, drain all the blood with a sponge, then swab between the two edges of the cut, place old cotton, and use linen strips. Then cover it with damp cloths in wine and oil, and avoid removing pus. When it's out, you must rub the bone until hair starts to grow, then treat with things that dry, as they make hair grow.
In this manner: take two parts of the wheat flower and four parts of colofon, and make a plaster from them; and apply it to these wounds to encourage hair growth everywhere.
On the operation of ear piercing
Everything that enters the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or mine stone or similar thing such as iron; or seed, such as beans, peas; or flowing thing like water and oil and similar things.
When it pierces the ear or in any other way of a thing that does not fit into the ear, nor grows in the ear, then place the ear under the sun. If you see the stone, if any violet oil or sesame oil drips out, then proceed with extraction; and make them sneeze with condisi, and stuff their nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool into the ear; and hold the ear up. Many times this treatment results in improvement; and if it does not improve, then you proceed with extraction using small pincers, as described below:
If it jumps out with the pincers, that is good; if not, proceed with extraction using small sharp scissors. If it does not jump out through this, then make a spider's thread and pinch the end of the thread or the part of the ear very hard, and stuff it so that beeswax is between the thread and put in such a way that nothing can enter the wax with the thread; then pull it forcefully for it comes to be as we have said many times. And if it does not come out in this manner, then take glue from honey and take its waxes and put one tool that is suitable for this task into place, and put a little cotton there; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull forcefully. And if she does not escape from all these things that we have said, then quickly cut the ear in such a way that pus and blood flow out, and twitching occurs; and the method of cutting is to first remove the cephalic skin and drain its blood along with the pus according to the size of its strength. Then place the patient's ear between your hands and turn the ear upwards, making a small cut at the base of the ear on the fatty part hanging down; and make the cut as wide as a crescent until you reach the bone. Then break the bone according to your ability and suck it quickly into your mouth; and continue the cure until it has healed. And if they are seeds and they swell up, administer evacuation; and if it cannot escape, then perform this: i.e., apply a subtle poultice according to this form:
And perform the incision of that seed. But do not do this when you think that the seeds are moist due to the moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with fine tweezers and using suction, as we said before, so that the extractions may be clean.
In the case of discharging from the ear, then it is required that the patient perform sneezing with their first nostrils and enlarge the ear with old cotton. And lie flat on this same ear where the discharge occurs. If the fluid jumps out through here, it's good. If not, take several stones according to their length and gently, and warm them a little at the flame; and put one or two of your ear's stone into the patient's ear, and step out from one foot on another side, and strike out with another stone over the stone in the ear; and do this from stone to stone continuously until all the fluid discharges completely, and thus it will jump out completely; and if you see, take two sticks, and place one of the shoulders into the ear, and the other shoulder takes fire until the stick burns most. Then repeat this process with other sticks until all the discharge comes out, as we have explained about the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it's of small size like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have explained in the division; but if it's of large size that can be felt, then perform an extraction with tweezers; this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of mites in the ears, when you are treating according to what we have explained in the division and using distillation methods, if the cure doesn't improve, it is necessary for you to look at the ear with the sun: if there's no opening for any mite, extract them using fine tweezers; and if there isn't an opening, take the type of cane that matches this description:
And be narrow below and wide above. And use the finer of the two for the ear according to the degree of suffering from the illness, then pour it into all of the canal; do this often until all the liquid has come out. And if they don't start coming out, you should apply cotton wool inside the canal as I have said in the case of a worm; and if they are not expelled as we have said, give them distillations that the old people have proven effective in removing worms; you will find advice on distillations in such texts; and if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, follow this form just as you see it:
And be it made of silver or of lead, narrow below to a half-inch in size and wide above for distillation; and to press within the distillation use an instrument well made of lead appropriate for this task. And take one rasp and wrap cotton around its tip beforehand. Then pour your oil or juice into it, and whatever medicine you see within your canal, place it inside the ear canal. Then fill the rasp with all the cotton, press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or has reached the ear; and sense the patient's illness internally, and let the distillations boil slightly as you would when distilling in the ear; and ensure that it is not too cold, because the medicine would not be as good.
Regarding ear unclogging
No child is born without any part missing in their ears; and the same thing happens to adults through injuries due to wounds or birth defects inside the ear. These injuries often occur unnoticed within the ear if one cannot see them; and they are not seen at any other time, and one never sees two parts come out of the hole, and one can see this well.
So for that which comes unseen from within, if one cannot see it, it involves several stages of healing, and in this situation, what you should do is place the ear under the sun; and look inside: if you can see the evident swelling, or the work has produced this pus-filled state as described:
And so and thus, cut in front of and behind it evenly all around, without hurting the ear; if there is an evident swelling or a bump from the inside or on the ear, handle it with your fine pincers, and gently pinch the area until you remove all the flesh.
And if the excrescences are in front of the ear, take one fine and light rasier blade, rub it slightly on a fire, then place it near the ear. If you feel that the excrescence causes pain to the patient's ears upon light touch, do so gently, ensuring not to injure the ear nerves; then insert into the ear a cloth tent according to its width at the tip, and moisten with Egyptian ointment in the ear canal.
Do this every day until the wound is healed, or you take a cloth tent and moisten it with pink water, and apply powdered vitriol. And if you see swelling of the ear, then you should remove the tent and replace it with another moistened tent made of rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling disappears; then treat it until it is fully recovered.
And if bleeding occurs, soak an sponge and dip it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and use other treatments to stop the bleeding which are effective against distillations or similar conditions.
Of the ashes of the papers
It's the case that they come out in hair when they are wet and then dry, so it should be that you spread them with tongs and forceps, and take off its roots with a spatula; then place sulfur on the wet part of vinegar.
And if they are not peeled, then apply the thin lenticular cautery, and after incision it will harden; and they return many times, but no part of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots burn up and do not reappear.
Of the gravel
Many times in the papers come things that seem to be gravel by their shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "granuloma", it being a collection of moisture large on the paper above and below; the work procedures are as follows: watch if the granuloma moves from one side to another, and this is a simple thing to know; make it then large in size, next burn each part lightly, then take it with tweezers, and cut it out. If you cannot remove it without piercing some of the paper, or causing no pain to the patient; if the crack is big, and there's a seam, treat until it heals; and if it's small, do not apply much force, for the ointments will heal it quickly and promote wound closure.
And if the granuloma is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, and find the granuloma at some of the tweezers, cut it out and press from both sides; and if the paper moves away due to the incision, this does not cause any harm; and when the granuloma has been removed, pour in clean water, cure the wound until the tissues heal completely once the patient's condition is stabilized.
From the fat of gravel
Exinach is a grease that settles onto the papers, and this happens more often in children than adults, causing them much pain in their eyes, and it comes to them with weeping in the mornings, and they cannot look at the sunlight because tears rush into their eyes; due to this, they sleep under their desks right away, sleeping on them, and have their papers damp from under their eyebrows that become covered by exinach which opens in the eye. And when you press your hand onto it with your fingers and feel exirnach between them.
And the way of the operation is such that the patient places their head in your healthy space; then take one linen cloth, and prepare a tent like a circle according to the amount that exirnach occupies for each part, then place it on it; press with your fingers from both sides so that the exirnach is gathered within the circle; then make a cut halfway through the moist area at the sharp point of the trench making a small slit, not larger than the wound as in the vein operation; and make the skin tight until you see the exirnach; and with multiple adjustments, exirnach comes out from the slit according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Remove then all together a piece of linen cloth between your fingers at the front, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is dispersed; make sure you don't stick in the slit that you reach up to the edge of the skin all the way to the eye, do not hurt.
And if the incision does not open at the beginning of the cut, increase it lightly just until it opens; then stretch it as we have said, then moisten with a wet cloth and water, place it on the wound, and wrap with bandages.
And if there are any who grind flour and put it to corrupt the moisture that has remained. Then heal it until it is sound. And if an abscess appears at the wound, then treat with healing plasters until it is sound.
The French phrase "des poilz des papieres" translates directly as "papers' hairs". However, this expression doesn't seem to fit into standard contexts in French language usage or literature. It might be a specific idiom or technical term of the time period and field (possibly paper-making), but without more context it's hard to give an exact translation.
When hair grows in an unnatural manner on the face and body and when aging causes it, if it harms the eyes, it can lead to disease symptoms such as habitual tearing of the eyes and paper-like conditions and testicular swelling; all these are due to damage to the eyes. Treatment should be according to four methods: or by a fire cautery together with heat, or with herbal medicine as described in the section on cauteries, and this is done, or through incision and suturing, or with pins, based on what I will explain later.
It is necessary that you place the eye's lid in its healthy position, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it flips over correctly, it's good; if not, insert a needle through one thread from both sides. And do this either under or at the edge of the paper where hair grows underneath these hairs, and pull that thread across all the paper, turning it with an awl; then cut in the area beneath the paper, below the raised hairs, down to the spatumile up until the small tear; then remove one thread, place a small cotton tent on the paper with some gauze, and draw a symbol like a bay leaf on top of the paper. It's important that the symbol be made according to how much you see the paper lifting where it's folded over.
And if it's necessary for the quantity of paper according to how that paper is moistened; then cut all along the spatumile above the two lines you marked, and start from the large tear until the small one. And if there's a split near the natural hairs in their growth stage, then insert the thimble in one of the angles of the eye, then scrape it entirely. Then bring the two eyelids together into one stitch with a needle through both threads of fine wool all along, and cleanse out any blood, and let air flow freely on the two lines of hair with some sticky substances if you see fit; and if not, don't concern yourself, then leave the stitch and threads for three to four days. Then treat the wound without stitches using dry and constraining things because the paper recovers by the hardening of the wound and the assembly of its parts, but the stitches are weak (as the old ones would say), and this is work without fear;
And if there is another way: and that you mark the paper with a shape as like to the leaf of holly, as we have recounted, at three inches in size according to the form which is below:
Then apply this to the smaller forces equally following the form which is shown here:
And if you don't have the ability to hold the forceps, and if the thing isn't equal, take one needle or where there are two threads, place it in this figure; then place another thread diagonally across the larger cut, and the second thread diagonally across the smaller, and join between your fingers the threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above what you've marked, just as we described, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and treat until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your cut, soothe it with cerates and similar healing ointments;
And often, the paper hair turns black: if it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the stitches in one and the other are more artificial.
The treatment of canes follows this form: and you should turn the paper and cut it from within according to what I have said, then make two canes by art, and also two fine threads as long as the paper is wide except for the space where it is thin; and place two heads of each part where you hold the threads; then assemble them both finely atop what stands out from the paper of the eye, and pull the two canes from the two parts formed; and leave them like this for a few days, and the skin which has been pulled will heal and harden and thicken until it comes out by itself.
If it takes longer, and if the treatment lasts for some time until it is healed; and once the wound has healed, and when the paper lifts, and no more hair will come out; and this is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
The surgical procedures are such that you must take a fine needle and insert it halfway through two thin silk threads; then join the ends of the thread finely, and let them be as long as one hand's length. Then set up another thin silk thread briefly in the chase, knotting its ends to the thread; then place the patient's head on your healthy side, and expose the procedure until noon so that all the surgical procedures are clearly visible because they are delicate and small tasks. Then push the needle fully into the base of the hair, piercing paper quickly as you pull it up from the natural hair. Then remove the hair up to the chase, and insert this hair in the chase; if there are two or three or four or more hairs, then extract them all until the hair appears completely out of the chase with the natural hair.
And if the chase has been treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the chase away from its base with all the thread that you have set up, until the chase is completely out beyond the cut and visible through your vision; then pull the chase and the thread, and rest the eye for two or three days, as long as the hair hardens in place and a new flesh grows up; and if the hairs are small, then accompany one longer hair of natural horsehair, lifting it with that or leaving it to grow until it is fully grown.
regarding eye infection
When this illness is called 'aleacrati' or 'putrefaction' which affects the eye, there are two ways it can come about: one naturally and another unnaturally. And it occurs suddenly due to injuries, from surgery or cauterization, and similar events.
And the way to treat this in such cases is to break that seal and open the eyelid. You place linen patches inside and keep them there until it heals; you should not use any healing remedies that dry out or restrict it. For if you do so, the illness will return worse than before. But apply softening substances instead; for example, fenugreek. And immerse in water or broth mixed with linseed and oil, then spread with dill oil, wrap them in a patch, and heal according to this method.
And the treasures of your cure consist in being cautious not to heal it back into the shape it was before; and these remedies we've mentioned are all aimed at preventing this illness from recurring in its original form.
The substance which comes to the eye
This illness known as "axacrati" is truly named and natural, involving accidents and injuries. Accidents come from wounds, cracks, cauterizations, and similar events; the way this happens involves piercing with a needle into tissue, where within there are two threads double-threaded, and you insert them into the flesh, causing the thread to pass through the left lacrimal sac as straightly as possible, so that the threads move in two parts of the tissue. The tissue then covers over all the needle, and forms a small white patch.
And when the shape of the paper returns according to what should be, it is good; if not, take a file and place it in the crack, then turn the paper, making two cuts within the paper itself. And let there be the corners of those two cuts at each angle of the incision you have made, and make angles such that when they are assembled, the shape resembles the shape of a letter which is 'two greeches'; then remove this tissue according to how wide its edges are as below the paper, then adjust those two cut ends together, and sew them with a thread of linen. Then treat it with the cure we have said for mollifying medicines and potions until it has healed.
And if the disease comes from a wound or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make a full incision across the hairs of the paper, and according to what was said earlier; then cut between the two edges of a tent, as I have described. And must do the work according to the shape of the illness because its form varies greatly, and the surgeons prepare various tools depending on how they can restore the shape to its natural form; and the patients themselves also need to perform actions using different instruments in accordance with what their condition requires for improvement.
immediately from the paper
When this welding occurs using human hands in such a way that the paper above is bonded with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural actions, then it follows that you should pierce the corner of a shaver into the paper, lift it upwards; and stretch it across the stitches, until you reach what is behind the thin spatula that should not be too sharp nor too deep so that the patient does not suffer from the spatula being too sharp causing irritation to the eye; and make your incision, from which you remove the assembled paper gently, in such a way that the paper regrows according to its natural form; and heals all that is assembled, and do no salty water once in the eye, then rinse it with gentle water and cologne; then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and cover the eye with wet wool. And afterward wear for several days with a collar and other dressing until it has healed.
Of the eyelash
Know that the eyelash can be in two ways: it is nerve-like and resembles one hard consistency, and another which isn't nerve-like but seems like a white moisture frozen, so when you touch it with iron or treat it using scissors, it won't; both of these appearances start from near the large tear duct, grow slowly little by little until they cover all the eye and all its light and movement.
And the method of incision is such that the patient places their head in a healthy position, then opens the eyes; and removes the eyelashes; lift the paper with your hand, then place the nail of the eyelash using small tweezers, and place it above; then take a needle, and insert one horse hair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and one strong thread; and double the needle point slightly and insert it into the nail, and pierce through all the way with the needle, and fasten the nail with the thread and place it above, and burn along the entire length of each hair from near the inner corner up to the root where the eyelash meets the eyelid, until you reach the most delicate part and minor nerves; then leave the natural part of the eyelid so that through the incision there are no new signs of tearing as is customary; and once the nail has been placed above only, and attached with thread, in this manner it resembles what we have described:
And ensure that the cautery does not touch the fatty tissue and tear it, and that the probe is not perforated; after incision pour a little of the broiled fat into the eye, and make a collar out of stannous oxide, and leave it until tomorrow; then treat according to what needs to be done as long as they are well.
And if the nail is not nerve-bound and you cannot push the needle in, and the cuticles cannot enter it, this condition of a nail-like appearance from medicines is repeatedly treated; they develop as I have described in the division section, and if you notice that it turns red, the eye responds to the injury, take the tip of the cautery slightly sharper according to this form:
And remove the nail slightly upwards, and if you see that it does not diminish at all and the wound is pressing inwards, then apply drops from your mouth into the eye a collar made of stannous oxide and a red collar with broiled fat, and treat the eye until the next day; then restart another operation according to this same process, as long as there is nothing left of it.
If there is no opposition in the eye, such as pus-filled abscesses, then proceed to treat them. First, cleanse and manage the pus-filled abscesses until they are drained clean. Then resume work on them as before, until they are drained clean.
And if there is an appearance of damage to the conjunctiva from tears in the eye causing great harm, suspend its use and cut off only part of it, not all at once, ensuring no tearing occurs; then apply red ointment to the eye which is made of litargirum.
of the flesh that comes forth on the pupil
Some people are born with red flesh once, covering the pupil and restricting onto the membranes and then projecting outward, appearing like a candle flame; and this operation is that the body puts its head into its healthy state, after which it removes these flesh parts, and then all that flesh until uncinated pieces suitable for this, and holds it by strength; then cut off the first layer of flesh completely up to the edge using the rasor blade until the very end, and ensure not to damage the eye during this operation; and make the incision around the canthus as we have described in the incision of a nail and with small forces of cutting away the skin, like what is shown after this chapter.
And when the incision is completed and all flesh removed, place olive oil or distill it with red colander and similar corrosive medicines on the oil. Place cotton with egg white over the oil to prevent infection; if nothing remains and there's no sign of pus, and you doubt about hot pus, leave the oil in and treat the hot pus area with things that soothe the hot pus. Then return to your work until it heals completely, doing so many such incisions in the oil as this process suggests.
But still, it is necessary that you adjust the treatment of each weak oil in its natural way; and to accidental ways, in iron work. And do not thrust your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb endures that operation.
The veins of the eyes
When the veins are red and covered over the eye, they tolerate vision of their own accord and weaken the eye for several days. Therefore, it is necessary for you at first to observe where the eye is, in which case the sebel occurs, and besides this there is no other disease except sebel; then direct your mind in such manner: instruct the patient to place their head on your healthy side, then suspend those veins over all the inch according to their wisdom, and let the inches be subtle double following this form:
And let them be two inches by degrees in one and a half turns according to this form:
Then complete the operation by gently moving those veins, and let blood flow for another hour or until you see these veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to injure the eye with the points of the spathamills, and perform this operation at noon in front of the sun, and strive to be very meticulous in your work so that you do not damage those veins. And when you have done this, then apply a collar of green and red distillation to destroy what remains from the sebel.
And if you do not have the ability to deal with all this at once, then create a plaster from things that soothe the pain in the eye, and leave it for some days until the pain is relieved and the danger of infection has been assured, then restart according to this method which was mentioned previously until it's healed; and this is how the strength comes about:
Of the pus of the eye
The condition they call "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with a cautery and by applying hot medicine as I've explained previously, and if it doesn't heal, then the place where you incise on the abscess, let it be near to where it should die out, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you will see decay and darkness, if you replace it with every instrument that matches its form; and it's called 'hard head', and should be made of iron about one inch wide, and should be pointed like a needle as it is in this present shape:
And place on it the piece of decayed bone, then press your hands against it slightly until you know that this corruption has been removed; and do this once, then return the site to its state after treatments with dry medicines.
If the bones have fused, and there's a new birth, and the body of the bone is also fused, and remains like this for forty days, and it doesn't heal and isn't an abscess anymore, and no bad accidents occur, you know that it is healed. If not, then another procedure must be done as follows to restore it: and you remove a piece of the bone the second time with iron and medicines. When it's exposed again, take one nail following this shape, and place the iron rod at three angles, and make sure the shaft is thinned out until it's about an inch wide as you see here:
Then place the patient's head on the edge of the bed. Keep your hand away from his eye for about an inch or two points. Then continue applying pressure throughout his face until he perceives bone through it, as long as you feel the pain when his breath comes in, if he holds his hand on his neck. And then restore the limb with dry medicines as I have taught you. When the cartilage begins to grow and harden, take out the material from his nose; something lighter happens to the patient.
from the exit of the eye
When the nostrils are fully open and there is no disturbance in the heart or loss of strength, if necessary to bind the patient's head. Then heal him, then attach suction cups or a siphon without piercing for suction, then place on the eye one made from laurel leaves and aloe and incense and sarcorrhagia, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with waxes and cloths; and the way of the cloths should be that you take cloths that are sufficiently soft, and double each one at four layers, and then place one on top of another according to the amount needed by the nostrils; then strain it from above with a hard bandage formed, and reapply the suction cups for suction without piercing; then remove the suction cups and let the eye be strained day and night, and if the bandages start to loosen, if necessary to strain more. Then remove the bandage after day and night, and if you see that the eye has healed well, it is good; but if not, continue with reapplying the plaster and cloths, the bandage, and suction cups until he heals properly.
From the bursting of an oviductal membrane
When disruptions come in the oviductal membrane, then opened, and comes forth with pieces like a grain of resin, and is visible; thus when you see its coloration, the organs are such that you pierce one as if you were sewing near the base of the part below up until half above. Then pierce another with two threads from this part where the oil gland is; and make them penetrate, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement; then sew this part of the membrane with the double thread and bind a portion of the oviduct internally, then strain it well, then extract the needle and place on the eye a wet piece of linen in abundance from an egg; and let it be until the threads along with the oviduct have been removed, then treat the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed; and no time should the wound be restrained by the membrane each part of a circular bandage, until she is healed.
And when the eyes have a significant appearance, then pierce them at the thin spatumile that comes by the surface of the eye, and drain out the moist albugine and let down the eyes, and enter into this immediately; then strain until they are healed.
By the strength of the eye
This disease which is called 'alcunnati' can be found only in an eye where water has assembled, resembling water descending; and it isn't real water. The way this chapter shows the work involves having the patient sit upright and straight on a bench, then hold their head with both hands about four inches apart, and move them until you see the water come above your eyes; then let it go in, don't allow it to descend and clear away light, observe what the disease looks like as usual; and if it doesn't descend immediately, know that it is water, and when the discharge from the eye isn't assembled in the way we've described. Have the patient sit with their head between your hands, then take a thin spatula and make cuts on the corneal surface about one inch by following the connection between the conjunctiva and the cornea and the crown, until the water comes out; and when it has come out, distill hot water in the eye mixed with honey, or boiled water with fenugreek and honey, then treat further with other remedies until it is healed.
From the tears of the eye
In the division of the water, we have the indications for piercing; so in work according to the condition. It is necessary that you place the patient between your hands crossed, away from sunlight, and hold the healthy eye tightly but not too tight; then put the paper of the eye on your left hand when their eyes are on the left, or on your right hand when their eyes are on the right; then take with your right hand, when their eyes are on the left, the tool called "almagda", or with your left hand if their eyes are on the right; then place the tip of the tool under the corona by half the width of an eye in that corner of the eye to the lower part of the tear duct, then force the tool called "almagda" properly and twist your hand until it pierces through the eye corner, and feel that almagda goes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the length of the path of almagda be at full length of the space from the pupil to the end of the darkness; and this is the corona of the eye; if you see the bone in that paper by the lightness of the corneous weave, then place the tool until it reaches the area or where the water is, then express through one path after another. If now the water descends, you will see the patient's eyes before him and the tool in his eye.
After a short rest. If the water rises on the second path, apply force with the tool, and when it's fully inserted and no longer rises, gently remove almagda by turning your hand slowly and slowly; then add a little of the gem water back in, and remove the eye from this one. Then place fat or greasy wool or roset oil ointment beneath the healthy eye. Now, those who are of our time, let's apply with plenty of egg white on it.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you take the tool called "alberit", which has this shape:
And then pierce only the conjunctive part, do not go too far inward, but make it about an inch fine, and then put in alum powder as we have said; and upon finishing the operation prepare for the patient one additional healing agent, where he sleeps on his back for a week; and be free from all movements, eat light meats, and avoid moving his head either to the right or left, tie him according to his position until three days; then release him in that dark room himself, let him test his vision, have others show him some things, and then reapply the bandage up to seven days; it is not suitable for you to do this during the curing period or after an incision has been made now, but it is appropriate for you to keep these procedures because the wound becomes inflamed immediately.
For the extraction of pus comes, that you release the eye before the seventh day, and use an agent that soothes the abscess; and when it is calmed, then release the vision and place one gold ring on his face for covering a day, and remain in this dark room. And then leave the house slowly and slowly, and transform back into his state; know that no disciples should intervene in such cases.
And one came to us who was from the Iberian region and said that in his country they would take alum powder and apply it where there is inflammation, then drain out the pus but still, I have never seen anyone like this in our land nor have I read about it in ancient books; perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the signs of the forms of mercury, for those who do not know them see them; and they belong properly to ardent ones:
And these are the head of its own subtlety, and the rear at three angular aches.
from the fat on the nose
None of the birth or birth of mixed star-characters occur. Some seem like scorpions with piez's mouth; and there are those in which a star-character is attached to the face by a dark color, and those with a good-color star-character. In those among these star-characters that have a good-color and not been enhanced, it must be that you place the patient between your hands against the sun; and blow on their nostrils, pour water onto those star-characters, and let them out; then take whatever you can hold at the fine sharp point of the subtle substance on one side until you know that this star-character is completely penetrated.
And if there remains no matter that we can't handle, if you open the body completely with all instruments very gently, ensuring nothing stays in place; and if it doesn't heal without forming pus or an abscess, treat the wound appropriately as needed. And if it's malign abscesses, act quickly and apply the cautery until the pus is drained out and all the flesh has healed, then wash thoroughly with water or vinegar.
And if it is clean and moisture comes up to the throat, you know there's no pus; and if moisture doesn't seep out as it should, you know that there's new flesh forming in the bone above, so the instruments can't come through because of too much fat: thus, you must squeeze out one piece of thread about half an inch thick, and hold it with both hands near each other, ensuring a space of about an inch or less between them; then insert the needle into the mouth on its side and pull gently until it comes out at the back of the mouth; and many times do this way in schoolchildren, as it's a simple task for someone who wishes to perform it. Hold the head that comes out through the nose with one hand and the other head that comes out from the mouth with the other hand, and know them one after another while watching us who are holding the thread. Do this until you can tell that the flesh has rotted away where it's stuck; then remove the threads, wash off any blood, moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and reinsert it into the nose as before; do this for three days or longer, until the ointments have corroded everything left of the flesh; and then place a handful of opium for several days until it's healed, and if there is need for dried medicines, use them; and this is how to prepare an instrument to purge the head, which involves distilling oils and medicines in alcohol or wine.
And make it of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a rod, and guide it in the same way; and if you can see it, make a closed rod, and fill the instruments to purify the head; and have two handles on the head so that when one heats oil or any liquid, you can hold them.
from the flesh to the nose
Many times a disease begins at the nose's head and is called "telul," it grows and becomes large enough to see; thus it befits that you take care of it at first, and remove all bone, then place the cautery or hot medicine under it; and if one delays caring for it until it is large, if it feels hard, changes color, has poor sensation: do not touch with iron as it contains an abscess, because when you cut once, it brings great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is due to heat touching, not just color change, and you see that it can be entirely removed, then empty the patient and perform surgery under fear, and treat the area with dried and restraining substances.
when the nose has been cut and sewn
Know that when solutions of continuity come into contact with one of these vessel walls, it profits little in some individuals. Thus, such occurrences should not happen to anyone unless the wound is fresh all over with blood; and then adjust both the two edges by suturing them together, then treat until they heal fully. And if the two edges are already dry on either side, it's necessary that you scorch all parts of their cut so they heal completely, then join the two edges by suturing them, and bind tightly with dragon blood powder and incense finely ground; then place powders over this with a piece of plaster or any other type of soldering plaster, and leave until it discharges naturally. Then apply ointment until they fully heal.
The method of suturing is such that you join the solution: or with needles, as we have mentioned in the stomach stitch; or with thread, as I have informed you.
from abscesses of the lips
Hands with warts inside the abscess area, resembling grains at times, both smaller and larger; so it must be that you remove the lips, and cut through each nodule, taking them with tweezers in each part; then use the hand after the vitriol incision, until the wound has stopped bleeding; and then lift the debris, clean the wound of dry substances until it is healed.
of the flesh of the gums
Many times pus forms on the attached gum tissue, which the old would call "albulus"; it is necessary to hold this with forceps, cut at its root, and allow blood or pus to drain. Then apply vitriol to the wound, or other drying and restrictive powders; if that flesh returns after incision and repeats itself, then cut a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return after the application of the cautery; these are the forms for cutting them out.
From the confusion
Some times they are gathered at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, and they appear ugly and rough. And some times they cause the tooth to be black and yellow with worms until the decay reaches the gum, causing the tooth to stink; it is necessary that you hold the patient's head in your hands, and have their teeth ready under yours, until there remains nothing visible; and thus create darkness, greenness, jaundice, and other colors, as long as they are completely removed. And if what is removed at the first instance is right, it's good; otherwise, start over again on the second day and third day onward, until you have everything removed; know that teeth need various tool shapes to be extracted according to how their work shows them, because the scraper used for extracting teeth from between others has different shapes than that used for teeth outside of gaps. And these shapes and others must accompany you in your preparations.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth due to its pain that you continue to extract as long as you can, for this should not be done lightly; for it's a very fine substance up until then so one should not have any excuse for quick extraction. So when the patient is forced to undergo extraction, you must be sure about the tooth involved. Often during pain in the tooth, one must consider if it's a wisdom tooth, and extract the good tooth; but even then do not allow all pain to subside until the bad tooth has been removed, as we have already experienced this with our surgeons; and when you are certain about the tooth causing trouble, ensure that you sear around the tooth with one. small space for keeping the gum protected from all sides; then move it to your fingers or onto the fine forceps at once and at once until it is properly extracted, then secure the forceps well; and have the patient's head under your knee with the chin well fixed so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it doesn't jump out, take none of these instruments and insert them from each side gently inside, and move it as you did initially. And if the tooth is pierced and eaten away, it must be filled with bandages where they have lost; and should it be extracted finely with forceps, so that it does not break during extraction; and you must very carefully open around the gum to remove the tooth completely.
And make sure you do not break it and leave a part behind, and warn the patient that by this mischief of the root, they will suffer greater pains than at first. And watch that you do not do as those ignorant surgeons do, who in their haste and recklessness break once or more times through the bone, and do not follow our advice; but let there be a single time when by the operation of this great disease from the roots that remain, or because of the bone they break, as we often have wished. And when the tooth is pulled, wash the mouth with wine or water and vinegar; and if bleeding does occur, which happens sometimes, fill the mouth with vitriol juice; and if that doesn't help, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, to which you first speak to set teeth, should have long points and thick handles, not doubling when you pull the tooth; these are the shapes:
And they should have thick members so they do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of well-made iron, and they should be toothed to hold things in place.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains during extraction, it is necessary to place cotton soaked in moist butter inside the mouth for .i. jor or ij days, until the gums are softened. Then pull out the forceps known as "algefri", which makes the shoulder seem like a well-trained beak; and they should be made similarly inside like a file, this is their shape:
And if they do not want to come out with all these pincers, it is necessary that you expose the entire root of the object, and place the tool known as 'althali', which is called palainche, as described here:
And let it be strong and large so that it doesn't break at all, and if the root jumps out from this, it's good; if not, use all your tools, as their shapes are shown below:
And if assistance is taken with this tool that has two points, which is depicted here:
and there are other tools in front according to the order of the teeth, and this tool that seems like large pincers, which is illustrated here:
And make sure this tool cannot be broken, and know that few tools made from bone exist; and also other tools, which are not commonly listed; and the skilled surgeons find their own instrument through themselves, according to what their work and the illness show them, for there are parts of diseases where old instructions do not teach a tool because of the variety among these and if it breaks part of the cartilage or from another bone, or if it rots, when they seek for the tools that suit him, that I have told you about, and help through gestures, as this is their form: And be them large and well-fitting so they cannot escape but can hold and remove; then return to the arm with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it's small, take all this tool and do it:
When the teeth appear not according to their natural form, and the shape is ugly, and especially in virgins, it must be known if the tooth was born after this tooth, and it's not straight on him, and you can neither polish nor file: then take out; and if it's alongside with this tooth, take this tool which has this form, and resembles that of two small beaks, and should be sharp in its whole length.
And the tooth is inserted slowly into one's hand for the hardness of its root, and because you don't move the others, and if it appears that one could shave it off, then you shave it with a single blade in the manner depicted:
And it is also like the needle file used for nails; and in filing the tooth slowly into one's hand lightly, so that you don't move it until it breaks; then smooth out at the end with a final polishing tool, and if it's too sharp it irritates the tongue, then it is necessary to file off the roughness until it becomes even, so as not to irritate the tongue or affect speech.
when the tooth rots
When the tooth is in front of an opening or by tapping or striking and if the patient cannot press against it while eating without vomiting, and you have cured them with restricting medicine, this doesn't work; thus they should be restrained with a gold thread, as silver threads turn green and decay but gold never decays. And choose that thread neither too thin nor too thick, depending on the space between the teeth; if you notice the teeth aligning, take hold of the thread with both hands in the middle, then place the dislocated tooth between healthy teeth. If there are one or more dislocated teeth, do this until you feel resistance at the side of a healthy tooth. Then start the covering again up to where you previously interrupted, and move your hand skillfully and carefully until it stops moving; and secure your tie on the root of the tooth so that it can't escape. Next cut out the dislocations with the thread using two pairs of pliers, then assemble them, and place them between healthy teeth, doing this so they don't hurt the tongue; and then leave them thus tightly until they can remain like that, if it slips or the threads break you must secure them with another thread; if it stays tight and serves its purpose throughout time, this is the arrangement of teeth and the position of the two pairs of healthy teeth, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, if you put it back in its place step by step, as we have said; and don't interfere with anything that isn't gentle and bears it. And make no form of a bone tooth of a calf, and put it where the defect is and secure it as we have said, and remains and serves for so long.
to cover the wound of the tongue
No time is it where the ligaments come from beneath the tongue or nature, that we are born thus; or by accident of a wound being stitched; and the procedures are such that you work on the mouth towards the illness, and place its head in your healthy position, then lift the tongue; afterwards cut the nerve cord across its width until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there's hardness or swelling, particularly from a sudden injury to a wound, then bend the hook and cut that ligament straight across; and make sure the cut isn't too far down, for the artery being nearby; and once you're done, lift it to pinkish-blue or slightly yellow, or cold water, then put under the tongue a linen bandage each night so that the mouth doesn't heal. And if bleeding occurs again, then pour vinegar over the mouth; and if the pus won't drain, then cauterize with the slow burn cautery, which is good for this situation; and then treat it with another treatment until it heals.
And if you see it has turned to red or black or hard, and the patient doesn't feel it, do not touch it as it's gangrene; and if there's a decline towards lung disease, and there is moisture, then use the hook and drain with a subtle puncture from both sides, and then release it on both sides; and if pus won't drain in your body part, then pour vinegar over it until it stops bleeding, then return to your procedure while you're applying all the force; and once you're done, lift it using cold water or saline solution, then treat with other methods until it heals.
removal of abscesses from the throat
No matter how often pus comes out from the throat, which are called "godath", and properly speaking, they are the two almond-shaped glands. When you treat them as we have said in division, and if they aren't healed yet, take care: if there's pus that is small in size and a bit yellowish in color, don't touch it with steel at all. And if it's red and its root is big, don't touch it with steel either, because of blood loss; but leave them until they're bleeding, then you will remove them, or they would break by themselves; and if it has a white color, and the root is subtle, take care to prepare your tool properly. But first check if the pus is thickened and calmed down. Then have the patient sit in front of the sun, keep their head well aligned, let their mouth open wide and pinch the tongue with servants' hands between their palms, press all over the tongue from the tool like this; it should be made of silver or very fine steel as knives are.
Can't you press the tongue with all this tool, and see the pus? If so, take the onion and insert it into the almond shape, then pull it upwards as much as possible; remove nothing from the threads with that, then pull them away with the tool like this, seeming to be some strength. And both ways the head are curved, one place over another, and very sharp, and is made of either iron or tin.
And if you do not have this tool now, then use tweezers like these.
And make incisions on both sides and the other side's name; and when you have performed one of the amandres, perform the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water that is also cool or soothing, and with cold water, until bleeding occurs. Then gargle with hot water, or crusts made from cooked pomegranate peels, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the throat is completely healed; then finish the treatment when it becomes well again. And do not let any other abscesses develop in the throat besides the two amandres, if you do them like so, equally with the two amandres.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, one of small size; and had almost completely sealed off the entire throat, such that she could not breathe through the blocked passage and could neither eat nor drink, and died after about one or two days. The abscess had risen so high it was placed at the level of two inches by each nostril. I quickly did so, inserted a half inch into it first, then removed the other one; and took out a large portion of phlegm. Then made another incision in the other nostril, and had her open her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards put the piece back into this abscess, and took away some of its contents; and only a little blood came out; and thus cleared the passage for breathing from her throat, she began to drink cool water now then wine, and did not stop trimming that abscess over a long period; and it grew again, filling up the space I had emptied until it became quite large; then I removed these parts, and God did what was left of it afterwards.
from the eye
When the head of the disease descends to the eye and it becomes swollen and long, it's called "perpendicular"; and if it's distant, large, and round, it's called "eye". When it is treated in the manner we've said during division, and the cure doesn't help, and you see that the pus discharge has calmed down, and it’s thin, so it should be handled; and this one which is round assembled and isn't long; and it's bloody or reddish or black, so it should avoid making an incision on it. For there's great danger to the patient. So when you see it, according to the way I've said regarding its bulge and length, you must have the patient stand under the sun, then press their tongue onto the instrument we had remembered beforehand; afterwards stick the needle into the eye, and pull it outwards, then cut off with two of the instruments I mentioned during the incision of the four almond-shaped parts. And it should be that you don't cut more than necessary past its natural boundary; because if you do cut more, you harm them in voice and speech; after making an incision, use what we said regarding the incisions of the four almond-shaped parts, and cure until she is healed. And when the patient shows signs of fainting from cutting off, it should be that you use something for cauterization sensitive to their weakness. And the way to perform the cautery should be sharp. And make sure that the disease's head reaches your health, then press their tongue onto the instrument we had said about under the chapter on cautery, and with a hot iron apply, so that it’s neither too thick nor too thin; and use its tool movement accordingly which is described here:
And let my head have hair where I put the medicine, like movements of a spoon, and place the instrument completely with the medicine on the eye; and make sure the disease stays stationary on its side, so that saliva and the sputum flow from their mouth to the inside of the medicine but does not go down the throat or into the ear; then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour's worth, until you see that it dries and the effects of the medicine are calm; and if you see this, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton with the medicine, place the instrument entirely on the cotton in the wick, until the cotton burns on the eye; and do this repeatedly, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and then after four or five days. And if you need to start the medicine cautery again, then do so, and after that, clean around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and clean off any place around where there was medicine; and rinse with cold water, and gargle until it is healed.
This treatment is safer than incision or using the cautery; if it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take valerian and sage and oregano and rue and chamomile and plantain and similar herbs, and gather all of them or any of them into a single pot, and place it inside, and bring it to a boil; and ensure the pot is well sealed with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot have one tool like hair according to this manner: And it should be made of silver or lead, and let one of the shoulder blades be placed in the mouth under the badness until the vapor rises to the eye through the nose as long as the eye is dead; after that repeat often, as long as the eye dries out, and make sure you do not perform this at the beginning of the pus's appearance as heat, for many things occur; and do not use this method when the pus is declining. And if that tool is not present, take a piece of wood and place an eggshell inside your head so that the mouth under the badness is not too hot; because the eggshell does not let the vapor weigh down the mouth, and it is a good treatment together for health.
Many times it is in the throat bone or spine of fish, where nothing happens; therefore, you should extract what you can see and press the tongue to the sun with all the tool, so that you can see the movement; and anything that does not open and is still in the throat, you should induce vomiting in this way until the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance if it gets out through vomiting; or if the badness swallows a piece of sponge, or a navel piece, or a lettuce root, or one dry bread piece; and tie a string to the sponge and then swallow it; and when she comes up to you, if she is being expelled, and then pull forcefuly; and if she does not come out with what we have said, take one tool of pitch according to this form:
And make the forceps at the nose so that it can more lightly enter into the throat, and have the nose raised high above the throat. And guard yourself not to touch the epiglottis, that nothing obstructs its movement, nor push any bone inside; and when you move, let the patient feel the forceps, because if they are moved or if resistance is felt; if it goes in with a push, or if you pull hard all along the forceps equally, until it pulls hard.
Of the windpipe
No single remedy heals the windpipe as I've described in division, through the use of medicinal cures; and when that doesn't prove effective, then look into the throat for the ailment towards the sunlight, after pressing their tongue with the tool I told you about. And if you see the windpipe, pull it along with a quarter inch or fine tongs suitable for this task. And if that doesn't work, take a single hair and place it in the throat near the mucus spot; then when you feel the hair soften to half a hot iron, perform this often. And wet the afflicted person down completely with water every day. Then take a full gill of cold water and rinse their mouth, pour it so that they can swallow it immediately, and move it around in your hand frequently; and as soon as the mucus feels the water, it will defecate.
And if it doesn't pass as we have said, command the patient to smother with asafetida, using the instrument that was mentioned in the treatment of an eye abscess. Do this many times because it will not cause pain. And the method for smothering is: take one pot containing burning coals and place a cover on top pierced through the center, and at its bottom place the head of the patient's affected part. Then pour your smothering substance over, and put the end of the rod in their mouth, sealing it so that no smoke escapes but goes to the throat; and now phlegm will come out, if it doesn't pass, then restart the smothering many times; and let the patient endure thirst and eat salty things, etc., and do not drink water. Then it is necessary for her to escape forcefully through this method.
And the shape of the instrument used to expel phlegm is such that when you can see it, it resembles half-moon scissors intended to enter the throat. It has a surgeon's beak appearance and has a grind on it, so whatever she takes, she cannot leave; and here is its shape:
The chapter concerning abscesses
No mention of the removal of pus is made according to what memory brings after this from one and another in this book, and they vary with perforation and incision; and it's done in two ways whereby one is in its own appearance, and due to what it holds moisture. And the second way is for those that are at the body. because abscesses on the head differ from those on the base, and abscesses on the flesh within the body are different from those that come in joints, and each has their judgement in work.
And if it's an abscess that should not be pierced until the swelling has reached its fullness according to its development; and if there are such that it must be pierced when they have grown large, but do not reach their fullness according to their development, like an abscess that is within joints. For when abscesses occur within joints, and you leave them until they are somewhat swollen inwards, by chance they may corrupt the joint's tendon and nerve, which can cause a contraction within that limb. Or if it's underneath the main limb, and if you delay the perforation until it has grown large, this will harm the main limb; or if it is under the base, if you pierce it in such a way that it grows large, it should not be left to grow fully inside, and extend within, causing a tunnel-like opening; and cannot heal properly for an extended period. And it should not be pierced when the abscess has grown without proper digestion completed, except for the one that is under the base, which would not have fully swelled up and be spread outwards, remaining inside, and cause a fistula; and cannot heal properly in a large scale.
And it must be that you know the time for perforating an abscess that has grown according to its development, and this is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and diminution of pain and redness, and with the movement and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it should be that you place the perforation where the abscess depends more from above or below it, and at the point it opens; and make sure the perforation runs along the length of the body, whether it is on the arms or legs, in joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere without any folds.
In those that bend, according to the member's length. And when there are abscesses within the body tissue, it's better if you let the puncture stay until digestion is fully completed, as we have said. Because if you were to pierce before this, it might lengthen inside the body from the venom and be full of clumps of dirt; and unexpectedly harden the lips and inner parts of him. And for abscesses that are punctured along the width across the body, according to what the limb needs. And it's fitting to handle small abscesses with fine needles; and in large abscesses, large needles, and many cuts depending on the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where you should bleed them, and cover them; when it has become as two drapels, and is softened, then it's fitting to do like this for blisters: and for those that split into three angles, and for those that are covered like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses from the corners; and for those where you make a round cut, and other cuts and similar cutting techniques.
Those who lack a root, such as superficial abscesses, it is fitting that you pierce them completely. And when the abscess is large and has grown a significant pus ball, if you pierce it, do not drain all the pus immediately, but drain only part of it; then stop the pus from coming out until the other end, then leave nothing directly afterward; perform this many times in layers, until all the pus drains away. Similarly, when the body's resistance resists each time with the release of pus, there is a risk that the patient might die from it, so you won't realize it. Thus, be cautious about this chapter and when you have drained your abscess, see if the wound has healed; and check whether the wound in the abscess is small; and if it's just a clean cut, provide linen or old cotton bandages; and for large abscesses and there are many needles, it's fitting that you insert one needle in each so they stick against each other; and if you have cut into the abscess partially through the skin, and then sewed it back up again, it is necessary to fill the space with old cotton or linen rags soaked in moisture, and secure them until the third day; then wash the wound and treat with ointment until it heals.
And when there is blood drainage in your operation, it is fitting to apply cold water and make it easy, and moisten with one drap of wine, and place it on the wound repeatedly. And if the blood drainage persists, then you should prepare for government and treatment, and the powders I have mentioned in this book that are suitable for hands. If this involves ice or if the person is in a fever, and their limbs or abscesses are very nervous, then it's fitting to place moistened cloths and drapes on them with wine and hot oil; and if they're swollen, then it's fitting to have draps moistened with water and oil, or wine and cold oil until the third day as we've said. And then remove and clean the wound, following what is appropriate, until it heals.
And this must be known universally in treatments of abscesses: now I have told you how one should act prior to the treatments of abscesses, and here comes the chapter.
of discharges
In the area where small abscesses occur and are similar to what one might find on a squirrel, there are various ways they present themselves in fabrics. It is true that there are many similarities.
And the cut on a stone abscess and dampness makes it lighter, because there's little blood involved. And if some of these abscesses or around heads they lack moisture, and two of these abscesses that I saw around heads from an old woman; found the abscess as a hard stone, rough and white, not able to be broken; and even without piercing any of them, you would make incisions on them as if there were stones. In other abscesses coming out or around heads, it was those coming off from children's heads and ear roots, the opening should stay open for all days at most depending on when they need to let blood go; and treat them accordingly.
of the scrophula (i.e., tuberculosis or similar skin disease)
Many times abscesses occur in the throat, and along with them, and around the neck, and nowhere else or on the body, they are small and stuck together. And each scrophula is properly contained within its own skin layer like a nut and an abscess at the head, as we have explained; and there are many appearances of these scrophulas. Some contain moisture and others are malignantly disobedient to treatment. In this case that you see with good disposition towards surgery, and resembles the color of the neck, silent from all sides and is not mixed inside the throat or in the artery or the conduit, and it's shallow; it must be cut from above, and scrape each part, and keep the two lips at the corners when needed, as we have said about abscesses at the head; and treat gradually, and make sure you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and don't go too deep, that your hand doesn't slip, and don't look too far ahead, so you don't cut what you should not.
And if you sever the vein or artery, and it does not allow for opening, apply vitriol or any powders that stop bleeding to the wound, and restrain the wound; then leave it until the abscess subsides and the wound softens, then begins to turn. And when the blood has stopped flowing, return to your work until completion. Then according to your judgment, if there are no small scabs remaining, remove them. And if in the root of a pustule there is substantial bleeding, it's not right for you to cut out that pustule from its root, but secure it with a double strong thread and let it bleed out through it without harm; then treat the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then continue your treatment.
And if you cut out the entire pustule, it is fitting for you to bring together the two edges of the wound and suture them now. There should be no leftover superfluous matter due to the size of the pustule. It's necessary that you aim to cut into its root, drain fluid, and stitch as we have mentioned before. Those pustules with superfluous matter within, pierce where it opens up; and do so similarly to how was said previously, hanging downwards, then apply ointments and similar treatments until they decay; and when the wound is well cleaned, then use ointment dressing mixed with paste, as long as it remains healthy.
Regarding lateral deviation
The old ones spoke and talked about the surgery of the throat; but I never saw anyone do it in our land, and this is their written word.
For those with squint, it is necessary that the slit of the throat, called "epiglottis," be removed; and one should not assist in this operation, because all the veins and the lung are in these who have phlegm either in their mouth or in the throat or between two almonds. When the illness is within the bronchial channel, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis in order to prevent the loss that comes from suffocation.
Therefore, when we wish to slit the epiglottis, it is necessary to make a cut through three circles or four, with a small incision in between, not cutting into the cartilage.
And these can be so long as to require the cutting of the epiglottis, that there is no flesh, and the vessel is deep within.
And if the surgeons are fearful, it is necessary that they extend the skin of the neck to the entire inch, then cut through the knuckle until they reach the artery; and avoid blood vessels, should you see anything, and then cut the subcutaneous fat as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the section of the artery where blood jumps out through the broken limb, and because of the loss of voice;
and leave the wound open for a bit.
And when the time has passed that one doubts strangulation, assemble the two edges of the wound with care, and all the seam along the cartilage; then administer medicines which cause flesh to grow, until it is sound.
Albucasis states that one should not perform this until the throat is completely swollen, and the organs are judged to be dead, and until the defect is filled. So cut the epiglottis because the organ can't bear it anymore, and it breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death.
And because the old men were commanded to leave the wound open until the sickness's mischief passes, and it has passed in three days or four. And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and treat it until it was healed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a maiden took one knife, and stuck it in her neck, and cut out part of the vessels near the heart;
and I was called to treat her, and I found her as if dead.
I uncovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and indeed, she did not have a severed artery or exit flow other than the throat, and the veins issued forth through the wound.
I hurriedly cleaned it up, and treated the wound until it was healed;
and there was nothing to the maiden but that she lost her voice for days, then returned to her usual state.
I swear by heaven that in the surgery of cutting the epiglottis, there should be no mistake.
From the large throat
Cysts or abscesses are called "throat hernia", and they are large cysts of a chestnut brown color, and are very common in women;
and there are two ways: natural and accidental; or the natural one does not involve any effort.
And the accidents are according to two ways, of which one resembles what comes from us and the other way resembles an abscess that comes from our veins; And there must be fear, and it is not suitable to make fire outside that in the one who is small, and prove and search throughout all the instrument: if you find it as thin as one small bone, and cannot pierce any vein, then cut it, like how we cut bones, and guide the tool to all its contour, if there is any point; and thoroughly clean it all around, and treat it as it should be treated, until it becomes perfectly sound.
from bones
Many ways are available to us, so I will describe all the similar aspects;
And it must be that I explain all the differences between us and them.
I say that fever and heat are present until the evaporation has passed and the corruption is completed; therefore, the fever and heat then cease.
With the new (condition), there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains one gallbladder, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins in such a way as an eggshell, and becomes large;
And they are according to two appearances, or greasy, or moist, and little color change as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of a new case, that you first test and inquire about all the instrument which is called 'entromissor', according to its form or chapter that comes afterwards.
And the method of inquiring about abscesses among us is that you take whatever is more moist than what you find inside the abscess, and turn your fingers a little by little, until you know that the instruments have penetrated the pus, then proceed according to the size of the abscess;
Then remove the entromissor, and be careful not to let it jump.
When moisture penetrates deep, regardless of its nature, if it affects the area as I have described for other abscesses;
And if moisture does not penetrate after the introduction tool, know that it is fat, then cut in a cross pattern, and use tweezers to take it out. Gently scrape each part and keep the clothes where it was located, so that you can remove it cleanly with a knot;
And if you cannot remove it cleanly, remove it piece by piece to ensure nothing is left behind.
For if anything is left behind, it will recur through multiple times;
And if it stays for a little while, and the eye isn't harmed, use powders that corrode and are watery on the wound, and keep the wound restrained, and place soothing things around an incision in heat, and treat with other remedies until it's clean.
And if it is large, you cut the two edges of the wound, and treat with the one who holds the bleeding.
And if the vein is too far or else you hurry and use the opening of vitriol, and leave it for two or three days, as long as the wound heals, then let it rest in blood heat; then return to using what has been held back from the new substance.
Here are the forms of the instruments for insertion and they come in three ways: large, medium, and small. And there are four squares which are called 'albaret', and one which is called 'breb'. There are also three kinds based on size: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses;
And they are also like the needles from which one cuts the scabs, and they come in sizes of aragonite, or iron, or silver, and gold ones worth as much as those that are yellow, and they are more experienced at using black paint to surround abscess cavities;
And there are three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the opening of the wounds.
The shapes of the forceps resemble sheep, as you can see here: large, medium, and small. And similarly, if there are two cavities in the forceps, they also have large, medium, and small sizes.
And if there are forceps with two curves, they also come in three forms; and if there are forceps with two curves each and only one curve respectively, they also have three forms each; and all of these are necessary in their respective places.
The head of this is one who makes their incision sharp, and there are those among them who do not cut powerfully but only from one side, so they sear the skin; because in such cases one does not damage the vein nor the nerve.
And these introducers have their knives in sheaths so that the patient does not notice during the opening of abscesses.
And there are three ways: large, small, and medium, just as you see;
and only use it in the buttocks area, such as legs, arms, breasts, and at joints, among similar things.
And no other small instrument is made, resembling those of chestnuts, according to this form, to which one stops the blood:
And it is placed in its proper position that aligns with healthy veins and arteries, and it is never done according to this broad form:
None of the men swell their breasts when they begin to become corrupt, until they seem like breasts of women;
And remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them should follow this form of line b. until .g.: Then scrape off the fat, and apply medicine to promote healing on the wound, then join the two edges of the wound for suturing, and continue with the treatment until it is healed.
And if the mammary gland has been stretched downwards due to its size, like it happens in women, if they cut it into two parts above, by two similar incisions; From which one holds to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape, from this line B until the line G; Then scrape off the skin that is between the two edges, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary for treatment, until it heals.
And if it is not clean, or the incision has not been fully completed, because the patient does not wish to rest, or due to bleeding, you should fill the wound with wet cotton in a corrosive ointment; And leave it as long as he eats and moves it and the grease, then treat it until it becomes clean.
removal of abscesses from the armpits
Abscesses that occur in the armpits are remedies for hard scrofula or swellings, and if there are any containing moisture.
Those who contain moisture need to be cut according to this form, from the line b. up to the line .g.: And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day. Then remove all the cotton and apply ointment treatment until it heals.
And if the abscesses resemble scrophula, cut them as we have instructed for cuts in scrophulas, and if the wound is a scrophula type, apply a cautery treatment as we instructed before.
regarding the rupture of an artery
When the artery is punctured, and the skin is stitched where it was cut, there are often abscesses. And similarly, this happens with drained vein and abscess;
and if one knows this when it's due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, if you feel resistance; and when it's due to the vein, then there appears swelling outside;
and it is foolish to cover this abscess, and similarly when it's under the armpit and under the axilla and around the neck and in other places, and it's very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid iron treatment, and the one who is in the head should also be avoided, and in the case of a swollen artery, do it above the skin as long.
It is therefore necessary to avoid iron treatment, and the one who is in the head should also be avoided, and in the case of a swollen artery, do it above the skin as long. Then work on the size of ounces, and beautifully separate the artery from the tissues, as long as it is exposed.
Then insert an ounce on it and pierce until the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread for two lengths, as I have taught you in extracting the two arteries from the temples;
Then pierce through the middle between the two lengths with an introducer until blood comes out from where it is, and free the abscess;
Then administer the treatment that excites growth, Then treat with ointment accompanying this, while it remains sound;
and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, it is necessary that you apply with your hand whatever amount of pus you can to the entire skin. Then stick the needle through the place you are holding with your hand, and make it pierce, and let there be one double thread, so that you pull from the other side. Then remove the abscess, just as I've told you, or tie one end of two threads to each of the two shoulders.
And if you doubt the threads will withstand force, sew another needle with both threads across the entire abscess from the incision of the first needle, and bind the threads in four places;
Then cut away the abscess as much as the excess allows, then trim off the excess neatly and leave what is tied.
Then place a moistened bandage with wine and oil on it, then give them treatments of poultices and remedies until they recover.
of abscesses of nerves
Also, when abscesses occur in the artery and vein, they also occur in nerves when they are cut, or due to too much labor, and similar occurrences.
And this happens more often at the shoulders and in the arms, or anywhere where there are joints, and it's one of those abscesses that resemble the color of body tissue, and is in various positions with pain;
And when it is squeezed, one feels the muscles' pain, and it's not completely like inside the body, but around the elbow;
and move carefully in all directions, neither forward nor backward, neither down nor up, and one who is connected should not be covered with iron by chance: perhaps it would cause constriction;
And the one at the head or forehead, make the skin smooth. If the abscesses are small, then use your tweezers and clip them from their base;
And if they are large, then suspend them at the elbow, and scrape, then cut into the bone, and stitch up the wound, and continue treatment until it heals.
of large hanging masses No occurrence happens in the abdomen and nowhere else, it is a disease that is called "fungus" by its appearance, and it has a subtle root, and large lumps; there are small ones and many large ones;
and I saw two homes who each had two of them that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, and had a small root, and were cut open, and they consumed moisture immediately.
I weighed them and found that in one there were eighteen ounces and in the other five, and when you examine the organs during incision it is as follows: if the body parts are moist, and the color of the fungus is white and moist with a subtle root;
If it cuts too deep into the fat and oil, then have the fire cautery ready in your presence. For the surgeon often encounters excessive bleeding at many points, and if you are not cautious, if you hurry, then prepare to use the cautery;
And if you see the patient alarmed and fearful due to the cut by the iron, take a well-made piece of linen thread, and tie it in an appropriate knot as we have said, and let it stay for two days;
Then restrain it, and don't stop pulling the linen thread until you feel the knot, and each time without much effort; and if the roots are large, make it hurt along with the cut for the belly, but you can hardly cut half of them.
Then apply the cautery so it doesn't heal over; then treat the wound, and ensure you don't cover the scab that is of a reddish color and has little sensation and milk secretion.
For this is an abscess that needs treatment, and I will proceed to the treatment of the sore after this.
When the bladder is filled
The appearance of the bladder comes from the cautery on the wound or incision in the scrotum, and it is found under the abdomen and in some of the testicles, as happens with other injuries, or bleeding due to veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or due to windiness;
And if it's through the tearing of the syphilitic ulcer and through the opening of pus, then the appearance of the abscess has a similar color to that of blood, and is a light matter without much pain, and opens from various exits. And if it's through the opening of the intestine, then it's more varied, and when you press it with your fingers it recovers, and then comes back again, and by chance it might be squeezed, expanding greatly at the entrance of the bath and due to strong labor.
And if it's due to moisture, it is a light matter and opens well when you press it with your hand, not constraining at all; and if it's due to blood, it opens by these signs - large and hard abscesses, and are found according to their quantity.
And if it's due to windiness, you consult the doctor, and the signs are that you look to see whether its appearance is from blood of an artery, or vein, or windiness. It is necessary for you to leave the treatment alone. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you or in chapter of abscesses, for arteries and veins.
And if its appearance is due to the intestines or the belly, it is necessary for you to command the patient to bleed their bile, and make sure they are lying completely straight, then cut around all around the belly; then command them to sit up between your hands, Then go inside the limb where you have marked on all the sinew, then there is half of the abscess above across the entire broad hook;
then apply half of the abscess stretched over the binding, and place your finger's tip, and grasp the intestine. If you find it trapped inside the body, set it free, and push the intestine out from the belly.
And if you find the boil, take hold of the handle, and remove its excess.
And if it goes against the artery or the vein, then go back to your work and take two needles, and thrust out two threads, and place the two needles inside where you pierced, crossing them.
Then pull the abscess up to four fingers above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the wound heal until it turns yellow, and discard the dead flesh. When you come across something subtle and ripe, then treat according to what needs to be done, and remove the abscess as we have said.
When you come across something subtle and ripe, then treat according to what needs to be done, and remove the abscess as we have said. and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound according to what needs to be done, and sew the wound.
treat the ulcer
We have spoken about the appearance of ulcers and how they should be treated with medicine, and how to avoid iron treatment. Let it be known that ulcers are contained in the mouth or can be removed as with ulcers found near the nipples, in the cooking pot, and similar places. You must remove all when they are at the beginning; but when they are large and old, you should not approach them because I have never seen any heal from them; no one ever heals from them before me.
And the operations, when they are in place or can be removed as we have said, is that you cleanse the patient of any black coal once; then make them clean if there appears to be clear swelling, then apply the cleansing agent .i.e. at a good distance from where surgery will take place; then remove all pus and debris thoroughly from everywhere without leaving anything behind; and allow blood to flow completely unimpeded while holding the area tightly with your hand or any object, and if bleeding inverts against the incision of an artery or vein occurs, if you cauterize it until the wound is sealed; then continue other treatments until they are healed.
of dropsy We have discussed the appearances of dropsy in our division, and how the assembly of water occurs, and the signs for each appearance, and the treatment done by medicines, and that which is treated by iron: these are detailed; and it should not be to touch iron in these two appearances: this means tympanites and yposarche, because they are mortal matters; therefore when you treat this dropsy appearance called 'dropsy' with medicines, and if the treatment doesn't bring improvement, then look if the patient is weak or has another disease apart from dropsy, such as abdominal distension and similar conditions; don't use iron in these cases because there's doubt; and if you see that the patient is very greenish and they have no other disease than dropsy alone, and they are neither too young nor too old, then proceed to operate: Lift the patient straight in your hands, and have them press their abdomen while holding the water up to the lowest part of their buttocks. Then take the thorn spike following this shape: And cut it about two inches at a point, but do not make it too narrow so that it can come until close to the intestine when inserted, and cannot be pulled out;
Then look to see if the ascites is spreading towards the intestines: if it's necessary that you make an incision in this place about two inches above the belly button; and if the ascites is due to liver disease, then cut on the left side of the belly button about two inches; and if it's due to kidneys, then do so on the right, and it mustn't be that the patient lies on the incision where excesses flow into the weak one;
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument and pull it out, lift your hand to the entire thorn spike between the skin and the fat as much as when searing in proportion to a fingernail or half so; then pierce the fat until the thorn spike reaches halfway up, and that is the depth of the water incision, then continue pulling and hold this instrument as described here: It's similar to a thin silver needle, made of bronze or tin, and has two small projections at one end; and three on another side, and one more; and its shoulder shaped so that the writers cut it like a feather, and that is the shape of the incision that the scribes cut the feather into:
At the head is the alveolus, so that when the surgical tools come to the water, they immediately start cutting through the instrument; drain it then half or one-third, because if you drain more than what should be done at this time, by chance the patient might die due to the release of their spirit from the weapon, or they might faint, or approach death.
But drain according to the strength's quantity, and according to what the virtue of the patient signifies, and its pulse; then use the instrument and retain the water, and it is held back now because of the anesthesia which dulls the pain that is on the surface, as I have spoken, do this kind of puncturing; then start using the instrument again another day, if you see the patient suffering from this, drain a small amount of water.
Do this every day, and keep yourself from overdoing it until only a little water remains. And if you doubt the patient, and you leave much water, if the burial or sand is hot, and through sweat or bathing and in sunlight, and if it turns red; and drink accordingly. Cure with drying medicines until it's healed, and cauterize on the stomach and liver after removing the water, as I've explained before.
Of the embolism of the penis No child is born without having any parts in their penis, or if they do have them, the parts are small, or they are not in their place. If it happens right away that there's a very thin piercing at all .i. (a unit of measurement) of something very subtle following this shape: then put or pierce .i. (another unit of measurement) of a very thin piece of lead, and tie it and keep it like this for .iij. (three) or iiij. (four) days. And when they want to urinate, if you remove the stopper, they will urinate, and then put it back. And by chance nothing happens, because the urine that comes out doesn't leave the stopper closed. If the parts of the penis are small, if there's medicine from a lead stopper, as we have said before, and it will expand. Those who do not have their parts in their place suffer blindness, for no child is born with parts at the tip of the penis, because they cannot urinate until they lift their penis upwards; nor can they conceive due to this, since the matter cannot reach the anus, and this is a serious illness.
And the way to work is that the patient lies on their back, then positions the tip of the penis and the scrotum just like a feather's length, so that the cut pieces are in the middle, as it should be; and watch out for bleeding which occurs many times during this process, and if it happens, stop it using someone who can stop bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals properly.
The pimples of the penis Many times, lumps form in the penis, and there's an unpleasant appearance; and among them are good and bad ones. It is necessary that you remove these at a weight of .i. oncinia finely, then cut and clean all of them, afterwards place Egyptian ointment-soaked cotton; then treat it with diaphanicon ointment until it heals properly. And if the boil is malign, changing in color and discharging pus, it should be treated with a cautery. When you have applied this, and if the boil is located on top of the testicle and has part within the skin and part outside, it should be removed first the boil which is inside; and when it's healed, then clean from the outside. For when you treat together, there mustn't be any assurance that the testicle will not be penetrated, and comes blackness and corruption in the testicle or within its anus; so remove all that has become black and corrupted, then cover with a dressing of honey and flour made from walnut shell and vinegar, then clean with other treatments until it's healed.
And if blood leakage occurs, it should be treated with the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterization should take place in two positions together: namely, during bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and removed, it should be that you insert a reed from poplar inside the penis and let the patient urinate among its parts. And when the hairs are at the tip of the penis which would be those of uncircumcised individuals, or there's injury or abscess, then it must be burned with a single hairpin until all ties are released, and liberate the testicles from all around;
And if there's trouble in discussing this matter, it should be that you burn with the tip of the first hair on the head and skin of the penis; then open it properly between these two positions, and then place a small linen wad soaked in cold water inside so that it doesn't dry at its front.
On the circumcision
Circumcision is not merely about continuation like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own volition, and particularly on children, it is necessary that we accomplish the best work, and do so with the lightest impact for their health.
I say that the old ones did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
But I wanted the majority of masters and nobles who performed circumcision within one day, and at all strengths, and for every newborn; if it was wrong because there are two layers, and by chance we might leave this one above and retain this one below.
The patient receives care and experiences doubled pain. In the process of surgery, where the surgical area is not entirely secure at the point where a limb ends; in the shaping of nails, sometimes the nail escapes the hammer's hit and runs through the work, and many times grow unnecessarily requiring shaping, which I prefer to avoid.
The shaping that is done using all the strength of the thread, I have found the merit of experimentation because the strengths cut exactly as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut equally at .i., all the tension is felt. But let the threads be tightly woven inside the skin; and use the method of the first operation so that it makes the child think, if they hear, that you are only applying force to bind the thread around the member just like that, and then make them stretch in every way you can. Then place him between your hands straight up, and hold the forces between your hands or under your feet where he can't see them nor any of the instruments; then place your hand on the penis and blow or pinch it, and pull it upwards until the head of the penis is inside; then thoroughly clean it from the accumulated waste, then tie the neck with a double thread, then tie it under half an inch above and below; and hold onto them at two inches by the second tie to the pouch and the second finger's edge, cut between the two ties, then lift the pinch upwards quickly and pull out the head of the penis.
Then place him between your hands straight up, and hold the forces between your hands or under your feet where he can't see them nor any of the instruments; then place your hand on the penis and blow or pinch it, and pull it upwards until the head of the penis is inside; then thoroughly clean it from the accumulated waste, then tie the neck with a double thread, then tie it under half an inch above and below; and hold onto them at two inches by the second tie to the pouch and the second finger's edge, cut between the two ties, then lift the pinch upwards quickly and pull out the head of the penis. Then let the blood flow out slowly and slowly, because it is what needs to be removed; apply a powder here and there on top of the powder, one spoonful of glue made from half an egg cooked in rose water, mixed with fresh and well-beaten oil, and leave it until the next day, and treat it again until it becomes clean.
The form of the forces during cleaning is as follows: both ends should be held and they should cut through, and they should have the same size as each other equally:
The error of the world's creation occurs when the kidneys inside leak during incision; hence, you must extend them to your fingernail, like making an abscess; and apply evenly, and if you cannot hold with your fingernail, use tweezers then apply.
And if they penetrate for three days, and the one that is under the penis is swollen, let it be as long as the abscess is calmed down when you have worn out its pus bag, and gently scrape it; apply it as much as you can move, and keep away from the part of the penis, this will not harm him.
Therefore treat the place of things suddenly affected by disease with powder, as we have said about powders in treating them, and if you press too hard on the kidney and it goes beyond its limit, it will cause no harm; therefore treat it accordingly, just as we have said, until it is healed.
The retention of urine
The retention of urine can be due to the formation of stone, or blood being frozen, or a bowel obstruction, or pus, or other things that we have discussed in the section.
And when the urine is released and you see retention due to stone or obstruction in the bladder neck or in the urinary tract, it is necessary that the patient be positioned with their legs bent. Their feet should be placed under their back, and their abdomen stretched from above the back part, and restrain the patient so they remain upright as much as possible; then force the bladder's neck to express the stone above, because this causes urine release.
And if it doesn't come out as we said, and the patient feels intense pain, you must administer extraction with all the instrument known as "syringe", which has this form: It should be finely cut silver hair, similar to a bird's feather; and it should have a cane of about 15 inches long, and it should be fine at the tip.
And the method of how urine escapes is as follows: take a double thread, and tie it around one part of the head with a piece of wool or cotton string. Securely place the string inside the catheter through the head of the patient. Trim the excess string leaving only up to the head of the catheter. Anoint the catheter with oil or butter and egg yolk. Lay the patient on their side, and introduce moist olive oil and water into the bladder and penis.
And gently insert the catheter into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis. Then bend the penis upwards towards the anus. Next, place the catheter in front before reaching the bladder and keep feeling for urine to reach the emptied thing, and this is not done according to this order because whoever guides it would be twisted; then pull the thread back through all the wool bit by bit, and the urine follows the string, then drain the urine and make sure to dispose of it properly.
Continue using the catheter until the bladder is emptied, and tie the patient's leg in place.
Of diseases of the bladder
When burns or blood come to the bladder, or corruption is gathered there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, do this with all the instrument which is called 'clepsidra', and it's like this in form:
It is sealed, and if it has three parts: two on one side, and one on the other, just like you see; and the loops are placed through which the medicine goes well into the penis without addition, so that moisture can be treated and expelled when necessary;
And when you see the medicine flowing in the bladder, place the snuffer over the moisture, and guide it to the one pulling it out; if you pull out the moisture with the snuffer, and then firmly fix the one pulling it out; if the moisture enters inside and goes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
And this is the form of the subtle bladder stone which one cathartically treats the bladder with: thus it is:
And it is made of silver or lead, and the shoulder is above; and at one or two inches under each breast or on the ribcage; then take a lamb's bladder and place inside it moisture for treating the bladder with catharsis, then tie it between the two breasts forming around a good double thread, and heat one end of this moisture over fire; then insert the stone into the penis, then press your hand against the bladder to transfer all the moisture content until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle, then pierce it roundly through. Then insert a strong thread into these holes, assemble the circle as one would assemble a disk, and place inside what you see from the material and moisture and water, and tie it to the tool; do this in the same way you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
from the stone
We have mentioned in the division of the methods for stone extraction and treatment as a whole; we have also discussed the differences between stones found in kidneys versus all others, and the signs to distinguish them, and when to operate on which type of stone; and I will explain this clearly and succinctly.
I state that the stone within the bladder more often occurs in children, and this is a sign that an illness has sprung forth from the bladder akin to illness due to subtlety; and I open the anus and cleanse the afflicted person's penis many times, and then set them upright; and at some of these instances where it springs forth the foundation; and is more lenient in curing children until they reach four years old, and becomes much harder for the elderly, and lies between childhood and old age; and the treatment is more straightforward for those with large stones than for those with smaller ones.
And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the afflicted person through urination, in order to remove all the fecal matter from the intestines. For it only blocks once when seeking the stone.
Then hold the patient by the hands, lift and move them down, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, appearing only once from its top; then have him sit between your hands, with his hands under his thighs, so that the bladder is fully sloped downwards; then touch and press it from below.
If you feel the stone in place, now cut it immediately. And if it doesn't slip out at all under touch, moisten your index finger of your left hand with oil; if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and fully grown; press on its base, hold the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, pinch it off at the bladder's neck; then apply pressure to your finger tip, and cut through where you see it needs cutting.
Instruct the attendant to press the bladder with their hand, and tell them to extend their right hand upwards and their left hand downwards. Have them hold the skin above the genitals in the area where you make cuts. Then they should pinch out the pus-filled sac; this is its shape:
And cut between what is inside the knees and the foundation, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh; and be straight over the stone, and your elbows should touch either the knee or the foundation, and have this size so that it goes wide outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
By chance if the press needs to be made where it is against the foundation, make sure not to exert too much force. And know that there may be parts of stone with angles and edges: if they are inclined towards the exit; and if there's a part submerged, resembling a nut or round in shape, from which the removal is easier.
In such cases where there are angles and edges, make the size larger; and if it doesn't break, then you should use the part of your pliers that is as sharp as a file to squeeze the stone so it doesn't escape; or you can push from below with an instrument slightly curved at its tip; and if you can't engineer it this way, then widen by one inch in both ends, and if it breaks clean off, then squeeze it with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stone, start by removing the larger one at the neck of the bladder. Then remove upwards, then the larger ones next to the urinary organs, and subsequently smaller stones if there are more than a few. And if they're very large, it's necessary to make bigger incisions, for two things happen to the patient: he may die or his urine starts coming out without his legs being able to hold up; but always strive with your tool whether by forceps or tongs, until you remove them piece by piece;
And when you have accomplished your work, fill the wound with frankincense, aloe, and dragon's blood, then compress it, and pour over it one cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and cold water and rose water, to soothe the burning abscess; then place the patient upright at his neck, and do not release the bandage until the third day.
And when you release the bandage, ensure that both oil and water are thoroughly washed off, then treat with a dyafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it is clean.
And if abscesses or corrosions come to the wound and blood clots in the bladder, and they are due to this retaining urine, which is known in such manner that without jumping with the urine: therefore you must apply in the wound, and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and deteriorate it;
Then cleanse the wound with water and salt and oil, and assist him in all manners that you can see, until he is healed; and it must be that with every treatment you give him, you tie both his legs together, and place the remedies on him.
And if the stone is small and it's located where the penis goes in, and stuck there, making urine unable to come out; when you treat this as I've described, cut several times, allowing for the adjustment of tail size due to these treatments. I have already proven this method effectively.
Take one iron branch of this form, and fix it three times into one stick:
Then take one thread and tie it around the shaft of the stick so that it cannot come back towards the bladder; then hammer the iron into the shaft gently until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron in your hand on the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if urine starts to come out, then press your hand against what is stuck inside the stone that is within the shaft. If it breaks soon, and urination flows with the urine, and the patient heals;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that obstructs it, tie one thread around the stone and another above it, then place the shaft against the stone between the two threads, then strike with force, and remove the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and treat until it is healed.
of the stone of women
Sometimes a stone occurs within women, and if it happens once, then it is treated with grief, and is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is virgin; and the second reason is that one cannot find a woman who knows how to expose herself to view, even when she is chaste.
And the third way is perhaps one cannot find a woman who knows well this art of surgery; and the fourth way is that the stone in a woman is deeper than a man's stone, for which it must be cut deeper, and there is great fear involved.
And if you need to do this, it is necessary that you seek out a competent midwife, and place your trust in her guidance. If you cannot find one, take care not to entrust yourself to any man of doubtful virtue; and present before her a wise woman familiar with the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do as I instruct regarding the investigation of the stone;
And carefully inspect if the woman is a virgin: then she should push on her womb or foundation and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, force it down to her womb or under her condition, and advise that she pushes on her womb or where the disease lies, and uses and presses her left hand onto the bladder's form.
And if she finds it, then she should move it from side to side as she enters the bladder until inside, as long as she comes to the root of the thigh; then apply pressure on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of her condition, where the stones are likely located, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her elbow above or under the stone and be careful with your first small movements.
Then apply pressure in the abdomen, if you feel the stone increase the wound until the stone can come out forcefully, and know that many kinds of stones are: meaning small and large, smooth and rough, long and round, and those with depressions. Know their appearances to understand the outcome.
And if it does not respond to you, place sulfur on it and hold it for an hour until the sulfur has burned away; then return to your work, while the stone is still intact, and have tools ready that I instructed you about in the extraction of stones, as they will assist you in your task.
And if it does not respond to you, and it's an artery that has been cut, apply the powder on top of it and bind it with ligatures made from strips of cloth, do not repeat this process, leave the stone in place without removing it, for fear the patient might die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of blood has subsided and your hands are ready, return to your work while the stone is still intact.
From fatty hernia
Watery jelly is nothing else but a collection of moisture or white mucus, which is found in the layer around the kidneys, contained within an egg; and it is called "mucus", and it is not properly inside the egg membrane if one thinks there might be another egg; and this refers to the skin under the kidney where we have mentioned the white mucus; and that does not contain any hole.
And the production of this jelly is due to weakness, which affects the kidneys, spreading out that substance.
And it never comes from striking the kidneys, and that moisture has many colors: or it becomes declining yellow, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and this happens more often.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, because if it is white as we have said, then the pus remains, that is, very long like the shape of an egg and does not open the veins, for there is moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the own tissue, then the pus remains with part of the egg, and by that it is thought to be another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the veins and the white substance, you can feel it well; thus when you see to know the color of the moisture, prove everything inside that square, as its form was described above. Accordingly, whoever comes after the introduction, judge by this what is inside.
Accordingly, whoever comes after the introduction, judge by this what is inside. And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to our ability and the recovery of their body; then have him lie on his back, on something slightly elevated, and put wool underneath them.
then have him lie on his left side, and instruct the attendant to sit on the right side, extending the arm to one of the two ribs close to the heart region;
then take the spatula, and cut the skin of the chest between him and long until below the elbow, and make sure to cut all the way through the skin until white flesh, and then lightly burn it using your ability.
then pierce the fat completely with water about half an inch thick, and remove all the water, then put your fingers in, and keep the fat on top; but don't touch the chest bone, but only the fat; cut all around or piece by piece along his side carefully, for if you don't do it carefully, water will return.
And if the egg jumps to your work, you must reset it in its place when you have completed the task of hatching; then unite the two sides from the knee down to one seam, then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you tie the muscles that are suspended, while wondering about the bleeding; then cut all the way up to the suspension, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the wound is united in two assembled parts, know that these are two branches; then cut the other part in the same way as you did the first equally, then drain the blood, and place wet wool soaked in rose oil on the wound;
And wet another piece of sopping cloth in wine and oil, then place it over the two kidneys, and cover with doubled cloths, and bind it up all along this shape:
Then take two cloths and weave them with shorn wool according to this pattern and have them joined by stitching in the girth of the breeches, and one of the shoulder blades sits at the base up to the back, and the other at the part near the elbow; and another pair of shoulders at the two elbows, and all be joined together in the tightening of the braiding;
And each time the cautery stick is treated as if it were a piece of iron, and you take one small cultelline cautery, and cut the skin at the kidneys, and heat it just like we have said, so that the white fluid inside the water becomes visible;
Take the cautery according to this form, and make an incision at that point with your needle, and burn it with this fine cautery brush:
And handle the fire in all ways that you can, until you exhaust it; and be sure that the heat does not touch the egg; know that this work is more preserved; and beware of blood loss, and keep in mind the sizes of the cuts;
And if anything goes against you, or if pus is present or blood loss occurs or any other situation does, then treat whatever goes against you according to what was previously mentioned.
And if the patient is frightened and cannot wait for this treatment because of its awful nature, then perform a puncture, as I have instructed you, and know that once you are thoroughly convinced by the meanings we have explained that the watery essence is there,
Have the patient sit on an elevated seat; then pierce the abscess at its base throughout the full thickness of the pus, and make the incision as long as the spine; and ensure the cuts are wide enough so that all the pus can drain.
Then place cotton on the wound, bind it, and leave it so that all pus may drain away. Then treat until the wound has healed.
And if the white cloth does not allow pus to come out of the wound's opening, it is necessary that you insert a feather or the instrument used to drain pus from those with syphilis, as described previously. And widen one inch around the wound, and know that pus will return, and gather together after about 8 months or so, and when it has gathered in the same way as before, then this is how the disease progresses for its duration.
From the discharges of the kidneys
Know that in this part of the tree there are many positions for fear, so it seems to me that it is better to leave it as it is;
and I will tell you about how to treat and what the symptoms of an infection might be.
So, I say that many abscesses come from wounds or on the kidneys; and this can happen in different situations.
This is to know by excess of sour and fever, which spreads among individuals,
and the color of pus matches the color of flesh; and there is no pain, it is pus with discomfort;
And by chance there is pus that is green and stony, with a yellowish hue, and it never comes from the inner parts or swelling of veins.
When it's due to an artery, one can determine the location of pus by its characteristic sensation when you press on it with your fingers; And you should not touch it at all.
That which is made of arm vein oil is known by its position in relation to the expression through touch with one's fingers,
and it can indeed be done well on this analogy, and on other figures; and make the loop of the cord around the knee as in the diagram, then place the egg at the top and hold the white thread firmly, and release the suspension from all sides of the egg.
If the egg is already stuck with these new-born creatures, then you should remove the egg, and its shell;
and if it is under the skin or inside the vessels, then you should release all that is within, and hollow out the shell roundly.
And if the birth of the creature is at its backside, then you should hollow out everything and remove the egg as we have said.
And when your work is finished, apply the wound with moist wool in oil and wine, then use other treatments until it heals properly.
From the treatment of pus in the body
This is an abscess enveloped by a swelling resembling two inches, with the softening of the tissues, And the patient experiences severe pain when it moves;
and the treatment for this illness is very thorough and similar to what we have discussed before,
And yet we will tell you how to do it, according to what the old ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then pull back their loin cloth with your hands, stretch out all the veins that are close to the penis, and have them ready, and extend them in a form.
Then make an incision with a sharp knife wide across the veins, until they are exposed.
And then burn from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples;
Then pierce with a needle or where there is thread, and tie it at the first place where the screw has come, and tie it immediately to the other end. Then let the knife cut straight through in the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture;
Then treat the wound as with others when one binds it, so that no vessel bleeds and none grow in place of either testicle;
For it brings no harm, and if all veins come to sight, then bleeding the animal's veins at all veins is necessary. So that if the blood loses its course due to cutting of the veins, they dry and cannot help each other.
from the rupture of the uterus The occurrences of this branch are by means of the division that brings about orifice of the uterus, or the expansion on the belly in the abdominal region, because the intestines descend from this opening to one of the openings;
And this type of injury happens either at the point of impact or in the stretching of the limb, and comes about through these two ways of causing it: through percussion, or by jumping, or by shouting, or lifting a stone's weight, and from similar incidents.
And the signs when it is related to stretching at the point of impact, are that it happens gradually and over a long period, not suddenly. And the abscesses are equal until around the front, because the impact forces the intestines forward.
And the signs are when it is due to impact, causing a sudden onset of pain at the beginning, and there appear various abscesses close to the skin, because of the passage of the intestine and the body behind the impact area.
And at no time do the loops descend with the intestines, and they are retained inside, causing great suffering to the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these iron treatments for fear, one must avoid them.
And the method of the incision is that you command or instruct the patient to guide or pull out the intestines into their hand inside the wound, if it can be inserted. then sew around their neck, between your hands, and lift the buttocks;
Then cut above them, and shave all the skin around their length; Then cut inside the waistbands in inches according to how you need to open the wound, and do so precisely so they might easily exit.
Then peel away the testicle that is under the skin of the scrotum, until all sides of the white testicle are exposed.
Then place your index finger on the one that covers the penis, on the one between the white testicle that is under the skin of the scrotum, and between the second testicle,
And let the one behind be at the egg and between the second yolk sac; and then move with your right hand inside the cavity of the ovum, and place the white yolk sac high on your left hand, and gently lift the egg in all directions towards the waist. And instruct the minister to extend the egg upwards, and release the one behind the connection point.
And check with your fingers if there is any part of the intestine wrapped around or white yolk sac that's hard, and if you don't find anything, push it towards the stomach region.
Then take a needle with one and a half inches of thread made from ten threads, and insert it into the posterior part of the yolk sac, which comes after the skin of the ovaries; after the waist, then cut off the shoulders that appear through the threads, as long as there are three threads. Then join them one on top of the other in a manner of a cross, and fasten the sycamore, which we have said is under the skin's layer, with a strong thread of two parts; Then envelop the shoulder bones with threads and tie them firmly with two parts each, so that no needle that punctures them can enter, preventing any pus from spreading. And place the thread in a line according to the first thread long two spans of that, and after these two threads leave under the sycamore which is under the skin's layer, one span wide.
And then continue the rest according to the roundness that the needle carries; then cut in the part under the skin's layer, until you can reach both the bone and the flesh as we have said previously;
Then apply wet wool in oil, and place it on wounds, and I apply the bandage that we have mentioned. And afterwards, cauterize the white pus sac as we have said, after incising, due to concern for blood leakage.
And this happens many times. Leave the bandage until it drains from him; and if it takes a long time to drain, then heat water and place on what we have said, until it drains.
Then treat the wound with another cure, until he is completely healed.
From fatty hernia
In this section, I never find anyone who dares to perform the iron treatment.
And the old ones said that it is done like a bundle of twigs being gathered together and twisted, in such a way that you tie the vessels after cutting them gently at the joints.
Then follow my advice, and treat the abscess of the one who is working, as long as the vessels are intact; and treat it in the same way that we have said, until they heal.
No break ever occurs in the middle of an illness, as we have said, and when opening them; and no fluid is discharged from the intestines during pregnancy, and if it does discharge, it's little, and repairs itself constantly;
yet if it stays too long at this stage, whether in a wound or gangrene, as long as the intestine discharges;
this happens due to the extension of gangrene which occurs during an illness, as we have said, because it extends, then softens and inflames them and opens;
and the treatment is by cautery, as we have previously stated; and no time is it treated with a hot iron in this manner:
And it is that one should lie the patient prone on their back between your hands, then apply pressure to the affected area spreading wide according to the size of a little over three fingers;
and then extract the fatty tissue that is under the skin where it follows, then take hold of it and place it over the prominent area of the fat.
and press it towards the front of the abdomen, then stitch the two prominent areas of fat on top of the fatty tissue over the head of the muscle, and stitch both of them.
and remove the head of the muscle, do not cover the fatty tissue or spread the egg or any other thing, as I have instructed you in treating the removal of worms from the intestines;
Then treat through wound healing. And when you have sewn the wounds, if the world heals and treats the wound until it is cured.
The signal is constrained and lacks manifestation in the passage, and the cauterizations are wet in this location, and closer to salvation.
from softening of the skin of the heels
Many times the skin of the heels becomes soft in some people, because the muscles inside are being softened and it's visible; when one wants to treat them, they must allow the ailment to heal on their back, then cut out the softened skin from the natural skin. Then join the two edges together for a seam, and if necessary, sew the excess soft skin into three seams or four securely; afterwards stitch between the seams, treat the wound like any other until it heals, and remove the thread.
punishment
That punishments are abolished in our law, and because of this I would not like to speak about it in this book; and they are only necessary for two reasons: one is that the eyes should know how to respond when asked by someone, and know its cure; and the other, because we often need to punish some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep, cattle and others. I then say that punishments are carried out in these two ways: through attraction or by incision.
Of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite can be divided into two ways: one way is that between the two openings they are open just like a woman's figure, or she has hair and sometimes urinates. And the other way is in women, having one opening above the belly button also like a penis and two openings. And the treatment for it and female issues is that you handle all closed structures equally, treating them as any other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of their genitals, there's no treatment needed.
of the pustule
Tentigene is a joint that sticks out from the natural part of something, just as it's too ugly to be seen; and some women also have it as large as a hand, and this needs treatment. It's necessary for you to dye the superfluous part of the tentigene with your hands or on nails, then remove it gently; don't go overboard when you do so, because bleeding should not occur, and after that, treat it with another treatment until it heals; and there is a similar mark that appears near the mouth of marriage, and the pubis, and sometimes jumps out unexpectedly, and has a resemblance to a cow, which is why they were called 'the old disease of cows'. You must remove this mark as well, just like we explained about the tentigene, until it heals completely.
Of cautery from fire command the sick to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Erratic is when the nature of the woman's condition isn't perceived or if it's small; and this is by nature at birth, or through accidental events due to disease that has occurred. It can be from connected flesh, or thick fluid or thin, which is done in front during marriage, or along the sides, or below or wherever; and one should understand how to conceive and give birth, as well as by chance having flowers for reproduction; understanding this comes through observing a midwife. If the disturbances are clear and presentable, they appear near your fingers or on your side.
Regarding hemorrhoids
Bleeding openings are incisions in veins which happen without regular practice, and when these bleedings become thickened they turn into ulcers; this has been explained before under division, along with symptoms, and I will mention here those for healing. I say that ulcers and the thickening occur when they are exposed to heat, so there is no sensation at first, except possibly from iron treatment. Those found near the anus one can feel and thus can be treated. Therefore, you must place the woman in a cool house then position the ulcer with clamps, and use medicine that restrains blood flow like parsley, dragon's blood and incense, and similar items; after this seal her feet for an hour, then put them in cold water; if bleeding starts again, let it be treated through decoction of sumac and peel of pomegranate shells and oak bark and similar things, and afterwards take flour from barley mixed with honey and butter, and make a plaster on her back. And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If not, apply suction cups to her back and nipples without piercing; then take wool and mix it into the juice of plantain or elderberry with old wine, and heat this on her body.  And when the abscess rests, treat the area with ointment until it heals properly; and the one called "albathir" is red, resembles two rough pieces, if it needs to be treated as I explained for the thickening; then continue treating until it heals properly
The treatise discusses treatments related to wounds or abscesses near the anus. The specific mention of "des apostemes de la marris" refers to managing and healing abscesses ("apostemes") located around the anus ("de la marris"). This part likely elaborates on medical practices for dealing with such conditions, possibly including procedures like lancing, medication application, dressing changes, and wound care.
Many ways of developing an abscess occur around the anus, such as gangrene, pearly skin tumors (thorium), herpes, cysts, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, along with various other diseases mentioned in the division. Thus, this treatise will discuss the hot abscess that develops near the anus, which isn't one of the typical abscesses that swell up when touched; if you observe any work being done by a metalworker, watch as the abscess starts to appear, and notice it is full of heat and fever, and if it turns red, you can see it. Therefore, don't rush to pierce immediately but let him suffer until the pain subsides; then have the patient sit on one pillow, and use two smaller pillows underneath for support, placing them at hips, pressing against their back, and gathering their legs towards their feet; keep their arms spread out and place them under their knees tightly bound together; then guide the surgeon's hand towards the right side of their body, and introduce the tool used to clean the anus. It is important that when you see this tool introduced, the surgeon checks how deep the abscess is located, ensuring the tool doesn't go too far into it causing harm or injury; if the instrument is bigger than necessary, cover the depth of the abscess with a cloth so it doesn't hurt her. The surgeon should place the nozzle of the instrument above and cut on the tool when the abscess opens up gently from being pressed by hand. After that, you can handle it like a head or nipple in the center; once all discharge has drained out, place oiled gauze in the wound if it's clean, put the wound dressing at the deepest part of the anus and layer more clean wool soaked in water or cooked with mint leaves underneath; after two days of applying healing ointment as usual until it heals properly. Lift her buttocks and the wound with an enema using a mixture of water and honey, then rinse with water mixed with cooked plantain roots or elder flowers, then resume with ointment application. If the wound heals inside the anus, you should avoid metal treatment but instead treat according to what was said in the division.
Regarding childbirth
The profession is foremost in the dance that she knows the shape of natural birth, and these signs are as follows: when you see a woman approaching labour, and desires to smell the amniotic fluid; then the fetus begins to forcefully emerge. Therefore, you will know that this birth process follows its natural course and comes forth from its head, followed by its body; and when you notice these signs, gently pressing her abdomen is necessary so that the fetus can quickly be born; for when it descends through its head, its body accompanies it, and it is released of its excesses through good hygiene procedures; anything else that comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it appears at times on its feet, or with force through its torso or shoulders, or hands, if it ascends to her abdomen or hips, being eventually turned by chance around its neck, or in other harmful positions; thus, the midwife must be wise and subtle in these matters and guard against error and deception. I will show you all the shapes on how they should aid in this process.
When the fetus descends through its head by natural means, and the woman experiences intense labor, and her strength is weak, she should sit on a stool or have women hold her; then take this from its natural source, where fenugreek has been cooked, and then apply the midwife between her fingers to the small spatula which has this form: And cut the second one, and scrape until the moisture that is inside comes out; and hold the woman's belly as the baby descends, and if it doesn't descend, you must treat the woman with fennel seed enema combined with wormwood oil; then make her drink and snort camphor, keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: now deliver the child.
from the birth of the child on his feet When the baby comes down on its feet, it is necessary to lift it up. And then gradually turn it a little bit at a time, until they are even;
Then take one of the joints and spread it out a little bit at a time.
Can he jump up to the thighs, if the command allows, and let it emit a sigh of consent; If he can jump, may God will it.
And if it doesn't conform as we have said, if he twists a bit and a bit more, until it aligns with the natural figure. For then it is gently.
And if it doesn't happen like we said, take a spoonful of alum and oil from safflower, and gum that has been dissolved, and grind all in one pestle; and apply this balm inside and outside the body. then make her lie in cold water up to her chest;
and when she is wet all over, give her a tablespoon of myrrh, and put it on her, letting it sit for an hour; then have her sit on a stool, then make her sneeze and restrain her mouth and nose, and gently rub her belly, because the child is jumping now. from the position of the child on his knees When the baby comes in this form, if you place its hands little by little;
from the birth of the child that comes out with one hand during It is necessary to engineer in order to bring back the hand: If one cannot bring it back, then make her stand up and walk;
If she can't walk, I make her lie on a bed, and I straighten her legs outwards;
then follow the massage that I have described;
and if she doesn't give birth, make her sit on a chair, then try to guide the hand back; and direct the birth according to natural position, make her sneeze, and command her to push until the child comes out.
From the exit of the child from its neck, and spread out its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back. It is necessary to strike his hand with a stick gently, then turn it little by little, and lead him gently;
And when he is even, place on the natural movement of elevation and oil, as we have said, then command him to move little by little;
And once you've done this, make her sit on a stool, and command her to pray; and make her sneeze. In this same manner for all the second part
In this same manner for all the second part When it comes to doing this in this way for the entire second part, if you have the second part up to your nail, until all the moisture is drained;
And if it descends below its place on its face and neck, if you start from the navel, do not let it be held back, and let the child die;
Then guide the child inside, until you place it as it should be, and command the woman not to give any contractions at all:
Regarding the delivery of twins Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or even four at a time; this is not an uncommon occurrence, it just happens. Two are extraordinary things, and do not live long, if they do appear.
I know this, for they multiply, and are removed by the scab that afflicts them, which is bound to the sweat.
And they also come out naturally like all under them, as we have said.
And if they come out painfully, with the cure as we have said, and if it is a subtle ailment, then do what she does immediately and lightly. And do so in such a way that it benefits the health. Of several children
Of several children None are formed in marriage. Either once or twice or three times or four times or five times or six times or seven times, and they are all formed like an infant according to the measurement of their glory,
and it is necessary that the maid know about everything such as this, for by chance she might come across something similar. do it according to what is proper.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman who has lost her dead child or is carrying it inside, as I explained in the section on division, if it does not come out, and you are forced to operate with your hands; It is necessary that you know whether the woman is in good health, and if she has not experienced any accidents or fear of death;
It is necessary that the woman be supported on her back, and have her hands placed under her chin, and her legs lifted;
And let the minister apply a piece of wax of two inches, or bind it to the bed so that it does not burn during childbirth;
Then rub the mouth of the pregnant woman with oily camphor and mixtures of sweet fennel and linseed, then smear her hands with these oils and these camphors. Then support the pregnant woman lightly, then let her give birth in one hour or as much time as it takes for the pains to be manageable.
and take care that when the child appears, it descends onto its head; If the tumors are planted in his eyes or at his neck or in his mouth or under his palate or near his beard or on the forehead or close to the ribs,
and if it descends from the joints, then it's implanted or gripped and in the middle of the ribs;
It is necessary that you cut the tumor with your right hand and place the curve between the fingers of your left hand, and push it lightly with all your hand, and implant the tumor in none of these places which we have said, until it reaches the hollow thing.
Then find a third person or another surgeon, if necessary, so that the extractions are equal.
And then move them equally on one side and the other, so that they can be used, and make the surgeons' teeth capable of holding them, as shown here:
And if a part remains, if any of its duties is oiled, and grease them in that part, and draw the other part.
And if nothing remains, place this piece of bone or higher up, and do this until it all comes out.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by squeezing, then you must wrap with a single bandage until it exits completely;
then apply the compress at the joint of the foot or on the leg, and similarly you should do this with the other hand, and with both feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is tilted in the birth canal, or if its nose is assembled with its chin, If it is necessary for you to pinch the sharp sputum between your fingers, and make the head and remove the water; Or you will find it at the tool that is called "almidach", from which the form comes with tools or chapters after this one.
and in the same manner make so that their heads grow naturally to a great size; then pull out the bones with tongs,
And if the shoulder joint jumps and it is held by force, then it will be split as long as the moisture is or worse originates from;
And if it cannot escape, cut it piece by piece until you can.
And if it is swollen in the belly or around the sides, you must puncture it as far as the moisture goes.
And if it appears in his feet, it is a light condition, and its extension to the mouth of the womb is also light.
And if it's protruding at the belly or on the breast, it should be extracted with one and a half feet of wrapping around the hand; and when the belly or the breast is affected by moisture as long as that moisture is present.
and if another bone is involved and the head of the shoulder remains displaced, and if he has difficulty getting his hand through the socket, and leads it until it reaches the opening of the socket; then I add a spoonful or two, and stir it;
and if the mouth of the sore is narrowed due to an abscess that has come there, it should not be worked on, otherwise, it's best to apply moist and fatty substances; and the treatment involves plastering, and if possible, use waters that are softening and moisturizing.
And if the fetus is within its mother's body, and you can place it evenly, follow what we've instructed regarding live childbirth;
and if unable to do so whole, split the mother through her parts, and don't leave any remnants of the fetus.
And once you have done this, follow what we've instructed about incisions when dealing with pus-filled abscesses that occur in the groin area;
And if bleeding occurs, then apply hot water to restrict it, and proceed with other treatments.
And I saw a woman who had given birth to one child, then she gave birth to another near that one, and the second also died. After a long time, there was an abscess in her womb, and it grew so much that she opened [it], and started experiencing severe pain.
I was summoned for treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not find the wound.
I applied strong plaster to it, and out came a bone, and after some days another one. I was very surprised because a person's belly has no bone.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I looked for the wound, and I searched with my hands through the flesh until the woman felt better; And I attended to the woman long after that, and at this point there was a slight improvement in her condition;
And I have recorded this chapter merely for when, should a master find an unfamiliar thing, he knows how to offer aid.
to reset the dislocated joint to its place
Next comes the form of the pressure method, which is described in these books; and for each two turns use each of two arms with each of two fingers. Always, let the horns be finer than the restrainer, and made of ebony or boxwood;
And let the mouth be of wood, two spans wide, and the border of the trees one span, and a long half palm; and in between the two beams be two spans of this same wood, which should be firm on both sides, a half palm long or slightly more.
and these two braces are set in the mouth of the mortar so that they can be opened when one turns the two horns.
Another form, similar yet more delicate and lighter, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of the pliers. And you need two shoulders, say two adjustments, just like what you see, one of the length of a hand, and two fingers in width;
And when you see the opening of the artery with all the instrument, make the woman sit on one bed, her knees hanging and her legs spread apart, Then fasten the two adjustments together on the artery, and hold the handle of the instrument between her buttocks; Then work your hand with the entire instrument, just like you would with equal forceps, according to the amount that you see opening the mouth of the artery, until the operation completes what she desires.
This instrument is entirely raised and multiplied according to its resemblance; and when you have prepared them, the work progresses faster, and they are higher for men in terms of their quantity.
If you do not despair over the instrument but prepare it, because its necessity is not excusable.
When the second stage of labor is retained during birth, you must instruct the mother to hold back her urine, and then make her breathe out through the nose, and keep your hands on her mouth and nose; And if she does this by jumping, it's well done.
If not this way, take two pots, and make a lid or cover for each, then put in herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, like alum, rue, anise, chamomile, laurel leaves and mint.
All these herbs, or none of them, should be cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then put a reed or a cover inside each pot, and place one head in the wound.
Let the steam rise within the wound until it begins to evaporate; then make it exhale, as we have said. If you jump to the next one immediately. And if it remains after this treatment and is not cured, one instructs the patient to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or with myrrh, and then apply the paste in its natural state,
And seeks the second; and when she finds it, if she retrieves and gradually extends it slightly, so that no part of the joint is involved in the extraction; But it must be gently moved to the right and left, and then pulled; if this is done, it will come out and become loose.
And if there is tightness in the throat's muscles, we have spoken of the treatment for coughing and herb fumigation;
and if it does not involve anything that we have discussed, then be sure not to force it during treatment.
but it is necessary for the person at the throat of the mare to tie them to the woman's mouth, then apply ointment from Tetrafarmacopeia and enemas.
if it is purged, then strength will return; but still, if she recovers and yet there's an unpleasant smell in the stomach and head, and irritates the patient.
Then indeed, suitable fumigations are necessary for this: none of the old ones have proven effective fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the tool with which one fumigates a woman during labor and delivery is as follows:
And it resembles in appearance to a cane, and one places the narrow part of it in the natural opening, and the heads broadly upon the fire;
And let there be the fumigations above the coals, and the tree until it is spent, and start another one.
To pierce the base
There are infants born who do not have the base pierced, but rather, they possess a subtle secret: So it is necessary for the midwife to pierce this secret according to its place, and do not prick it with an excessively sharp needle, and preserve the wound so that it does not touch;
Then place on wet wool in wine and oil, then apply the salve until the skin heals.
And if you doubt whether it will stay in place, then apply or insert a hazel rod, and leave the patient's hands bound for several days, and remove the rod when the child wishes to move about.
And it is not sudden scarring of wounds or abscesses that comes; if you need to treat the scarring, you should do this: if you must cure it, as we have said regarding the hazel rod.
of the瘘管 from the foundation Fistulas that originate from underneath are called nodes, and those that come from above the foundation or in the space between two parts,
if there is one or more fistulas; and when that node is old, it works, and produces moisture which appears white or subtle bows,
and these fistulas are Persian; and they are known by the fact that there is expulsion or wind when the patient expels, and sometimes in moving one direction.
And if there are fistulas that extend up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and they reach up to the joint of the leg, and up to the root of the testicles.
And thus one knows the fistula is present at the foundation, and not present: and you should strike your index finger or the foundation, and insert a fine needle or an arachnid or iron pin into the fistula when there is no winding.
And if it has winding, then you should insert a fine tentacle, or one of a horse's hair, as long as you feel the tentacle or the hair at your index finger.
And if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge or windiness nor worms, as we have said: Know that it does not puncture at all; if you hasten to treat it.
And when the fistula is long up to the bladder or even where urine is conducted, if it jumps with urine, and cannot be sealed by medicine.
If it penetrates up to the knee joint, then the veins run up to the top; If there is no twisting and if there's an intense pain inside, then it will remain as such until it heals on its own, and it doesn't respond to medicine or ointment treatment.
And with these Persian fistulas, there is no use of strength nor the vain intervention of those who meddle in such affairs.
In cases neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope for healing through iron, as I have proven.
And it is that the patient lies on their back with you holding them; and you lift their legs up to their hips, and incline their buttocks towards their abdomen; Then place an araneus tent or a spider web if there is curvature, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
If a patient feels discomfort near the base, it is necessary for you to press your thumb nail onto it.
You will then feel as though the object has pierced through; and upon discovery, or when you sense between your thumb and palm a line or texture, you'll know that it's below the surface. If there is no movement in this, one cannot determine its location accurately.
Nevertheless, it's still possible to determine the position of some objects well, but this occurs infrequently;
and when we assist, one heats up the delicate cautery according to the width of the canal, as was mentioned earlier; and the tool is kept hot in the canal until it reaches the base; and perform this two or three times, as long as you know that these pricked spots are burned, which resemble a bird's feather;
and then the wet scabs are treated with butter until this spot comes out, then apply a salve to the lump and bind it firmly.
If everything is as you know it should be, that's good. Otherwise, this cannot be cured in any other way;
And if it tries to penetrate and does not reach until the root which is the foundation, and in between your thumb and the tent there's an thick covering of flesh or fat, and you can see the sinus under that yellow covering; If it digs from the beginning of the sinus, and pushes in before the tent, and then apply the cautery after, until it reaches to the tip of the tent;
And release the tent, and it will come out; then remove those thick flesh masses that look like a bird's feather, leaving nothing behind.
And if the sinuses don't continue, and cut between you and the wound, then apply fire or an herbal remedy to it.
For the fire cauterizations combine two things: this is to say, the burning of these heated stakes, and the bleeding from bloodletting and the drying from moisture;
Then the treatment of wet tents by boiling or in ground substances, until the limbs cool down, and the stakes are burned in the fire;
Then treat the wound with binding poultices of hard flesh, and use dried medicines.
But when it is restored, if it is healed and does not return again.
And if a fistula reaches almost up to the bottom of its opening, and is removed from the body, you must push on its top or its base, and inquire about it.
And if you feel the thread, and there are two of them or a loop or a splint, or it's about to pierce, yet only one way out with a channel and hope, by applying any one of three methods:
or you apply the cautery as we have said, or you push it until it reaches the bottom, or if you can pull out the threads and use a probe like before;
and don't push too deep into the wound, so you don't pierce the structure that holds the bottom, and allow the removal to happen naturally without force; then follow the treatment, as we have said;
then follow the treatment, as we have said; by chance if it is clean, or you remove that covering and cleanse it then since it has been cut from under the foundation, either by touch or with another tool directed; then cleanse that wound meat which is in the wound, as much as you can.
then try to heal the wound, and defer the fistula in the part beneath the foundation: if it is lighter matter for the patient.
And no way are fistulas according to this manner: and when you touch the tent in the fistula, and it is where the bottom touches the skin above, take a tent pierced through the head according to this form: And it pierces two threads twisted together and lets the tent stay on all of the thread within the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is in the margin at the bottom within, then remove that twisted thread, like when you hit the base or bottom;
And lead the head with the thread, and join the two shoulders together, and keep one to the other, and leave it for one or two days;
And hold it in place every time, until the stitches reach those marks that are between the two shoulders, and join them together;
Then treat the wound until it is healed and has healed over.
If the fistula does not perforate, make it pierce in all possible ways that you can, provided it is not too deep.
For it is not proper to do by the setting of a splint just so beforehand, and then treat him, as we have said, until he heals.
The shape of the spinal puncture from which they make the瘘管 is quite large and on one side it opens; And on the other hand not, because what should not be done we must not do either, as you see here:
Diseases occur in two ways: or they are within the foundation, like a piece of resin, and if there are small and large ones, and they produce blood in that area. and if there is one or more, and are outside the foundation and at the edge of the bottom; but those that are far out have little moisture,
and also in or a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the flesh.
And for those who have them within the foundation, you must instruct the physician to let them escape through channels until the foundations release it and the threads are seen. If you have it ready, and you grasp it with pliers, or hold it at your nail, then you cut into its roots;
and if the hook can't hold them due to moisture, then take them with one and a half inches of thread, or cloth, or a piece of metal; and remove them with your fingers, then cut them, and dust them with some hot powders that are used in place of a cautery; or you can burn them as it is said or according to the chapter on cauterization, then treat them with other remedies until they heal;
And if the foundations cannot come out, so cauterize the patient with a searing tool and use an abrasive substance to wash away what is at or around the foundation, so that it can come out smoothly;
And if the patients are suffering, and their filaments are strong in relation to the foundation, then the treatment should be light; And you should take them with your finger or forceps, then remove them, and treat them in the way we have said, until it is healthy, and until it fears the incision by iron.
It is necessary for you to sew it in this manner: take one twisted thread and insert it into a needle, then pull the thread over and make the needle pierce on another side, and loop both ends of the thread around the needle. And if it is broad; and hold the thread formed, then knot the thread, and remove the needle, and do so for all others, and leave one in order to cleanse away the excess blood;
Then place one finger of a damp flannel in rose oil or poultice, and place it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
And leave it until they scab over, and when they have fallen off, apply ointment treatment and other treatments until the wound heals.
With drying heat or on a foundation Many times, there is internal bleeding, due to nature's constraints, and when the disease has aged, and medicine no longer helps.
It is necessary that you reset at the tip of a splint or on your nail, which covers it from moisture; then apply heat to it as long as it becomes hard, just as it should.
and if it doesn't become hard, restart the scraping with more force than before, until it heals and is burned. Then the treatment until he becomes healthy.
with trembling Moths are a small false appearance before the body, and they fly around it closely;
and each time when it touches the skin, one feels it like a death-agony trembling, and it spreads everywhere in the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place this quill on the pulsation, until the purplish circle covers completely around the pulsation. Then turn your hand over all the quill until you cover completely around the pulsation, and apply it firmly, and eradicate the pulsation from its roots.
And if you see fit, make it in the form of a quill from an earthworm or iron according to this shape, and let it be finely placed below and sharply above:
Do not pierce it, for you must hold at both ends and press firmly. And if you see fit, apply the cautery to the pulsation, as is described in this chapter on fire cauterization.
of the form of the blister Never make a blister of silver or tin, or melted lead; and never use small and large tools depending on who they are for.
Therefore, when treating children and the weak and painful, they are small.
The form of the blister, whether small or large, is like this:
And there is an evacuation where the belly is fastened or tied together, as you see, and feces are inside piercing it; and has on one side two holes, and on the other one.
And let there be a belly where I place the medications of a beast bladder or parchment, and it should have pierced all around with small holes.
And have between each hole one unit of space, then insert a thread in these holes as two threads, made from spun silk, for ten or evenly around, and stitch the belly together like a goat. And when the medication is inside, tie it with a strong thread in front of the tool, then harden; and this forms like a circle:
And have the medicine not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with oil or yolk of egg ointment, or something like that, then gently bathe it.
And remove the ministers with both of his hands until it is completely visible, then extract the lump, and lift up the patient's legs to show.
And if the medicine seems to be coming out, let it come out as much as possible; and if they sleep for a whole night, this is more effective help.
And if you are treating the disorder of abdominal drainage with this medicine, and it quickly wants to come out, then repeat it until it is effective.
And if they (the body parts) begin to bleed from their base or from an abscess, even if it's a bladder as subtle as that of a child;
and this is the shape of a subtle bladder above which the skin may be restricted:
of wounds
We have spoken about the treatment of wounds in the previous section; now we will discuss hand treatments and medicines, according to their completion.
I state that wounds vary according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and why they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are due to strikes from stone, and cuts of sword and knife, or from a lance or staff or axe, or from similar things;
or according to the parts of the body where they are made, such as a wound in the neck, or on the head, or on the chest, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar limbs.
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and start with wounds of the head that are simple, because my memory comes to his chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes about or something to the head, and the bone isn't broken, take care if it's from stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn open and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt about pus formation: if it's treated promptly for the craniotomy even though there is a little blood from the wound, and the treatment goes against the part removed;
and have the patient drink wine and eat fatty foods.
And if they don't want to be operated on, then reduce their meat intake, and do not drink wine, nor eat meat.
And when you are at the wound, if there is pus coming out, use wet cotton in olive oil or in a stictic wine only.
And if there is no pus coming out, place it on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and not stirred by air, powder, which I will mention a little later;
And if it has been burned, apply some remedies until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like that of a swordsman and such, and the lips cannot be brought together by tents, then they are joined by stitches, as I will say about wounds of the abdomen, with stitches.
If the wound has exposed the bone and tendon, and it only holds up to a bit, if you let it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, Instruct the patient to consume large meats, such as kidneys and cooked wheat like barley, as well as things of similar nature.
And if you find that the skin is rotten or it doesn't smell up to bone, in such cases remove the entire rotting part and drain out pus; then treat.
And if there is blood vessel in the wound or vein, which can't be stopped by medicine alone, you need to remove the blood vessel; and if you find that it's torn open, tie it with a thread. And if this does not benefit, then apply the cautery.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment should be light: and you should apply this powder which binds in such a way that when the heat has acted upon it.
And the way to prepare this powder is as follows: take one part of incense; half a part of dragon's blood; three parts of fresh gall, and grind them finely into powder, Apply it to the wound, press it firmly in place, until it well aerates and joins with all its blood;
And then tie it well, and leave her without untieing until she doesn't swell; because we remove the medicine only when it is healed.
And this operation of cautery should be done only once, not when one lacks the charcoal or the blood from dragon, but when the art has healed the wound.
And if the art has healed the wound, even then, do not apply this powder;
Instead, apply some cooked poultices or oats flour mixed with water and honey until it stops bleeding; Then proceed with other treatments while he/she is well.
And if bone breaks come with the wound, and it's small, then use delicate forceps to retrieve them;
And I will tell you about bone fractures of the head later on.
from the wound in the neck
This wound comes from the neck region, it is simple if there's no distinction between its parts and the head parts, but when it affects beneath the neck or the artery gets cut.
If it's just the neck region, if there are no other methods than to let the treatment take its course and not impose anything restrictive, for it harms the neck and causes it to recede; and do not place anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the neck is cold, and its continuity goes with the brain which is the highest limb.
but use warm medicine instead, such as rose water rinsed with gentle water, and mixed with rose oil, and also clean cumin rinsed in gentle water, And other stones of the body according to this manner, and moist applications.
And if the wound is large, then treat it so that it heals properly.
And if the wounds are deep and filled with blood, then pierce or lower further;
And if the artery is cut and blood starts flowing out, then open it up, and let it bleed, and if needed, remove it and properly cauterize.
And if he cuts the neck or the knees, and the path is kept clear, so that the meat goes, if he cuts the knee above the neck and does not touch the neck but resets it according to its natural form; and then stretch it, and let it heal for some days, then treat with ointments that dry out until it is clean;
And if it causes an impression on the bone, then you must take action; And if there are fragments of bone, remove them thoroughly if you can, And let it be drained and cleaned out.
And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has a瘘管, then the treatment should be as I have said in my chapter on this subject.
From the wound of a spear or a knife.
If it's from a spear or a knife wound, and the wound is deep, examine if there is any suction in the wound: you will then know that the wound is fatal.
And if it isn't deep and the blood is still flowing freely throughout, do not apply any powder or bind it up in the first hour unless the blood stops flowing completely. And arouses at the heart, and occupies the patient; but I apply an attractive balm, and bind it twice a day;
and if you don't have a balm, put old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture,
and make the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more if necessary; If there is no spasm, nor unpleasant heart tremors, nor sudden movements due to pain; And when you see the good conditions, if you know that the wound is saved. Then treat it with remedies and other treatments, while keeping it clean;
And if it cannot heal properly, and there is an incision or wound, then you will know that there is a fistula; treat it as one should.
And if the wound is a result of an incision from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse, or behind, if the treatment for him who is in front;
If it's large, sew it up; and if it's small, use powder, and if it's pressed into the bone, and cut parts out of it, then treat the wound, and remove any foreign debris if they are exposed; And if they are not exposed, let the wound fester, aiding in the extractions;
And for other wounds on other members is judgment made as we have said.
about the rupture of the stomach
The ruptures of the stomach are large, medium-sized, and small;
From a major wound, it jumps once the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, causing an invasion by them;
And healing is more difficult, and there is no time better than a small wound compared to large ones.
because one should not put the intestines in again immediately; instead, they should be inserted little by little. Because when the intestines swell up as soon as they feel cold, if you insert them further in,
And because of this, it's better to perform surgery on the smaller wound, for this reason you should insert the intestines to their original position along with others.
And know that the tearing of the belly follows four ways:
the two common stitches occur in the stitch of the belly,
and the stitches for other wounds on the body and two other types of stitches are common to other injuries;
yet they are more appropriate with the stitch in the belly, and I will describe each one separately.
I say that when the wound is small, and there's no part of the intestine involved, and when it comes to putting things back, this can be done through either of two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when he's cold, warm him this way: Wet a cloth or use one millilitre of water only, or you cook in water that is infused and contains cypress and thorns, and let the intestines cook until they are so full they cannot be squeezed out;
And once this has been done by restraining the wine intake, and made it stop causing swelling.
And when you see the swelling depart, if season with water or broth or whatever cooked vegetables there are, because thus does the intake become limited to little things;
and if it cannot enter, they make a bit more of the incision with the instrument used for extracting thorns;
And the first treatment is to let the wound grow, which we should not cut without great necessity, nor at random;
and these are the tools to split them:
if you cut inside at the bend and not outward, and see this shape:
And when the wound has grown larger, and the intestines have escaped, if he resets it according to its natural form in its proper place, should you have the ability, because this is what matters.
When the wound is broad and it's located on the abdominal area, It is necessary for you to make the patient feel comfortable on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if she is in the abdominal region,
And similarly if there is a rupture due to wind in one of the two parts of the abdomen. if you understand that the part that has shrunk should be higher than the other;
and thus it is appropriate to administer what I say about large and medium wounds.
For small wounds, use what you are equipped with,
Then have in your hands one, a surgeon who cuts through the entire tear with his hand, and bring together the lips; and this is the common way of stitches,
and this is the common way of stitches, And it is that you take one needle or several, according to the amount of width of the wound, then leave at the edge of the wound, that is one inch in size, and I place a needle or where it has one good strong thread; and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two sides of the artery.
and stretch a doubled thread around the needle for two inches, then join the two edges of the wound with an addition,
and then leave one inch of space, and insert another needle. then with the thread just as you made the first needle, and keep doing this according to what you need for the needles, until all the wound is contained;
and that the needles are balanced between fine and thick ones, For the fine needles cut all the flesh, and the too large ones can't enter properly: Therefore, they should be smaller;
and it's not good to have the needles sticking too far out from the flesh and skin,
They should not cut or widen the wound before sewing it up;
and then cover the punctures of the needles so they do not irritate the patient during sleep, and set up tents or cloths over the puncture areas from the needles to keep them clean and prevent infection. and leave them until the wound is healed;
and this way of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, For there was a pricking sensation at two points.
The second stitch is common, And it involves sewing together the two strips of leather and two strips of skin into one needle with half a strong thread; And when you have pierced all four pieces together,
And when you have pierced all four pieces together, if you reinsert the needle at the part where you started, in the way one stitches with threads;
and place a space between each stitch as large as a minor do;
these stitches form the seam,
and I sew up a wound made by one's hand, or belly,
who was without a knife, and had a wound larger than a palm's width, and contained intestines as long as two palms,
and the wound was in the middle of the abdomen. I returned the intestine to its place once it had been out for twenty-one hours,
and the wound healed up until fifteen days, and I treated it, and it was sound.
And they believed that he would die, and this was a wonder;
and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in one region where none could be found, nor any medicines; And change the cloth covering the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it is clean.
Or I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
Take the needle, and thread it starting from the outside part until inside;
Once it has pierced straight through in line, leave the thread attached to where you have inserted the needle,
And make another piercing from inside of the other part up to this one outside;
and the understanding of this seam is that you sew it in the same way as the leatherworker fleshes the skins, and leave once the seam on one side, and take it on another, until the entire seam is completed.
The second way of sewing, as Galen stated properly,
It's thus like what some do, who unite the two parts naturally together, and press one of the ends of the syringe against the other end, in such manner:
stick a needle or a piece of thread near the gallbladder area, and make it pierce only that side. and let the two ends of the needle hang; Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part until inside. for the two shoulders of the socket;
Then pierce both from the outer part until inside, in two other shoulders of the scapula that are opposite each other;
and this is the usual and common way of sewing.
Galen stated this word and no one denies it,
We must stitch the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each;
And one should stab one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew bullet wounds;
and know that when the rupture occurs within the belly, then the stitch is more dangerous than in other cases of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it follows that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, just as the art has made it, If set back in the intestine, and at the cut; then put on the powder that causes swelling,
If set back in the intestine, and at the cut; then put on the powder that causes swelling, and if it has been defecated, then apply no ointment until the wound heals, and sew the thread, and stitch up the skin, and heal the wound; then treat the wound as usual until it heals;
And if you don't have medicines, place it up, as soon as it starts to bleed, old cotton, And shake it twice a day until it is healed.
But you don't need other medicines in various preparations when the wounds are simple;
And if you doubt that the wound might affect the main members, If you need to moisten with light oil heated to body temperature, or in oil that is lightly roasting, and apply it inside the joints, and over the armpits;
and if you feel pain or gangrene in the bowels, and this occurs many times, if you use black wine enemas, and especially if gangrene reaches up to the intestine;
And penetrate within, and know that when it is large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the smaller ones.
The intestine which they call "small" cannot be healed if it is wounded, And this is due to the disposition of the veins that are there, and by the subtlety of the whole body, and its approach to its own nature with nerves.
And if pus escapes from the wound, it is treated in the same way as if it were intestine when it's still fresh;
And if it is old and turned red or black, then you should tie the part that is black, so that no bleeding occurs there. for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligament, and place both ends of it down from the part above the wound until below for to ease extraction when the roots pull out, and the wound heals.
Of the breach of the boil
When the intestines are involved, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in any way,
because I have seen that a man was pierced by or through his abdomen with a lance;
And the wound was located on the right side of the stomach, And it became infected and formed a fistula, causing both malabsorption and flatulence;
I treated it according to what I could do, and kept refining the treatment until it healed, and bound the edges.
And when I saw that it was healing, I wondered if there might be disease in his belly; And there was no harm, but it stayed in better positions, eating and drinking.
And some experimenters say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated in this manner: take large eggs, then join the edges of the wound, And when the mouth of the patient has been opened, place it between the two lips,
then place another wriggle in the same way as before, until the wound is fully treated;
And thus the wound. If the food heats up inside, and does not cause any harm to the patient,
And one can tie the intestine with a fine thread cut from an animal's intestine,
"By this method:" Take hold of this thread from the intestines where it is slightly burned, and then tie firmly to this end of the thread that is one inch in length, a fine linen thread twisted together. then sew the thread into the needle and stitch it through the intestines, and correct the dislocation;
and this way of stitching without any cuts is only according to the path of faith and hope;
And if the wound is big and wide, especially when it's in one of the intestinal chambers, if there is no organ or health there, due to subtlety.
from a fistula or where it might be. Know that any wound or abscess, as it matures, is universally called "fistula". And likewise when she is hairy and returns to her origin.
And a fistula is according to the yellowish hardened and whitish nodulation, where no pain is felt. and it is also covered like the feathers of a bird;
and sometimes in clear white, and other times in thick substance; sometimes it is scarce, and other times sufficient.
And I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed, and there's no flesh, This can only be due to one of the eight causes:
That is to say, it's due to the weakness or obstruction in the blood or wound; or because of its malevolence; because there is hard flesh within, and above the lips, which does not allow hair to grow; there is too much fat; the veins are swollen, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good for treatment; because the corruption is like a pestilence; because the properties in the region are late for digestion, and the health process is slow, escaping naturally; there are veins or bones:
and I have shown all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies for medicines in this division.
It is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas which is done through manual work.
Know that fistulas can occur in all limbs, both internal and external; because there are fistulas that originate from the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the stomach, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs, At the spinal column of the back, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the ulcers that are like this are difficult to heal, and there is nothing else but hard work, and lack of knowledge;
and if there is no ulcer that does not reach up to the one I have said, and you will be able to complete the treatment, And you will learn to recognize it, if you take a spider's web or a metal thread, if the duct is straight, then choose;
and if the duct is bent, seek out a delicate fishing line; because when fishing the fish twists and moves in the bends;
and if the duct is hard to find even with spider webs or metal threads, if you cleanse through one of the anus openings,
because moisture can travel from one anus opening to another, and it gets cleaned;
then cut carefully according to your ability, so you know if there is bone or nerve, and look inside by the front,
and ask the patient to clearly describe the pain they feel when you press their hand, and the location of the pain;
And when you truly know where it is or where she is, and if it is far from the joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the joints that I have told you about, if the treatment follows what I have taught you,
or in any of the joints that I have told you about, if the treatment follows what I have taught you, and remove the pus and decayed flesh that are inside; and continue the treatment until it is healed,
And if the fistula is deeply and correctly placed, it must be sealed from below upwards, as much as you can. Then place wet cloths in medicinal water, and fill them until they reach the tip of the fistula.
Then place wet cloths in medicinal water, and fill them until they reach the tip of the fistula. Until the medicine eats away the excess that has remained at the bottom;
And then apply healing ointments for a long time until it heals.
And if it cannot be treated by this method, then apply heat treatment as we have described.
And if the bone is decayed due to the ulceration, then operate on it. If a vein or nerves are affected or impair main limbs as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed and there is decay and darkness, then operate until all the decay has been removed. Then let the remedies for illnesses grow until they become healthy;
and if it is not healthy, and you must use them as before. Know that you are not yet done until this point:
if you uncover and dig as long as you reach the bottom, And remove all the decay, then reposition its place;
And if it is thus healthy, that's good. If not, know that the decay is too deep, and you cannot heal it; if there is no other reason except for age;
And if there's a small rotten bone, you can extract it with tongs. if you find an instrument suitable for this task, use it for extraction.
and if there are multiple bones, remove each of them completely, do not leave any behind;
and should moisture oppose this and cause fear, If you handle heat, moisture, and flesh, and release the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in one hour, then place something inhibiting putrefaction over the wound, and leave it until the flesh is thoroughly rotted inside the bones,
and then if the bones will have been more easily removed;
And if it's a large bone, like from the leg or thigh, and release only until the pus has been entirely bone, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large portion of corruption, and it reaches up to the bone; if it needs to stay and cover all until the decay occurs, and then treat him as long as he is healed;
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in his leg at one house,. so that you take it as an example and aid yourself in your work.
There was a young man of about thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg due to something that came from within the body,
As long as the contents reached the leg, and was drained of a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it;
but the doctor due to his foolishness opened it so that the abscesses could be opened; and they removed very little material, and it became a fistula, and much of the body fluids were leaking out through hot moisture in their bodies;
and each doctor took care for about two years, and there was no wise one among the medical practitioners,
As long as I was called upon, and saw her leg and the remedies used to cure her, And that which flowed out through the cracks in large amounts; And would turn the wounds red like youth, and had the color of citron.
I built a tent in one of these cracks, and then searched all the cracks,
And I found that one would come against the other from all parts of the leg.
So I hurried, and cut into one of the bones until I discovered a part of the bone, and I found that it was rotten and perforated, and the corruption reached to the very inside of the bone;
I was the one that appeared to me from the rotten bone, and I thought there wasn't any other corruption, except what I had removed;
And I began to heal the wound with medicines for a long time, and could not stitch it;
and then I restarted, discovering the bone as before,
I found the continuous corruption in the bone, and the socket, then I extracted it, and I bent over to stitch the wound.
but I could not do so until I copied within half of the bone, and I laid it out to all its size, Then he will recover with medicine; and his health improved quickly.
and no longer needed to start the work again except for due to the weakness of the patient, who couldn't bear it. and because of the fear of death that I had concerning him. But because of frequent blood loss, he was completely healed,
But because of frequent blood loss, he was completely healed, And there emerged from within the bone a hard flesh, and it was well arranged and had no harm or opposite effect at all in every way, neither outward nor inward.
and remove the head, so that you draw out the rotten flesh from under the surface. and uncover the tissue on the bone where you see sinew, ensuring the sinew does not damage the tissue; and place one piece of charcoal or a board under the bone to cover the rotten flesh; And it must be done as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and do it even another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if you expose all the flesh; then place one coal over.
and then apply to each part of the corruption, and keep the application long as the length of the affected area, as we have said;
And if corruption exists at the connection point, then handle the corrupted connection, and let bone exist on either side;
And if corruption is in the continuation of both joints, if there's no other angle to fix it;
And if the corruption lies at the heel of the hand or the heel of the foot, if that thing is very strong, but nevertheless you must inquire about this corrosion, how it opened. And refine it in all ways that you can, but such that neither your vein nor your nerve oppose it;
And know that the knife and drills are numerous according to the setting of bones and the appearance of bones, and their size and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; And because of this, it is necessary to equip oneself with each kind of work its tool;
and know that the work will show you the tool you will need, according to the knowledge of this art,; and testify to the ways of diseases; if you consider the tool that suits your needs according to what is appropriate.
The fire The shoulder dislocates either due to a blow inside, or due to a fall;
and when you have treated that burn with the application of medicines, and if they do not benefit at all, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to where the burn comes, if indeed the patient escapes through death, or by evil intent, which is greater than the fault of the limb;
if indeed the patient escapes through death, or by evil intent, which is greater than the fault of the limb; and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they have been burnt by fire, and after the blackness, comes the corrosion spreading from limb to limb, and spreads throughout the body; if you delay with copper treatment,
And if it's due to striking with some venomous sea animals, such as the scorpion of the sea and snake-like creatures,
If the corrosion is on the head near the nose, if you cut it, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, if you cut at the joint, so that the corrosion does not spread up to the elbow;
And if it comes to the arm, you cut it; and if it passes the knife, then it is death. and it would be wise only beyond what its effectiveness allows.
and do the same until the corrosion reaches or the plate: if it reaches at the first joint, then cut after the other joint;
and if it comes to the plate, then cut all of the plate. And if it ascends to the leg, then it is at the knee joint;
And if it comes over the knee, there's no other issue than to let the patient die;
And the way to handle or secure the limb is that you tie it above and below, and stretch one surgeon's hand with one of the ropes downhill, and another surgeon's hand with the other rope uphill, And you will open the flesh which is between the two threads at one broad spot, until the bone is revealed;
then place or sew it with silk, and put one strip of linen from each side, so that the silk does not touch the healthy bone; and let the patient undergo another injury and abscess.
And when bleeding occurs during this process, quickly cauterize the wound, In the first step, you apply certain powder restraining substances; then return to your medicine until its completion,
then bind the injured limb with a reliable bandage, and treat it until it heals properly;
and I will tell you what happened in one of those homes:
he experienced a darkness that seemed like the presence of fire,
And this corrosion came first on his second toe, until it consumed all of the toe;
And when the injury encounters the corrosion, it seeks to cover the foot, and becomes healthy;
And for quite some time after that, the corrosion returned to the second finger of the hand, and it came to me,
and I placed things responsive after purging the body, and could not stop the corrosion;
And it will be such that I shall pass my hand over it, and yet I do not wish to use it until I have hope of redistributing the substance; I also wondered if cutting off their hand wouldn't cause death. for the power of the ome was weak; and he completely lost hope, returned to his land, and held onto regaining his hand, and became sane.
And I have written this merely for those who may need to perform it otherwise, if required.
No abscess forms within the fatty layer of the flesh, and remains so long as it causes a large gathering of pus; And then spreads and perforates, and pus jumps at the pus, and remains in the veins, as if they were vessels; And the skin above is also as thin as a single piece of silk, And do not extend until to the bone, or to the nerve, and such diseases are called "safe",
but if it extends so much that it reaches up to the bone on all sides, then it is called "fistula";
and the treatment involves peeling that skin all over completely, and even when it's delicate, like a piece of fabric; And it does not heal due to its corruption.
And if you have found that the skin is burning, and corruption isn't fully present, and if the skin is thick with pus, then cleanse it with a collyrium like this:
look to see if the breasts are large, and the womb that is inside has an unpleasant smell, Therefore use an Egyptian enema made as follows: Take it easily, and oil, and litharge, equally, and cook them together in a single pot over the fire, While the medicine is red, and thickened as honey;
and then take this according to your need, and prepare it in water and honey. and apply it to the stomach, and keep it compressed; let the medicine stay there for two hours, then remove it by pressing out the contents;
Perform this gesture repeatedly as long as the breasts are matured and the milk is extracted.
and do not ever fill it with water from ashes, when this medicine is unavailable, and when you take vine wood ash, pour water over it.
then let the water drain, then administer as an enema, until you know that the breasts are well drained.
And if the patient cannot bear it, neither can Egyptian remedies nor ash water help. if they use a solution of water and honey or has a little lye in it; or you cathartically use honey and mixed wine, where the honey has properties of purifying and washing. and the wine makes one sweat;
And when you have done this, and you have ensured that the breasts are well cleaned, if you cauterize him who causes birth through it,
and then you should plaster it with fine plaster, and do this with rose oil and wine; or you cauterize him with some medicines and applications, about which I have discussed their properties or dealt with remedies;
And if his chest is too small, and the liver can't enter, if it's widened by a bit with one iron, and then puts on an ointment of Egyptian myrrh, or basilico ointment, until it is widened;
And if the wound is too large, so the stitch can only stay as long as one of his thumbs or the knuckle might be able to enter,
And if the wound is above the elbow, so high that even my hand cannot reach it, or below where I am. For when the arm is in perfect position, do not let the flesh stretch; and if you can't cover the breast from below as you see, If it's arranged in such a way that the elbow reaches as far up his back as possible,
and if you cannot cover the breast area all around as you see, if you arrange it like this: have the elbow go slightly down and do not leave anything of the elbow; and take in medicines to strengthen and put within the body,
and place them on a one-yard linen sheet that covers all of the body; then apply it to where the loss is in the chest, making it about twice as wide as the first one, and apply lard oil on another linen cloth according to the amount of loss, And place it on the nipple of the breast to relieve the bowel, but do not remove the large covering completely only after many days once;
And the one who is near the nipple of the breast, often removes it to relieve the bowel, And be aware what flows from the bowel, whether it's poison or a small amount, or enough, or if it is digested or undigested;
and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not,
And when your medicine has spread somewhat like this and you see the nature leap onto the chest thorn, if you know that the breasts are already growing, and bring near the treatment;
and then let it heal in the morning or on the third day, and when you release the wound, if you need to change another dressing, and renew the ointment.
And if your breasts release an undigested substance after many days, know that your breasts are not functioning properly. And if subtle poisons continue for a long time, do not despair about your health,
for health approaches. For there are men who delay the healing of their wounds with sex, and others act in opposition to this;
and if undigested food starts to come out from under the breast after several days, know that your breasts are not functioning properly.
And if his lungs are delayed in breathing, and are far away, then adjust medicines of dry substances and active dry ingredients, if it is like an oily substance, because there is a large part of vitriol, and this is the last remedy;
Take the oil of dyafinit, and mix it with rose oil, and season it with old wine in terms of quantity;
And then he applies it, using this himself; and doing so makes the treated area swell up more. when there's not an absence of scent in the ointment,
or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them up, and mix the powder with honey when it's burnt; and then add half an inch of gum, and spread this mixture over the chest, and give it to someone once a day for a long period. And roots of this celestial thing, which is also like flour sometimes and centaury;
And roots of this celestial thing, which is also like flour sometimes and centaury; And in using simples or compounds: grind them, make it into powder, and place it on the honey that I have said, and use it; and if the treatment is long-lasting and not treated with this remedy,
and if the treatment is long-lasting and not treated with this remedy, then know that corruption spreads throughout, making an impression in the bone, or on hard members, or around ligaments; if he performs the cure of treating fistulas, as we have said previously.
of cutting out the pus from the nail.
Panarice is a kind of pus that appears under the nail of the finger, or on the toe, or by chance may appear in other fingers;
And when it grows old, and if no care is taken, then one comes to an abscess forming. And cut and bleed them as long as they reach the root of the nail, and by chance may cut it all;
And the corrosion goes up to the bone as long as there is stinking pain, and the shoulder blades are two wide apart, and the color of the skin is changed.
And when you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit. It is necessary for you to remove all the excess that has remained of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The fire cautery is very helpful if both the bone and the nail are healthy;
and if the nail is pressed close to the flesh, and starts to pierce it, and becomes inflamed, If you need to put oil near the nail so that not even a dot of it touches, and pour it at the top, and scrape off this small piece gently. and place on the charcoal a medicine that is hot and corrosive to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is within the bone, you remove it, using strength in your action, for as much of the bone that has decayed cannot heal;
And if you see the joint is corrupted, remove it with one-third of the bone as was explained before, Then clean it until it becomes healthy;
And if it is hard and painful, with great pain being felt, it's necessary to make it healthy first; Then cut the nail of the sharp thumb across above,
and be careful that your cut does not go down to the flesh beneath the nail, because the patient would feel too much pain;
And if it happens, put something on it that soothes.
The task is to adjust what is born by chance in some men's hands, particularly those who are thick or robust. And by chance it might have part where there are bones, and not infrequently it has an angle,
And none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some we must adjust. Those that are born from any part of the bone do not move, And he who is born at the joint of the knee, by chance moves;
The size of that which is muscular is light, in such a manner: Cut it from its root with a broad spatula.
That which is born at the root of the joint needs to be treated gently: hold it with your cupped hand.
In one who is born or destined to die soon, it is necessary that you grasp the round flesh until the bone, then grip the bone with a smoothness appropriate for this, and treat it as long as it is sound.
The fusions that occur at joints are by nature, or through the healing of wounds, or due to cauterization with fire, or due to similar circumstances.
If it is necessary that you treat this fusion, so that you should repair it according to its natural forms; Then place between two wet tents or cloths in oil rose, so they do not stick together; Or you place between two pieces of fine plaster, until the legs are joined together, just as it should be.
When joining them, do not let any of his feet touch with the palm, instead perform this soldering in such a way that it is correct.
Of the lowly
Here come swollen veins packed tightly, filled with surplus melancholic substances, that cause afflictions in various parts of the body;
And it happens more often in legs of those who walk on foot and work, than in others.
Therefore, you should give them an emetic for the bile once, and then treat it with basilisk afterwards.
The iron treatment can be done in two ways: one is to apply the paste and bleed them of black blood; And the other way is that you open the vein, and pull it with all your strength.
The method for this is as follows: first raise the hot leg water quite forcefully, until the large vein becomes delicate. Then gently stretch the leg towards the bad side above the calf, up to the area below the knee. Then open the vein as wide as one finger, or two fingers, or three fingers in size.
Then lift and strain out the black blood from your hand, from one end to the other, as long as much of it comes out as the virtues of the sickness can endure;
and then mix it, and instruct that it be seasoned with raw meat in this black dye;
and continue the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, causing harm to the patient.
The method of removing from it is as follows: raise the leg of the affected side, if there are hairs on it, Then place them in a hot bath, and let her leg soak in hot water until it turns red, and the veins swell;
And if you don't have a bath, heat it over the fire, and then apply it to the veins along from the knee down to the ankle, or in the part below at the ankle;
Then peel the skin with an awl, and scrape the vein from each side, until it turns red when you feel it;
And you see it turning red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems as white as a string.
then heat the cautery until it is raised above the skin, and then place it gently on the surface.
then apply it for one more area above three other spots, then burn the skin near the vein until it appears. next heat it with fire, just like you did before, and then place it on another small metal rod, just like you did initially.
Then take another size or sizes if needed, then lift it up, and place it onto the foot's heel.
Then stretch it until you reach the second size; then stretch it from size to size, until all the strength comes out, then take it.
And if you can't pull and lift it, just use a pin through one and half thick thread, And pull it down and stretch it out, then insert a rib right through it, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out. And ensure it doesn't twist, because if it does, you can neither milk nor lift her, and this causes harm to the patient;
And when you have completely treated her, place wet wool in the wound with wine and rose oil; and continue treating until it is clean.
And if the body is twisted and curled together as a whole, and she isn't straight, just like we have said, And it must be that you split her forcefully, but do not twist her; and treat her as we have stated previously.
And it must be that you split her forcefully, but do not twist her; and treat her as we have stated previously. The shape of the iron used to turn the screw is curved, and does not cut like when it turns a wheel; so as to not pierce the vein.
and is thickly curved, because if it were thin, it would puncture the vein, but being thick as we have said, and here is the shape:
From the civil vein
This vein is found in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in the ground that has no moisture.
And by chance it may arise somewhere other than in legs, and this happens due to decay that comes from under the skin,
just as it may come within the body like snakes and worms, bind between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein appear such that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then the veins change, and the vein begins to emerge outward, like the root of a plant.
When the head of the shoulder opens, it is necessary that you wrap around it an object made of lead as long as three and a half to four inches, and secure it.
and hang the lead down from the leg, and every time there is a bit remaining, if you cover it inside the lead, then secure it; and if it is too long, if you cut off a part of it, then cover the rest, and do not leave any part at its root until it has completely come out; but if you cut it off, it will enter the flesh and cause pus and decay where it was, resulting in a bad illness;
because with her illness it's necessary to treat it gradually and step by step until she feels well, and not leave any remnants or consequences;
and in no instance when this vein is treated for five long palms, or for ten; and one hour came to me, under which she lay for ten long palms, and when you take her pulse, if you find a rate of one or more beats per minute, or lack thereof, then puncture until you reach the bottom;
so that all comes out; and evacuate the contents within, and administer remedies for pus every day until it heals, then treat similarly to abscesses.
And never at this vein with hands wet, and likewise when it opens at the ankle or foot joint, And there are many cases of dislocation, and when they occur suddenly; therefore treat them as we have instructed before.
Worms that emerge between skin and muscle
This disease is called in our land "cattle disease", because it often affects cattle,
And there is a small worm that emerges between skin and muscle, and travels throughout the body going up and down, And one feels it well in each limb upon its ascent, until it reaches the skin where it was going, and jumps forth;
And it is bound up with corruption of certain fluids, such as worms and snakes and roundworms or in the stomach;
And there is doubt about its nature, for when it travels through the body, and rises to the head, and comes to the eye, By chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being treated and drained, one can only do so until it's almost over:
Therefore, it is necessary that you tie the wound above and below with a strong ligature tightly,
Then cut upwards and drain it, and if it goes deep into the flesh, you won't find it, If you heat the cautery,
and the greater injuries that it causes, if they flow in the eye, as we have said;
and when you see it coming near to or close to the eye, if you cover him with your hand in front of it, then move upwards, and push it firmly;
and it is necessary to use the patient for the purification of bodily humors by medicines that dissolve, in order to treat illnesses caused by them,
And if it comes to cooking meat causing putrefaction.
Of the pain that comes from wind disturbances This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that affects some parts of the body, And it travels from limb to limb; and I have seen what I am telling you.
I was summoned to tend a woman in labor, and she showed me her arms, revealing a small swelling in the vein beneath them;
And soon after, I noticed it rise as if a worm was moving up to her shoulder, Quicker than anything else, like quicksilver when it is cut from one place to another;
The pain left that part and settled in the shoulder,
And then after a short while corrects throughout the body, until it reaches the other arm;
Then I realized that she was correcting internally within the body, as I observed.
I marveled greatly at how she moved thus member by member, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner. Still, there have been many times when others have wanted to move pain from one part of the body to another, but I do not wish to use this method if it is as I see it applied on a woman;
and I thought that was why women have smooth skin and exposed veins, and this explains the constriction of wind (a medical term possibly referring to风气 or a particular condition) in them;
yet they don't appear this way according to this reason for those who are healthy and have wet skin and covered veins.
And when you see this disease being cured, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens up as we said, if it extends upwards and downwards rapidly, and then apply it until the constraining windiness that comes out of the body occurs; and apply cautery to this region; and if you don't see it in your eyes,
if the treatment for those who expel wind includes things like stinking pills, and pills made from rattlesnake venom, or similar items.
Of arrows
Arrows vary, according to their appearances and according to the locations on the body where they pierce.
The variety of their size includes those with large points, and small ones, and feathered ones, and soldered ones; and there are those with two edges, and those with tongues, and those where they have parts; And when they give birth without any member, if it does so according to two ways: or among the main members, that one might have,
such as brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. And when she gives birth then in no part of these members, and the signs of death, that I will tell you later, become evident: it is necessary for you to be prepared for the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in various situations; And when you do not notice this symptom, and the arrow is not yet completely out, then pull it, and treat the wound.
And when the sign of the brain appears, as the arrow enters and pierces the bone, and sends a spasm upwards to the head, This is when blindness and numbness affect the tongue and body, and a red flush appears on their faces, along with inflammation and a red tongue, and seizures and confusion of mind, as well as vomiting of bile; And it might affect the nose or ears too; and sometimes one loses speech and voice. And from the wound, there is moist white matter resembling hair, and also ash-like burnt flesh.
And if you notice this sign, hold the treatment steady, and pull out the arrow if it hasn't been lodged.
The sign of the arrow when it hits or pierces is that it's near the left breast, and also as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; And by chance the arrow also moves like hair, and there is black blood, and coldness comes with cold sweat, and fainting: Therefore, know that many die.
And the sign of an arrow that never goes into the flesh is when there's no foam spurting from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient has a changed color, and they sigh loudly with a hot forehead.
And if the arrow has exited through the buttock's cover, it is beneath the small ribs; and produces great pain and sighing; and moves all limbs from the shoulders.
And if it's an arrow or stomach, by chance if there is no matter from the meat undigested in the wound.
And if it's an arrow or stomach, and in the case of a jump there is no dung passing through the intestines, then there is no hope in treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if it's an arrow or stomach in the bladder, and urine comes out by jumping and leaves, and the patient feels intense pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other limbs, such as the arms and chest and neck and shoulder blades and the shoulder joint and the spine of the back and the ribs and the kidneys and the legs, and similar body parts, are safe according to various positions. When the arrow is in one's nerve or artery, and it isn't venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because when you do that other thing.
It happened at one point where an arrow hit someone in the shoulder blade at the base of the neck: I tried it and moved it from that side through the fat behind the ear; there was no significant sensation.
And I tested an arrow that fell in the fat near the eye below the paper, And the arrow had been withdrawn, and it could no longer reach even to the tip toward the shaft. And the arrow was large as an arrow from Turkey, weighing about one pound without ears; the wound healed properly, and no adverse events occurred to him.
And shot an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and the arrow was the Arab type with ears:
I aimed for the necks, and guided it as I shot it, and the Christian was unharmed.
And take out an arrow at two inches deep, where it was stuck in the back or belly, and thought he would die;
and then since it had passed thirty days, if it did not change its condition; I cut through the arrow, I tried to pull it out, and there was no bad incident.
And if you encounter an arrow that fell on or hit someone's back, resulting in a wound that is sealed;
And allows the arrow to remain within, not returning to its natural position, And finds no harm in any of its natural works.
And saw one other man who had an arrow wound on his face, and he was joined together the injury;
and it felt like this causing a great pain to remain; and many similar things occurred.
And try to extract an arrow from the first half of the body of the king's son, as it was stuck in his chest halfway. and had slightly moved towards the right side; and the arrow was completely inserted.
I was called for the treatment after it had been three days since it occurred. I found the wound to be very tight.
I tried all sorts of delicate methods and did not feel anything; And he felt a burn and pain around his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow.
I placed on him a plaster that is absorbent and restorative, because his limbs were swollen; and I saw the arrow in his limb.
and I saw the arrow in his limb. I applied plaster to the wounds on the days, and resolved the injuries immediately, then let the patients recover for a long time.
As long as he felt the arrow within his nose; and I told him this. I applied corrosive aqua regia to the wound by my own hand until it was opened,
and I tested it, and felt the tip of the arrow which was pointing upwards. Then adjust during the opening of the wound through this medicine, until I visibly saw the head of the arrow;
and made sure to penetrate deeply inside for about four months,
then I would loosen the wound so that my fingers could reach it from both sides, and couldn't escape;
therefore I didn't stop refining and devising ways to use tools, until I had taken it out on the second day with well-made tweezers, According to how its form will come to an end in the conclusion of this chapter, while I am treating it, and I will heal the wound.
And the judges determine that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will heal it then, and seal the wound, and completely recover the patient.
You have been told about the quality of extracting some arrows, if you place your treatment on what I do not say, because the book cannot take everything into consideration;
but trust your wise master brother with some small matter, and regarding what is present and lacking, trust in nine works, and the ninth tool, for their role in removing foreign bodies that occur in this craft.
I say that arrows penetrate the limbs where they are embedded only according to two methods: by their head where they enter, or from another side;
and the one that leaps in through the wound or where it enters, this is an arrow entering into their flesh, and it now pierces once again.
And if it doesn't pierce now, let her grow until the meat is ripe inside, and wait for the discharge;
And also if it's stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, let her stay like that for a few days, and remove her each day;
And then it jumps, and if it does not jump, if it pierces through all the way to the very end of a slender piece for piercing, as long as there is space inside for the needle, and then guide.
And if the arrow has been restored inside the body so well that it can't be seen, And if you feel it, guide it to any suitable tool;
and if you cannot do so by the constriction of the wound, and due to the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then make incisions as long as the wound becomes larger; remove the arrow if you can, and if it has hooks on the arrow that hold it in place,
remove the arrow if you can, and if it has hooks on the arrow that hold it in place, If you want to remove a bone that is stuck at two places, use force until you can pull it out. and then break or bend the arrow's ears as long as you can draw it out;
and then break or bend the arrow's ears as long as you can draw it out; Do this carefully so that you do not break the arrow but draw it out more firmly.
And if you can't remove it in one go, let the shaft be buried up to its feathers until it's broken, then pull it out, for the extraction is easier. And if bleeding is against your wish during this process, apply what we have instructed about treatment in our chapter.
and beware of cutting near nerves and veins, and do it carefully so as to draw out the arrow without risk.
either quickly or gently, firmly or clumsily; and guide the patient according to the shape they were in when the arrow struck them. because it is the greatest help that I be, and if you cannot do so, place him according to what the mark shows you.
The arrow that comes from another side, or if it exposes any part of the wound, or if there is swelling in the area where you can see or feel it obviously:
Then cut upwards, as long as the tongs can take hold, and then press: if it jumps now.
And if she is held in the bone, twist your hand around it as long as it enters into the bone and widens the bone, then pull it.
And if she cannot come out, leave her still, and then begin the extraction again until she comes out;
And if the shaft of the arrow is there, one should push it all the way through.
And if it is in the anus, and you see it needs pressing out, then press it with an instrument having a sharp tip,. so that the tip of the arrow enters the channel of the tool; and then force it out.
And if the arrow is bent, I use another instrument with a point entering inside, to facilitate the extraction.
And if an arrow has hit you, it is necessary that you cover all the flesh around or at its entry point, if you can, then clean the wound as it should be done.
And if the arrow hits or pierces it in the chest or stomach or bladder or ribs, and is close to vital organs, then if you can cover it, do so;
and be careful not to cover the vein and the nerve, then extract it, and then stitch up the wound; if that is what requires doing. And the treatment until she/he has recovered.
The shape of the tongs used for arrows resembles an bird's beak, and here is the form:
And they come in sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
from the veins of common bodies From the veins from which we cleanse are thirty-one, from which there are sixteen heads.
This refers to: The two small things behind the ears, which are called the "two herbs"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples visible; and the two veins which are in the grooves of the two eyes, and they are called "aspirers"; and the vein that is inside the forehead; and the vein that is at the root of the nose. And the two guide poles which are at the neck; And the two veins that are in the cheeks above the mouth, and these veins are called 'augueherich'. And the two veins that are on the tongue.
The veins of which we commonly speak are five in each arm:
One is the cervical joint, and it's at the left rib area, and they call this 'the vein of the head'; And the median one is called 'fast', and it consists of the cervical joint and the basilic vein, They call this 'the artery of the heart'; and as for the basilic vein, if it is at the right rib area, and they call this condition "the vein of the belly", and it's located on the flank, and it is that which can be healed, which opens clearly on the pouch.
And the artery is the vein located between the index finger and the ring finger, and it's two inches long;
and in the leg and where the patella is, there are three veins: one is under the bend of the thigh on the left side of the body, And this second sinew is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein that is called "the nesse", which is in the ankle of the other side;
And in the other leg are three veins besides those.
The health of the veins that are behind the ears helps with hangovers and migraines; And the qualities of the surgeon, as I tell you, is that you will laugh at the pain of the patient.
And the qualities of the surgeon, as I tell you, is that you will laugh at the pain of the patient. And rub the arm or veins with an abrasive cloth; then pinch the patient's throat to their neck. Until the two veins become visible behind the ears in the two arms hanging down from the head: Then place your hand there, and where you feel the pulse under your hand, let it beat rhythmically;
Then take the lancet and place the needle just below the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all the way above the vein. And cut and let the skin and the vein well two inches deep through, and make blood come out as long as you see;
then hold and tie it, until the wound heals;
and I have already spoken about the incision and the fire cautery in the first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it involves ancient lead poisoning, And similarly, and with ointment accustomed, and at the body of feverish tears by the eyes;
And the quality of the physician is such as I say: And when the patient strains their throat, until the two veins are clearly visible; and feels the pulse on both sides, and then listens for an echo.
Then lift the knife over the vein upwards towards your thumb tip, and hold the scalpel steady. and lift the vein upwards, and make an incision, just as you did in other veins, and pour out the blood according to your need;
then release the patient's body, and place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put a cotton pad there.
and then form the wound and leave it until it heals; and we have spoken about this and its treatment, as well as its extraction, or beginning of the book.
The treatment of the vein on the forehead is as valuable as that of the frontal sinus for ancient diseases of the face, and migraines, and fever;
And its quality is such that the patient tightens their neck by twisting, until the vein appears. then take the tool called a 'digger', whose form is as follows:
And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or some other tool, allowing blood to flow out according to the amount you see; Then release the patient's neck, and bind the vein as long as it is healthy and without any cut or wound. And once an incision has been made with a broad flame,
Always, it is not right that the flames be too fierce and directed from side to side; instead one should use gentle heat, for the bone is close by. By chance, if the flame were sharp, it might break the bones when they are brittle.
The treatment of the two veins that are in two eyes helps with the tears, and at the nose, and at the cheeks, and under the eye in the socket, and for diseases of the face;
And the quality of their treatment is such that patients tighten their neck by twisting around some string, as before;
Then heal it, and make the healing pass through, somewhat long like a flame's width somewhat broad, because there is no flesh.
And if the flames are subtle and accidentally break, then make it correspond to the blood flow up until you need to do so, and then bind it with cotton, and bind it well.
The healing of the vein near the nose is valuable for an ailment like an ointment application and after the face has been cleansed, and for diseases affecting the face, such as migraines and redness that come to the face, and similarly when it is old;
And the quality of health is such that the patient narrows their throat, then restricts their nose with your left hand, and take a long subtle flame, and stick it inside the mouth in the space that is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well yet, and the blood will now start to flow;
and do not go too far in this position, and apply blood gently according to your need, then leave it for a night, as it is quickly restored;
The health of the two kidneys aids in tightening the liver, and in the beginning of melding disease, and for many illnesses, and in putrefaction, and corrosion, and in herpes, and tumours;
And the quality of this health is that the patient's throat is tightened from one side to the other, as we have said; And let the master be on the head of the patient, and the disease sit at one point,
Then cleanse the vein as long as a bit more widely, then drain the blood gently, or as much as is necessary.
Then make another incision in the other vein, then release the tie, and gently restrain the veins somewhat. and let them not strangle the patient; and leave it until morning, so that the wound heals.
Cleaning of the lungs The healing of veins above the lips aids in collection within the mouth, and decay of gums, and tears in lips, and nosebleeds and congestion.
And the quality of healing consists in having the patient stand before you, and restraining their neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left; and you can recognize them because they are black, and because inside them there are small black veins: Therefore handle both of them, and if you do not know them, and are in doubt about them,
Therefore handle both of them, and if you do not know them, and are in doubt about them, if you handle the largest of each side, and do exactly the same for the two veins that are above and below it, because it is the same method.
From the treatment concerning the tongue The health of veins that are located in the neck receive help after the treatment of the head vein, and this is at the constriction of the throat, and among eye diseases, and among mouth illnesses;
And the quality of a surgeon is that when diseases are squeezed between your hands in front of the sun, and lifted the tongue, and you look at each side there is a black vein:
Then it's healthy for both, but do not squeeze too much, because there are the arteries nearby.
The veins in the arm which we commonly treat are treated according to two methods:
at every point of .i., ignite a large iron needle, or use a slender olive branch like a sharp knife, and call it "anisel"; and are wide yet fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the iron needle is much celebrated, and it is wide as you see:
And it's needed to open hair-filled veins filled with obvious blood, and those containing thick and turbid blood; and this is the shape of olive oil flame:
and it is more slender and pointed, and it aids in thin veins or has thin blood of a citron color.
The basilica's healing quality, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat, and neck, and chest, and stomach;
And it's proper for the healer to heal gently, and to be aware of the artery that is nearby. And if he presses on the artery, and blood starts flowing out, should it happen, you need to stop the bleeding, as I have said; and must not be grasped by the flame, but cut with them like a knive.
And if it is clear that the basilic vein does not open, then you should try to extract it and use another one; Or if you want no part of this, or you decide to replace the vein with your arm: it clearly opens. And the cure with fire comes before, as we have said.
And if you understand the location of the pulse, it is thus that you should stretch the arm, touching the site until you know the beat. then mark the place for cutting, and then bind the arm, and apply fire to that area before it.
and be careful not to cut the artery when you see the place swelling, for that is where the artery is: watch out there then.
And if you see it protruding up as much as the urine of a child, and the sinew is red and subtle, know that this is a sinew from an artery: Hurry then, and place your finger for a long time, then stabilize your finger so that the wound is sealed, as this has happened many times;
Tie up the arm, and leave it like that, do not move the patient; and be afraid, do not move until they are healed.
And if the wound has not sealed and you need to do something, and the medicine is not at hand, then cut the artery if it opens, because that's how blood flows out; and seal the wound.
And take a piece of walnut shell, and cut it open, and take one half and bind well up to the other edge;
leave it uncoated, that's good; if not, then treat it, as we have said, with powders that stop blood;
and the coatings should not be too tight for the small area of the wound and the strength of the connection of the arm.
The treatment for a vein injury in the middle is to use the means to stop blood flow from both above and below, and on either side. Because it is made of the basilica and cephalic parts, as we have said;
And it is necessary for the surgeon to be aware of the location of the nerve that is nearby, and if he does not go too far in, and he finds the nerve, And it swells up and damages health, and by chance cannot heal;
And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any of the bodies due to its subtlety, then you should heal it from the scalpel beforehand; and feel for the nerve with your finger.
And if there is a vein between the two fingers, cut it as long as necessary.
The relief of the forehead helps, when it evacuates blood from the head, and assists with the eyes;
And it is necessary to warm with the olive oil flame or the myrtle flame, for this is the safest of all veins, because there is neither a nerve nor an artery near it.
All right then, it's necessary to try the lightest weight, and don't be discouraged if it doesn't work the first time, simply try again. And by chance swells up some men's ears, cannot it be the first time, but it causes no pain. The quality of health depends on your thought.
The first thing you should know about a surgeon is that surgery is managed solely to maintain health,
and to avoid future diseases; And let the healing take place at one of the three veins that are there: this means, the cephalic, the facial, and the basilical; And it should be treated at the beginning of prayers while kneeling, and in autumn and after meals during winter, when the sign of fullness is seen;
And it should be treated on the first or third day, after two days or three days.
The treatment for diseases does not have a fixed time, but it is given whenever the need arises during the day or at night.
And it is not advisable to nurse children until they are twelve years old, nor a pregnant woman only for three-quarters of her month until the seventh month. Neither should anyone over sixty years old be nursed.
And when one wishes to nurse himself, in any way that might be the case, it is necessary for him to cleanse his intestines with a gentle cathartic, if he has retained some dung, so that the veins drain the superfluous fluids out of the main parts causing harm;
No one heals well who is too full of meats, or who is drunk, as long as they have strength, or are dropsical;
And when someone is better after colic pain, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequent urination, and excessive bed rest during pregnancy, and work, staying awake and walking, or that which quickly loses its strength, or through something from the arm or injury to the body;
Then refine the body fluids, if it is too full of meats and drinks and medicine, but you have the ability to do so;
Then try a bath, if there's no objection, to refine the blood,
And cure of the vein from the lower part up to one-third from inside, as we have said;
And keep that day for work, and pain, and excess, and similar things;
And tie yourself tightly and warmly, and ensure that the bandages are higher than where you're treating, and rub your arm two or three times.
Then adjust the bandage moderately above, because if it is too tight or not enough, then you cannot correct the wound;
And then rub the area with hands until the veins swell, and when you can feel them;
Then moisten the wick of the lamp with a little old oil, then place your left thumb on that vein under the shoulder a bit where you want to puncture; so that the vein does not rupture and bleed when pierced. For some veins leak like strings when pricked, while others are full of wind and thus do not leak. If indeed when one places upon the flame, it retires to the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is of those;
And if it opens the vein, the wound is too narrow for this reason, so one must be skilled in these matters for the surgeon.
And if the vein opens for the first time, it's good; if not, try again slightly under or at once near that spot, where the limb is swollen.
And if the limb is swollen and there's anxiety in the patient, let it rest for one or two days, don't bind the arm: By chance, there may come pus-soaked discharges; do not enter or bathe, then restart the cleansing if it pleases her;
and if the wick is small, or the string is too fine and you doubt whether it passes through as much blood as you see, so pierce that very wick straight across to all the flame;
and the ointment a little quickly, so that the limbs are swollen; for this happens often when the wound is small.
If you see the limb swells up, do not start cleansing again, instead put a little of animal oil on it, for it helps relieve the body of blood and is effective at this point where the oil lies.
And thus apply the oil in each healthy part that you heal the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
And similarly apply garlic and mustard seeds, when you place them on the body; if the oil is too thick it will leak out.
And if there comes an abscess that is large, which happens often, even when it has not been healed yet only once or twice, especially when the opening of the vein is small, If you rush in, soak an sponge with water and a little hot wine and salt, and keep it on the body for an hour;
And it is necessary that you do this after the expulsion of blood from the vein, and if it stays in place after several days without any blackness or verdure, then it does not harm the patient. And if you see that, place on it some thing of aloes or of myrrh made into a juice of rue, gentian, or something similar.
And many times an abscess and appearance to the healing of the basilica occurred: then place your hand there, and if you find that the area is soft upon pressing with your hand, then this indicates a bad condition. Therefore, do not apply anything of what we have said to the affected area because you might inadvertently touch an artery; but instead, apply two layers of dry plaster to harden the area, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
And lead each one to blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
And if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it continue to flow until it thins out; and if it's too thin, let it cool down.
And it is for the one who is full and stricken, needing blood extraction; you should make him have a larger wound, and let the flames be wide.
And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and make him well, often apply it, and when treating him, cut across, not straight.
In this method of healing, it saves from the running out of blood and constriction of nerves, and is more effective than a long cut.
And for the one whose body requires healing, it is necessary to give them a moist paste made from juice of quince apples; if they are hot, let blood flow four or five times.
And if they have a cold constitution, eat before healing a moist paste in a syrup flavored with herbs, or an aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and caraway seeds, with a well-smelling syrup.
And if they have trouble healing after blood has been discharged during treatment, it's good for them to inhale broth of lamb and a subtle-smelling syrup,
And apply the other things that we have discussed in the chapter or section on collapse, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wishes to strengthen his arm, and improve it again, should it be necessary, when he is weakened by excessive improvement, he should improve slowly and gradually, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
And if one wishes to strengthen their arm after the first improvement, and they have robust health, then they should improve for seven hours after the first improvement, or even after the ninth hour.
And if one wishes to strengthen themselves on another side, then they should improve the second day or the third.
For there is much blood within the body that has become heated, and it causes fever; so one must drain a large quantity, and widen the constriction until it flows freely. Then you ensure all conditions for health, and place your hand on the healthy lungs so that death does not come from suffocation. This happens many times when hygiene is neglected;
And it should not happen when you see the arm coming out and blood escaping for a second time, and if the constriction is closed, then you should press firmly; If it's twisted, stretch out your arm quickly, for that would be ill.
but let it until the second time it heals; or you light at the tip of the flame, until the frost which was frozen off comes out. and put on one and a half a pinch of salt that has been boiled in water, and press lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be alone and don't compress it, until the abscess subsides.
And if there is a need to bleed again, if it can be done in that place itself, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein is located on the arm where it overlaps with the head because it's made up of that part.
And the method of bleeding is such that the patient holds their hand in warm water, until the veins become red;
Then moderately bind it, so that the vein appears clearly, then bleed now through it, neither too wide nor too long;
And make sure they are wide, and have them very close to the joint of the hand, if unable to move them, then place the hand in warm water and leave the blood in the water until you have enough.
And if it is winter, do not warm up your hand with hot water either, because you would rather be in winter than winter.
And this vein's healing is safer compared to all others, there being neither artery nor nerve in it.
The recovery of the right hand's salvation is valued against all diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
Strengthen your hand, and dip it in hot water, as long as the vein is closed, if you can see it; and if it's cut across, and if you press right through with all your force, so that nothing hurts;
and don't go too far in the middle, because the nerve is completely bare of flesh,
and then put your hand in hot water, if the flesh is frozen in the wound and can't escape.
And when you have treated the blood as much as your skill allows, place over the vein there and seal it to rapidly fuse, and thus do for each case.
The treatment of his left hand corresponds to the disease in the mouse, and do everything as I have instructed you for the right side.
The treatment of the soul corresponds to all diseases that exist within the body, such as diseases of the heart, and congestion of fluids, and diseases of veins, and old leg diseases, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of its healing is such that the patient should soak in hot water and rub it on the wound until it heals, And above the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot much blood flows.
Heal it then or more widely on the leg, or at the ankle that suits.
And if you heal it on the leg, be careful of the nerves which are nearby, and also make your incisions as when sewing; may the flames extinguish themselves.
And if it cannot come out without causing injury, immerse the limb in water, and let the vein drain well.
And if it is a new injury, then for the first time, if you repeat it on the second one slightly above, because the earlobes are salty; Never doubt a nerve, as we have said, and similarly perform on the other side with equal measure.
The leg of the sciatic nerve is at the knee of power, and its health matches with pain in the hip, when it's due to hot blood.
And its quality of health is that the limbs move or swim, and it twists above the ankle by three inches in twisting.
For otherwise, the vein does not open; and if it does open, you heal it in every way that you can, and when crossing through; And move her as you hold her, for the arm is free, and she responds much to human hands.
And move her as you hold her, for the arm is free, and she responds much to human hands. And if you do not find her, heal none of the veins that open or towards the foot, and be cautious of the nerves;
Make sure to correct any blood flow that you see, and then untie the knot, put on cotton, and tighten it; she is now healed.
Extracting with suction devices
Ventouses are made of horns, or spiders, or glass; and suction treatment can be performed in two ways: by piercing to draw blood, or without piercing.
And this suction treatment that involves piercing follows two methods: it can be done with any heat, or without heat;
And two more are in the second ribs beneath the neck; and the beard under the chin. And the axilla is between the two shoulders; and the axilla above the elbows. And the pits are under the two arms; and the pits of the legs. And the suction cups of the two ankles; and suction treatment does not involve bloodshed, because it deals with small veins that are scattered in the flesh.
And for this reason one does not weaken oneself at all, as is done in treating veins; And it should not be administered, nor with any fire or without it, in any illness that comes from overfullness, until all the body is emptied.
And if by necessity of diseases suction must be applied, or out of habit, then we administer it each hour at the beginning of her period, or at the end, and in between, and at every time;
For there are some who, when they have need to suction, if they hold their head;
and for those who find congestion and redness in their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and are blind with them;
and for those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, have swollen tongues, and spit out blood; and there are some who think, see through the nose bleeding and vomiting, and such like things.
And when we see these signs, indeed even during the month, we instruct to suction after three hours of the day.
The treatment of the nose helps in alleviating the fever of the head… that comes from the eyes, and it should not be done after the elimination of all throughout the body;
And this suction is part of the treatment for the headache,
And it is not suitable for those with cold constitution to use them, or who have diarrhea, because this causes much harm to them;
And it is not suitable for the old either when using them, nor those with cold diseases.
And he who frequently uses it becomes forgetful, for this reason it is necessary to place the suction cup somewhat further down due to the possibility of forgetfulness.
Ligature around the neck is in the place of the health of the head and the basilic vein, for this reason it is effective at constriction below the elbow. And to cut through the channel of the pericardium, and immediately, and to refill;
And it is best to gently press, for if you hold too firmly, it may cause constriction or blockage in the stomach and heart.
The windings on the two ribs under the collarbone can relieve head pains, eye and toothaches, and in stridor, and for pain in the roots of the teeth,
And it is at the site of the basilica's healing; and you should instruct the surgeon to place his hand there without pressing on the artery, nor let blood flow repeatedly.
The ventilation of the chin leads to illness in the mouth, and decay of gums, and similar diseases which occur within the mouth; and it is related to the health of the two lips.
Ventilation of the shoulders leads to illness that comes from heat and congestion.
Ventilation of the elbows is as important as three veins in the arms. because it carries blood from these major veins;
And instruct the warrior not to bend too far forward, for his chest is naked of muscle, and knows underneath skin and veins.
The suction cup on the buttocks is suitable for bleeding from the bottom and diseases underneath, it requires that the suction cup be large and made of iron, as it needs to be well treated; if it were too thin by chance, it would break; I make large wounds.
The leg suction cups operate openly, because they drain blood from the entire body, and are effective for old pain in the kidneys, and the liver, and bladder diseases, and promote menstruation; they are located on the inner knees and ankles, and all over the body; also, after long use, they weaken the body and cause fatigue in various situations.
The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you should apply it after checking thoroughly and ensuring a continuous sucking action. Apply it quickly, move it evenly, and keep doing this until you see the skin turning red and swelling, then release the suction. Afterwards, put the suction cups back on, take care with how your body is positioned since there are some who have very thin flesh and clear pores: in such cases, one should pierce only once, and make wide cuts but not too deep; apply light suction.
And if the patient is large, it's appropriate to strike twice: the first time for the purpose of making a small incision for the sake of the thick blood vessel.
And if the patient is very dense, it's appropriate to strike three times; and when we wish to drain a little blood at a time, we only need to make an incision once.
And if we wish to take a lot of blood, we repeatedly perform the procedure; and if the patient is dense, strike through deeply, and ensure that the veins are pierced immediately.
And it is suitable for those with thick and hard skin who have become red from long exposure, that you apply the cups of the suction and dissolving pessaries to their limbs. If it's in this state, from where it bleeds, or from the oil of sweet almonds, or from the seed oil of a cucumber;
And if it's in sweat, from spinach oil, or from rosemary, or chamomile, or other similar substances.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of wormwood, or of balm, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
And if the person being treated has tender flesh and large pores, there should be no oil applied at all.
But it is advised to wash after the suction of pink water, or cold water, or water from a rose, or water from a cucumber plant, or water from a porcelain vessel, or other similar substances.
And for those who have some moisture, if they rise from rest or from water of myrtle and sumac, and other similar things.
And for those who have large excesses, they arise from old wine, or water of succa, or decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar things;
and it is not advisable for a bath attendant to use suction cups before or during the bath, but rather after the bath one hour or two hours; and do not sleep after suction treatment,
And it must be understood when one should suck and when it has been sucked. Guard yourself against the one who is healing and hot-tempered, and if he is too heated and inflamed; It's necessary for him to eat cold things, such as apples, radishes, and lettuce on the side, and similar items;
Eat young rabbits, pork meat, and damp meats.
And for the one with a cold constitution, if they desire syrup made from honey, and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and small pieces of bread, and fritters and small birds and baby pigeons;
And on the day they feel an appetite, they should drink more than eat;
It is necessary to give some men neither trialect nor muscat wine before or after the appetite appears, in order to strengthen their main limbs; And season the broth with spices, but it is not good for those who are hot to drink them.
The suction cups that are placed to cause irritation are those placed on the liver, and on the lungs, and in gout, and on the stomach and intestines and kidneys and hip, because this limb does not suffer from being pierced by needles.
and it is done only to draw blood from member to member, just like we place them on the nipples when a person is bleeding; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, just like we place suction cups on the stomach and intestines to reduce the size of the member;
and relieves the pain, when there is an obstruction or stone, just like it happens by its attractive power to some extent with the obstruction, or empties the stone from its place;
And then perform it when you place it over the heart and under the lungs, where there is a retained gust of wind.
And these suction cups are administered empty only for sucking; and they are never used together with fire, and they are not filled with water.
just as in diseases caused by colic, and in such a manner that we fill the suction cup with hot water, or with water where herbs useful for this have been cooked.
The shape of the suction cup used over fire is like this:
And it has two sticks half the palm wide and at both sides of the middle one small notch each way as to place a needle in,
and let it be made of iron, so that when you place it on the limb, it does not harm the patient;
and have in the middle a rod across from an eel or iron, to put a candle in.
and let them be both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
For the suction cups of children are different from those of adults, and they are thinner than those of fat individuals.
And thus should one place this suction cup on the limb:
take a wax candle or a single line, and insert it through the suction cup which is in the suction cup, across the penis which is in the suction cup, so that the light is at the bottom of the suction cup and it does not burn the patient;
And then place it on the limb, and you must either on the spot that we have mentioned, so when one wishes, if it goes there steam, and removes it with the suction cup;
And apply the dressing in the same way as before, and repeat often, if you need to.
In the suction cup, which is administered in pleurisy disease, during all fevers, there should be neither a penis nor any part of it, and it is only administered when it is full of water, and placed only on the limb.
And this is its shape:
Without ears are treated only on limbs where suction cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts; and in the treatment of burns on them, such as cheeks or nose, and other similar areas.
And when you find ears that are in fresh water without infection, take them;
and place them in fresh water until they become familiarized and have nothing in their stomachs; And then cleanse with vein opening and suction, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place on bandages;
And when they are full, and bleed, if it is possible to place suction cups there, do so, for this is of little value afterwards.
If not that, raise the limb with a sling, and then with water, very well, and then apply treatment;
And if the limb is too stiff after applying bandages, moisten it with one or two linen cloths in cold water, and place them on it until the bandages become damp;
And if there are multiple sores, place on it ground glass or alum, or similar substances, until they become stunted;
Or you put half the peel of beans on it and leave them until they burn in the area; this will now stop bleeding.
And if you need more, take other meats.
And if the meats do not heal, rub with fresh blood, or stick a needle in until blood comes out. And then place them again, and as soon as they feel the blood flow,
And when you see that they are expelling them, apply a little aloes powder and flour, or ash, then they will start to expel now.
This begins the book of fractures
These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are useful for restoring breaks and alleviating suffering.
Know, dear child, that the foolish people of this chapter have never seen anything like it in old books, nor did they ever read about it.
And because of this reason, the knowledge has been excluded from our land, for I have never found anyone good in this matter;
And I know nothing of it, as far as the knowledge from the ancient books, or that I studied extensively and treated this knowledge through experimentation, and through habituation in my life;
And I have described in this chapter what is contained within it, and summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in those two chapters previously.
So it is necessary that we introduce or give an outline of the content of this book and the chapters in which wisdom places its understanding, staying on the truth, so that those who have experienced it can know and learn this noble craft, and teach it to others.
I say that when breakage or dislocation or twists or fainting occurs to any part of the body, if you need to quickly sanitize the patient from one side and the other, without leaving anything untended; like frailty due to age, children, or elderly.
Or if the place is too tight or too cold, and uses cold tools, this means cold jousts, and eye and hog's fat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not overfill your body with meat that fills veins with blood, until you doubt about an abscess becoming hot, or the spreading of matter to the limb; if it recovers according to its previous treatment as it had been used.
And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary for the patient to consume meats that cause excessive swelling or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and peas, and pies, and beef, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. And with such swelling the break begins to heal more quickly.
And know that broken bones in the old and the decrepit cannot heal or join properly according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those also which are too tender, such as the bones of young children;
But if there's no cure for it, reset the bone where the fracture is. That is, place large pegs in and join the limb together, until it holds as before; and don't rush to finish her work, rather let it heal properly; and following this, you should nourish with large meats, as we have said.
Know that breaks are various in many ways.
For a break in the head is different from a break in the heel, or of the leg, and I will tell you all ways of breaks in this chapter. For there are breaks that occur at the elbow, and others when striking, as when sharpening a feather to write with.
For there are breaks that occur at the elbow, and others when striking, as when sharpening a feather to write with. And if there's breaking with injury, and breaking at all a small crack.
And in each way it has its own method, and its proper tool for restoration; according to what memory brings to mind;
and it is known that the breakage of bone can be recognized by the twist in the ear, and its clear opening beyond, and the pain when pressing with the hand;
And when there is no twisting or weariness of the bones at their junction, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no break;
but it can well have twisting, or fissuring, or a small fracture. If it is not suitable for you to move it by hand, but apply the remedies that follow, and then gradually tighten it now in a subtle manner.
And know that the fracture which was moving in the bone, and are the two parts disjoined, you must now put them at equal points, so that the abscesses are dressed like gloves;
And if pus comes out when you clean it, if you leave him without any rest, Then put it in a place where you can handle it lightly and carefully, and know that its restoration is easier than when there are pieces; then extract it, as detailed later.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is from two parts, whether it's a hand or foot, or at your hand if it's a small limb, or from two strings, or one string and at your hand;
and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are healed, then you should firmly fix all additions in their places as far as possible at your handling, and be careful that through your work no harm or pain befalls the patient;
And adjust well the two shoulder heads of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel well with your hand if it doesn't seem to be in the right place: if you dress it beautifully, and don't pull too much, not squeezing as those who extract by their own surgical method do, pulling at the abscess and contraction of the limb, as we have often wished.
And when the limbs are in place, make sure to keep the wound still, not moving it while awake or asleep, turning or in any other manner; and see well that the limbs are secured so much that they do not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, if it is not to his liking, and one should arrange him in an appropriate position so that he does not feel any pain;
For when he feels no pain, if it is not to his liking, and one should arrange him in an appropriate position so that he does not feel any pain; and guard that he be placed straightly, that no twisting occurs when he is restored;
and the quality of the limb broken should match what I am telling you.
Know that limbs broken are varied in smallness and largeness, and in shape.
For there are small limbs such as arms and legs and alike: it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths;
And those that are larger, such as the buttocks and thigh: it is necessary to wrap them in a broad and firm bandage; for wide bandages envelop the whole of the large limbs, tightening equally from all sides, so that no unevenness exists;
Then wrap them with lighter bandages, three or four times depending on the limb size, and hold your hand a little across the entire bandage, then move to above the wound and tighten less, so that the wound can be moved away slightly;
And soften the bandage gradually and gradually, until you obtain a large part of the healthy limb, then take another bandage and go back and forth around the injured limb;
Continue from where you left off in the part of breaking it, and apply gentle pressure, not too hard nor too softly, as we have said before.
Then place between the stitched linen ties or cloths until they are all even in length, then tie everything up with one loop and then put your well-made stars on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something soothing on top that relieves the abscess and reduces swelling, allowing it to remain like this for a few days.
Then apply pressure to your stars, and let them be half the width of a straight stick that is carefully measured or from wood used for making gun barrels, or from palm leaves, and they should follow this shape:
But it is necessary that the steel that one places upon the break (or fracture) should be a bit larger and wider than the others;
and also as long as it suits the size of the limb, whether small or large;
then hold it in place with the steel just like you did in the first instance, then tie an additional thread over it, just as you did on the break (or fracture) in the first case;
make it tighter, but not too tight; and it should be of medium size, neither too thick nor too thin, made of soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as in my linen thread works that make their loops from twisted linewires, and this is great error, because the loop cannot be even if it is too fine, and it does not suit for there to be less than a half of an inch between each pinhole.
And if the wounds are irritated by the pins after compression in their healthy areas, then you should apply linen or matted wool to them, so they do not blister.
When the wound is irritated and the ribs are broken, I will tell you the treatment afterwards.
And know that it is not fitting to constrain all broken limbs on their first day. And when the limbs are large, it is not fitting to place them in casts immediately but only after five days or seven, or more according to your judgement following each abscess that occurs;
And here is the way of old plaster treatments for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour that stays on mill walls, mix it with plenty of eggs, and make this mixture neither too thin nor too thick. Use this preparation in accordance to its consistency, and this is the common method of restorative plaster for restoring fractures in various positions, just as well for adults and small children because neither should be excessively hot nor cold.
Another way of making a restorative plaster for fractures and dislocations: take three parts each of garlic, dandelion leaves, rue, asafetida, and Arabic gum, totaling nine parts; add five parts each of myrrh and aloes; use seven parts of vinegar. Make this into a powder, mix it with plenty of eggs; if the mixture is warm, apply this plaster, for it has good composition, it quickly heals broken bones, and benefits many people.
Another way to plaster for dislocation: take mugwort and vinegar, add 12 parts; myrrh and aloes, add 8 parts; acaica is added in the amount of 6 parts; Armenian balm adds up to 10 parts. Grind well, mix with water or plenty of egg yolk, then administer it.
Another method of plastering for joints and bones that have been dislocated from their places, and to soothe the pain arising therefrom, and to use the cut ends of bones, and to heal bruising: take new wool, and its fat in cream and oil cooked, then place it on your limbs. These plasters do not set back properly, but they are better for soothing abscesses and providing comfort to wounds, and they neatly relieve pains.
Another method of plastering that sets broken bones: take dried fig leaves and terrestrial poplar leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to plaster during restoration of bone fracture and to remove pus. Take root of marjoram, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of myrrh, from each one part; and grind, mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with coriander water, or just water, and use it.
Another method for plastering more rigorously than the first when pus is coming back during limb restoration. Take roots of marjoram and linseed, balm, milkvetch, and water parsley, as well as violet and chamomile flowers, from each one part; and grind them down, mix with saltwater or sweet water, or wine, depending on the heat of the limb and its rest period.
In his book, Hippocrates instructs that when restoring strength to a broken limb, one should only apply cerate made from wax and oil, and not any other substance. He states it should be applied between two layers so as not to be too soft or too hard.
And it seems like Galen suggests we should apply something on the broken limb for restoration, with somewhat dry but slightly warm substances, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another method of plastering suitable for injury and pain: take the fat and feathers from cooked chickens, or bird feathers, and vinegar, and equal parts salt, and grind them together to make a plaster mixture.
And then you apply a little later, and be careful that the patient doesn't feel any pain, nor does it hurt its own bone in its place; if not, apply it with your hands instead.
And if pain comes to the limb, or itching, with no rest or swelling, then act quickly and remove it, and replace the plaster now; take a thin cloth and a wet sponge from the sea, and dip it in water, then cool the limb until the itching stops and the pain is soothed. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool, moistened in water or rose oil, and secure it with a bandage until you are sure of removing any pus;
and let the inflammation settle in the limb, and reduce the pain, then resume gentle bandaging, and a bit of plaster, but do not bind it as tightly as before; and handle with care until it's sound.
And if you see that pus has formed and turned red, along with pain and swelling, indicating bone inflammation throughout, then you will need plaster and bandaging, so restart the process as you did initially.
And if nothing of what we have said happens to the limb, or if it does not release until after three days, four, five, or seven; and each time let it rest for twenty days, according to this method, as long as the healing progresses and brings closer alignment of the bone.
Then the restriction is more than before, and it strengthens its flesh, as I said previously; and if you see that the skin dries more than necessary isn't, know that no remedies can come. When the skin has healed properly after a hot water bath, do this every time you reset it, and let it be once every three days, and drain a little of the pus.
Through this work then cut the remedies from the limb, and hasten what fools do incorrectly that return the limb in a twisted manner: this is bad, and it causes painless operations, and I see nothing else except to rest and correctly open them.
Regarding various methods of breaking up Many ways of fractures exist, and various shapes appear, and their reasons are distinguished;
For there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the neck bone breaks all the way to syfac which is underneath the bone, just like when an arrow pierces through wood or a flog hits; for this reason, this kind of fracture is called "haichure".
Or the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing it, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; and these are the large or small injuries from these two kinds of fractures.
And if there is sequential impact, or crack, or fracture in the bone, or through stone, or on stone, or other similar cases.
And if there is a break halfway through, reaching up to the membrane that surrounds the bone or above it, and this wound is either large or small.
And if there's a wound that penetrates into the bone as thin as a hair, and this crack is small, for this it is called the "hair-like" break;
And if the wound is made by striking a stone or by falling from height or any similar matter, causing part of the bone to be pulled out, and this injury appears like the joints are dislocated as when candlewax is poured onto candles; when the stone enters inside.
This happens more often in those who have wet bones below, such as children's bones;
And it happens in all these ways of breaking that small fragments are removed such as bones; and I will speak about them in their place.
And know all the ways of breaking through extraction from them, and the examination with rods, and through the putrid matter which is above.
The hair's appearance is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed it inwards, if the breaking is blackened, then it indicates the break.
In the treatment of fractures, be careful about any adverse event involving the organs and if you do not see any harmful incident such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, extension, pallor, fever ague, and if the eyes start to come out and turn red, or other similar signs in various conditions, then cannot be cured without doubt.
And if you do not see an alarming event, yet still hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when winter comes before you, and it's time for surgery, then you should remove the bone fourteen days after the operation.
And if it's summer, hurry to remove the bone on the seventh day, so that the flesh around the bone becomes gangrenous, and let us encounter the events that we have said.
And if the bone break reaches up to the flesh that covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to cut through the fractured part like this: and take hold of the skull from where the bone has been broken, and expose the bone in all ways possible under the skin wherever you can, and more than the appearance of the wound allows.
And if blood flow increases during the discovery of bone or pus, or in treating a localized infection, you should assist with what is necessary, and one must fill the wound with moistened linen soaked in rose oil; And let the wound rest until the localized infections have subsided and blood flow is assured; then begin cutting towards the bone, and this can be done in two ways as described: one way is that you cut closely at the front, which forms a shape:
And then do another larger cut than the first one.
And the second way is that you have several different cuts, some narrow and others wide, they should be pointed and made of iron; and apply them lightly, making sure not to pierce the head.
And if the bone is far and hard, you should pierce it internally, in such a way that you administer cuts with needles, not completely piercing through the bone but ensuring there's a margin of about half a circle above the tip, so as not to let the tip pass beyond the bone; and you must have more than one, so that each goes into its place under the thickness of the bone, in such a way that you have needles for all parts; and this is the form of the three ways of using needles:
The quality for piercing internally through the bone is to place one needle on the bone and turn with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced. Then put the needle elsewhere a little later, and do this all internally, then scrape out the space between the fragments of the bone using the incisors, doing so more finely and gently than possible, as we have said, just until you bring the bone to your hand or none of the instruments that you are using such as forceps; and make sure not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced and scraped the bone, it is necessary that you prepare what remains of the bone with another tool similar to an incisor, but this tool must be more robust and finer than the other incisors;
And if it leaves behind no small bones or any scales, so lightly manipulate them with two instruments; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And another way of operation is this, which Galen stated, it being more secure; and he had the strength of a lion, and that's his word. It is necessary first to expose a portion of the bone, at the place where the fracture opens and moves, so that once you have exposed that part, you will place under the edge of this lens-shaped incision, as described below:
And do not cut from one side alone, and make the incised part into two halves, so that when cutting you are towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet from above, so that you gently chip away the entire bone, and be well aware of the netting which is there.
If it's pushed to the bone, if you gently touch the bone, because touching the bone causes no harm and little fear.
And if the bone breaks without piercing through the membrane, and only part of the bone is cut from above, with small pieces remaining, it's necessary to address that roughness afterward. You should remove the scales using a finely sharp razor tool, which you must have in various quantities, to apply according to each location, considering both the method and the appearance of the breakage.
When dealing with large razors, and then progressing to finer ones, you should continue this process until it is done properly.
For each other kind of fine hair trimming and delicate breakage, you should proceed according to its direction; this is something that cannot be adequately handled by someone who has devoted their studies to this craft.
And if the scab is discovered, it is necessary for you to take one or two linen cloths according to the size of the wound, and smear them with rosegum oil, and place them on the wound; Then take another double linen cloth, either in two layers or three, and soak it with wine and rosegum oil, and place it on the first cloth; do this as gently as possible so you don't weigh down the scab, then apply a second bandage from above, without pulling too tightly that it only touches the wound.
Let it stay like this for one or two days until the abscess subsides, then remove the bandage and apply medications such as the roots of parsley, wheat flour, incense powder, and arsenic, among other things; and make a powder from these substances, apply it to the wound, and thereafter administer royal medicines without causing any irritation.
And ensure that the wound is clean immediately, do not leave any pus or let it assemble in a ball, because when the ball assembles upon the brain tissue, they will move and cause injury, leading to great harm for the patient; for when you place something sharp there, it stings from above.
Therefore, be careful, should no mishaps come to the patient as we have said, if there is doubt then you must consider it doubtful.
And if no harm comes from it only because of the medicine we have placed there, should this virtue be true, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of goose oil, and mix them together in a cloth, and place it on that spot; Then follow the methods of treatment until it is healed.
Know that neither of the two parts near the nose, or even one alone, is broken, for these are two bones. And the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, nor will it allow force to bend or twist it, then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you should bend your small finger or the part near the nose, and place that break inside your index finger, and through to the end by pushing it outwards, until the nose revives according to its natural shape; Do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain through your operation.
And if the break is in the part above the nose and can't reach the nostril, it's necessary that you place it level with the tip of a finger slightly thicker.
And if there are two breaks, then redo the procedure, and endeavor to restore the first day if you can;
But if not, after the seventh or eighth day when the abscess is dressed and calmed, then apply a poultice to the top of the nose, if the break is in one part.
Or you apply another poultice on the other side, if there is a break; and make them large enough to fill the depressions around the nose.
And they say that any restorer should moisten their tents with butter and change each day. I do not think this is correct, but it seems better that they be moistened in the preparation of yolk broth and powdered flour; then let the tent stay until the bone becomes firm and the cartilage hardens.
And once put on or use goose feathers instead of tents, and if you have one egg's worth of down covering them, and if the dressing stays intact, let the wound be exposed, letting air flow through; now do as you see fit.
And if the abscesses come to the nose as you treat them, then apply a poultice or wet cotton in oil, or a small portion of garlic juice.
And if abscesses do not come out, then apply a plaster externally, made of sifted charcoal and incense powder mixed with yolk oil; place it on light wicks and do not bind them too tightly.
And if the nose breaks slightly and is broken into small pieces, once you have tools suitable for this task, then extract them through the incision; clean out the debris in such ways that it burns away and joins back together, like using plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose.
And if there is no wound within the nose, then proceed with the treatment of the nostrils, and place snail shells in it as long as it heals.
Of the rupture of the jaw
When the jaw is fractured externally, and there's no wound outwardly visible, only the breakage occurs externally. It isn't broken into two halves solely by cracks internally; one can easily recognize this.
It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, that you press your index finger into the mouth at the patient's chin; and if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then press your index finger of your right hand, gently pressing the fracture internally, and push it outward with the other hand, ensuring both are equal.
And if there is an fracture of the jawbone in two parts, it then requires that you perform an extension of both parts, ensuring they are equal.
And when the movements of teeth occur, or breakage, hold them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk. Then place on the broken mandible some wadding, and put over it one double layer; then place upon the layer a large wedge well made, or a piece of leather equal in size to the length and width of the mandible. Secure this to the muscles that you can, and command the patient to rest, eating light meat portions.
And if you see that the figure changes, if it loses its shape by the third day, and then return to fixing what has become loose; apply plaster over it, made with powder from the mill mixed with enough egg or flour of wheat, after removing the wadding; place over the plaster a light cloth, and if the plaster sticks and the patient's position doesn't change, leave them as they are until they heal. Many times they heal in three weeks.
And if there are incisions that become infected, then apply what we have told you many times.
And if there is breaking together with injury, reward none of the bone pieces that are removed; if such delicacy requires tools suitable for this task.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, if the wound is large, place one dressing suitable for it, to promote healing flesh, until it heals.
by the power of The force breaks many times in front of the shoulder, towards it, and the breakage occurs according to three ways: or it is broken and separated into two parts, and there are pieces, making it easier to restore; or there is a breakage with injury.
And when the operations are such that the breakage is with injury, have two assistants, so one pricks the shoulder where the force breaks; and the other extends their arm towards the affected area. Then match the break to your hands, making sure the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or movement.
And if you need to extend further, place a round sponge of cloth or wool under the shoulder towards the hair, and make it as large as your need requires; and support and lift the force, and hold the sponge in your hand so that you can match the break evenly, as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head from the strength at the back due to its position coming forward, it's necessary that the patient lies on their side with their shoulder lifted, and place half an ear under each shoulder, and push the shoulders down as far as the strength bone is elevated.
And place your hands on the breakage point, and if you find fractures, it's necessary that you cut there; then gently pull the pieces apart. If the bone cannot join even with any pressure, then use one of the incisions you've made; but put this tool near the strength location to ward off the excess.
And make it resemble a spoon, not to be found elsewhere, and be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and strength of the work; and have two ends, just as you see fit, with one being wider and the other narrow, like the cut made when you treated the bones.
And when you are certain of the location of the abscess, suture it and then close the wound, and if the opening is small or you doubt about the location of the abscess, use bandages and tents according to their quantity.
And if one must stitch them, if moistened, soak the bandage in rose oil and wine, and place it on top.
The sharpening of the bone, when it is sensitive to wounds and sensitive to sewing, is that you place on the bone a plaster made of powder from the mill and beaten yolk, and put light weights on top, and put a needle under the stitches if needed; Then take a very long strip about the size of a palm in width, then place two layers of bandage on top of weights and plaster. Then take a thin stick about three inches wide and long, and wrap it around this bandage so that the head of the bandage hangs down; And place the cauterizing instrument against the wound, and turn the hot iron towards the neck, and along a healthy artery, and a diseased one; and manipulate each part, and when you see that blood begins to flow over the injury area, and clearly observe that the instrument does not move on top of the broken bone, then reward yourself daily, and upon removing the ligature, if you restrain it.
And allow the diseased part to heal on its back, and apply it when he sleeps. Use a small strip against the artery, to lift the shoulder up; this relieves the strain of blood flow through proper arm alignment, or tie his arm around the neck, and do not untie until .20 days;
Then reapply the plaster if you see that it is necessary, and secure and leave it in this position until it has healed completely. The healing process usually takes up to 28 days, but in some cases it may be less for certain individuals.
On the breaking of the shoulder
Sometimes the shoulder breaks either at the top or in the middle, and it may also shift partly from its position; if you handle it according to the shape of the breakage, and reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then apply with ground flour from the mill along with abundant egg whites, and gentle massages, and place two layers on top; then place a large wide thin plate, slightly wider than the shoulder, such that there is no movement anywhere under the shoulder, fill that space with linen tufts so it covers evenly; and then secure all tightly in one great band firmly, so that the plate does not move from its position, and watch each day; and every time when it begins to heal, you tighten again, and if possible make the plate even if it has moved away from its position, and place the patient on their side; and the shoulder is healed after about 20 days or 25, And once these numbers are completed, then release them, and be sure of yourself, for it's not a bone that will quickly set in easily.
And if a piece of the bone should protrude and not be covered by the skin, then cut above it and below, and treat the wound as we have said in treating the dislocation of the elbow.
Of the breakage of the foot
The feet are occasionally broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; they often break at the end. And when it's broken in the middle, it tilts downwards, causing great pain for the patient and loss of sensation immediately, all over, and by chance blood vomits out, and opens the joints in the broken bones, and one feels this very well.
And for the restoration, if it is such that the patient lies on their back and you place one arm under each shoulder, then press the shoulders together, and join both ribs to your hands, and gently put them in a way that feels equal to all possible ways until the shape of the bone fits as it should; then place plaster strips and poultices above the delicate salt subtil, or another light substance, and cover it with one cloth, and bind it around the broken bone so that it doesn't move; turn the bandage around the back roundly and tighten it slightly, and reward each hour for the treatment of the limb, and if it is loosening, you tighten it; and if it feels right to let go due to corrosion or itching coming up on the body, or pain or abscesses, act quickly, loosen it, remove the plaster wrap, and treat accordingly with the remedies provided; then cover the plaster again and tighten it until it's healed.
On the breaking of ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs occurs only after great blows on the back and within the chest, and it only happens because they are brittle; one can feel this well during examination at the doctor's.
And for the healing, if you make the break equal, just like it should be. And then apply plaster and bandage it firmly, if needed.
And if the breaking of the ribs is occurring internally, then one feels great pain and stabbing inside, like from sobbing, because the bone pierces the tissue; and they have aches all over, nausea, immediate vomiting of large amounts of blood, and it's a severe health issue, and the old ones had to endure great suffering.
And if some say that it is necessary to serve meat that swells the belly, in order to expel the indigestion from within.
Let us not do this; that pus and sulfur do not enter where they have not already been. And if it has entered, then heal it.
And let no one say that we place suction cups on the body in order to suck out forms, for this is what it seems like in reason; nevertheless, there is doubt whether the suction cup attracts excesses towards the body due to its weakness.
And they say that when someone needs to cover the chest with wet wool in hot oil, and you place cloths between the ribs to make sure the heat is evenly distributed inside. Then apply the treatment for pleurisy, meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels intense pain that they cannot bear through the hole in the bone where the tissue is punctured, there is doubt for the patient whether to cut along the line of the broken rib or not, and the patient should have assurance. Then it's necessary to cut beneath the area of the broken rib's chest plate, and it's necessary to place one piece of equipment between them to ensure even heat distribution; then one must cut into the bone gently, drain lightly, and stitch the two edges of the wound if they are large, and treat with plaster until it heals. And if abscesses occur, one should place wet cloths in hot oil on top of the chest plate, and apply them to the area; and treat while keeping a watchful eye on where the equipment should be placed according to the abscesses, until it heals.
from the breaking of the neck
None of the time does breaking occur at the bones of the neck, and there is no bending when they bow; similarly for the spine in the back. And when this happens to any person and you need to know if they will recover or not, take heed: if you see that their hands have become softened, swollen, and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel it. Know that this is in multiple fatal conditions, and if they can move and feel well when restrained, know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and that the disease has been cured, if we treat it.
And if this happens to the spine in the back, and you need to know if they will recover or not, take heed: if the joints become soft and if there are incidents that occur like swelling hands and loss of appetite and wind escaping without desire at their chest; and when one has observed it on their abdomen, if wind escapes without desire. And if they try to lie down after being observed on their back, they cannot do so. Know that this is fatal: if not treated properly in its cure.
And if this misfortune does not come to him, then it is a matter of lesser concern.
And the treatment is such that you should apply it if there's pus or fat at its source, place on the spine oil from rooster's egg or hen's egg oil, until the pain subsides; then apply one of the soothing and drying plasters, and bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. And do not sleep on that part where they feel pain until it heals. And if any bone should break open, you must cover it with your elbow; and set the bone, then align the two edges of the wound, if it's large, with a stitch, then apply ointment that hardens to flesh until it heals; and if the bone chip is broken, which is called the "chip of the knee", put your left hand pouch against the other at your strength, then place the plaster and paste over it; then tighten it. And if there's a broken bone, you must cut it out, and set it again, and treat the wound until it heals.
Of the breaking of the bone of the hip
It happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, should there be a slight discomfort in the thigh; and stretch long, and decline to the knee, and comes to the patient pain in the leg, and bruising, and swells what is broken.
And for the restoration, you should extend your hand up, as far as you are above the bruise; and learn where the break is and its shape. And if the break is only in the thigh, then make it equal to that break, as long as it maintains a natural shape.
And if the break is along the length or it declines towards the inner side, then guide the patient lying on his stomach, as long as you are able to restore that break. And when you have placed it evenly, put it on the plaster, then place it on a stake of wood or charcoal, and hold the burn so that it does not move; and apply heat all over the back until the wound is even.
Instruct the patient to sleep on their right side or on their back.
And if abscesses come out, do not touch them until the pus of the abscesses is relieved, and place it on what we have mentioned before; then return to treatment, apply as needed so that no bad incident occurs; and this is how it should be done.
regarding the breaking of the shoulder
The assistants are those that are between the handle and the shoulder of the arm; if it is broken, one must restore it according to either of two ways: out of which one way involves taking a single solid rod with medium thickness, in such form:
And fasten these two heads together with two threads, and weave them upwards, then place the wound on one spot; then pour the broken arm onto the rod until it reaches halfway, having formed half of a rod's bend, then position above anything or where helpers are below; then place the eyes of the fracture equally among their hands, so long as the broken part returns as it should.
And the other way is that one must place the wound on his pillow and tie his hand to his neck, then instruct two helpers that one should cut near where the fracture is with his hands, and the other cuts over all two threads and extends each to their respective parts.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, hold one ligament under the wound and above the wound, and extend each minister to his part. And if the wound is near the head of the shoulder, it should be that you place one ligament halfway along the edge, and another towards the knife, under the wound; and also if the wound is towards the blade, then it must be that you put a gentle ligament, without effort, until the wound is level up on the left, and up on the blade; then make equal the tear, as it should be, and hold tight, if there are no abscesses come about.
And if abscesses come about under the wound, do not strain it until after seven days, and place on it moistened linen in oil and rose water, until the abscesses under the wound are soothed; then strain it, and how to strain it should be that you put plaster over the wound, then join the arm to the shoulder support, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; place the bandage and hold it tight over the shoulder support, and over the arm, so that the arm is in its usual position, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use weights and place an extra large and strong weight over the tear, and leave one space of about two inches between each weight, and let each weight be big enough to pass through the wound three inches from both sides; then strain on those weights as I said at the beginning of this chapter on tearing wounds, more strongly but less when pulling apart.
And if you observe the setting of the bones and their constriction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt about discharging pus, if you leave it bound until seven days, as we have said; then check each three days the tie, making sure itch does not spread to them or that no ulcers can come into the limb due to its constriction being too tight. If there is movement, as we have said.
And if no such incidents occur, or the discharge has not started even after two days or more, and if the patient lies with their limbs on their back and their hands on their stomach; then place underneath the shoulder one cresset filled equally with wool, and check every hour of the day or night to ensure that the figure of the broken limb does not move or that the stitches become soft; it is through the virtue of medicine that the body starts moving, and he receives the meat that we have mentioned before, in such a way that the meat becomes tender at first. And when it begins to heal, if it appears thickened. And it's customary for the shoulder and the leg should be healed within 40 days from then; and after that, one must remove them and administer baths and medicines of ointment for the body to heal properly. If the constriction is ugly and tight, then you must continue with removal for another two days or a month.
Regarding the breaking of the arm
The arm is made up of two bones, which are named the 'foscile' pair. One bone is small, it forms the pocket; and another one is large, it rests under the small finger; by chance if only the large foscile breaks or the small one, or they both might unite together.
When the small fosciles break, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large ones break, the healing goes wrong, and it's more severe than when they broke together. If only the small foscile breaks, then it should be stretched gently, and made equal.
And if it's the large foscile that breaks, then one needs to pull harder; and extend him on two cushions, and raise the hand's pocket higher than the others, and place the little fingers lower than the other fingers, and make sure there is no strain on his body, so that he doesn't feel any discomfort. Then stretch the assistants' hands under his arm or at one elbow, and another assistant above him. And then put the patient in an equal position, according to their best form.
And if in the breaking into pieces, you place each one of them back in its place, and if there is no bone pierced that touches the skin, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut through the bone, as we have said before.
And if in dealing with wound injuries, I've spoken about them individually; take the treatment.
And if during the commencement of the restoration process there are abscesses that come to be, then apply this: take a pad made of rosin and white beeswax so it is neither too hard nor too soft; join two pads together smoothly, as long as all the abscesses are quieted down. Then remove the wax, and place the plaster over the powder from the mill with plenty of egg whites, then lay the sticks, and ensure that the stick for the wound is more pronounced and slightly wider than the others; know that there must be seven or eight sticks in various orientations: either when the wound is in one bone, or between two bones; hold it closer to the wound rather than elsewhere, and day by day reduce its extent as I said at the beginning of this chapter; ensure that the cloths under the wound are soft and moist, and are neither hard nor abrasive; use threads made from linen that are neither too thick nor too thin, as we have explained. And support the member and the ligament after a few days. And if any unfortunate events come to the limb, such as itchiness that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you immerse the limb in hot water until that itch is alleviated; and let the limb not be allowed to rest. And then start compression again. And when the bandage is undone and the bone exposed, and similar things are done, if it is treated accordingly.
And if precautions are taken so that no injuries can occur to the limb due to it being too tight, it is necessary that you soften (the material) a bit. leave like this for several days until the injuries heal, and then start compressing again.
And if none of these things we have said come to the patient's condition, or if it is treated for up to 20 days, then let them use their hands on their neck, and ensure that their necks are equal. Take care not to move or twist anything, and sleep on their back; know that this strain has been restored in 30 days or 35 days, and perhaps even in 20 days, depending on the composition and nature of the remedies used.
from the breaking of the hand
You know that on the back of the hand and in us, there are few breaks, and it only results in many foldings.
And when the heel of the hand is broken or folded, it is necessary for the patient to lie with their head crossed and facing straight ahead equally; then they should place their hand on an extended table, and extend the broken fingers, placing them in a straight line as much as possible. They must be well aligned, then apply plaster and wafers if there's no pus. After that, place one stick according to the size of the hand; and wrap it with a piece of linen, making sure to cover it with one yard of linen.
And if the breakage is in the part around the belly of the hand's heel, make a sphere from cloths, and instruct the patient to stretch it towards their broken heel. Then stretch it with a long cloth, and place the stick straight down as much as needed so that its height matches the heel of the hand, and stretch it accordingly.
And if the breakage occurs at the front, it is necessary that you place a splint above, and another under on the sole of foot, so that the hand remains open and upright, then tie them completely around the hand, and seal the connection between fingers.
And if the breakage happens at one of both feet, which is a sprain, in such a way as it should; and you press with the sole, and if you see that placing a small upright splint helps to lift the breakage and keeps it from moving. And if the breakage occurs on other toes, like in the index or among others, do it similarly by pressing evenly and then tie them using a healthy toe afterward; or tie all of them together when walking as well, holding firmly, or place a splint over it, like one would with a sprain. Take care in preserving the position and location of each dressing individually, and prepare for those who come after you, just as I said.
Of the broken leg
The bone of the elbow is often broken, and one can see this when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration comes in two ways. One involves tying above the break, and another involves tying below it. And the patients lie on their face, then extend each minister's joint equally to their equal part; and this is when the break has entered into the bone.
And if the break is close to the elbow joint, then one should tie towards the wrist with a bandage, and the other bands around the break. Similarly, if it's near the knee, then place the bands over the knee, and apply downward pressure. Then align the bone equally with its two hands, as long as it follows its natural figure, and then put on plaster and apply the bandage, should new abscesses not occur.
And if there is an abscess to remove, let it heal then return to your work and treatment; the wound has been treated in this manner. It is necessary that you envelop the burn. I. i.e., bandage it thickly with two or three layers, and retain excess, then have the leg stretch until the heels reach the knee's base, and place one long thread between the thigh and leg, under the knee, and guide the ends of the thread above; then proceed to bind on the leg and thigh, and place a pin on the bone; then use five inches of silk fabric between the thigh and leg for equal pressure, and begin binding three or four times around the burn; and as you go beyond the burn, bind less tightly; then take two ends of the thread that you placed between the leg and thigh, and bind them three times above this pin, then return below to where the thread meets the heel; and tighten if it doesn't move from its place, then leave it like this until no other symptom such as swelling or abscess appears.
And if this happens, should it loosen, and address what comes out, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that catch, then they must be extracted when possible; and if one cannot do so, it is necessary to cut the skin open and drain the pus; and treat it as we have said, until it heals.
And never is the flesh broken when these rods are applied in places like on the shoulder and arm; yet still, upon completion of such treatment, there is no damage to the patient.
Know that the flesh is restored within one month or perhaps slightly more or less, depending on the variety of constitutions.
from the alley of the kidney
Know that in the alley of the kidney there is little tearing, but it bends many times. And if it tears, it's usually just a crack, or about an inch long, and occurs to both wounds and without them, and this can be felt quite well.
And the restoration is such that you place even what is round on its thumbs until it can move. Then apply the plaster and put a round stone if needed, then bind properly as necessary. After all these arrangements made according to our previous instructions for other injuries like abscess or similar occurrences; for each incident, use what fits accordingly while he remains healthy.
of the breaking of the leg
Know that there are two bones in the leg, from which one is named properly as 'mustelz', and the other is called 'foscile'; and every injury or breakage happens similarly to the arm. Therefore, the treatment for such injuries follows the same procedure as for the arm, equally so. The techniques involved are all the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, turn the leg from all sides.
And if the finer bones are broken, turn towards the front.
And if the larger bones are broken, one feels great pain and sees it clearly; turn away from that location. Then apply extension, place them evenly, and bind them equally; however, when the break is ugly and there are multiple pieces, the extension should be lesser and lighter; and align according to your skill.
And when you have completed your task, take two ropes of fust that support the leg on both sides, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee to below. Then wrap these in two layers of cloth, one above and one below, bind them in the middle, and at this binding ensure that the leg cannot decline towards the right or left; it should be well done this way; and no one administers a belt as long as the leg, made of fust, and puts on the leg to prevent movement. It must be done precisely where there was injury; and move the leg each day to see if there is an abscess anywhere else; treat until he heals properly.
From bone fractures due to impact
At the ankle it does not come from fracture, but when bones are struck, there is always a chance of fracture and in the limbs, there can only be pain in various positions.
And if a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones rise over each other, place such bones on the ground like they want to go, and then put your foot under his at the point where the bones are raised, press it so much that they come back to their senses; then apply plaster and cover it up, and underneath the belly of the foot put a small board about two inches thick, then fix it against the foot arch, then wrap it with blankets around, and other things you need.
And when three or four days have passed, you should release the bandage because you will find that the bones are even, whether they were broken or dislocated.
And if any of the ribs are broken, restore them, as we have said about the ribs of the hand; then place on each broken rib a splint according to the length of that rib, and slightly larger than it, then set beneath the rib the table I mentioned, and apply the joint support over this. And if there are two or three or more broken ones, break them, placing on each one of these ribs a splint according to its size, wrapped in one piece of linen, and hold the table under the rib; and being placed at the head of the table facing the abdomen beneath it, ensure that it cuts well.
And you should not forget the other things I've said about other injuries, once we have discussed them; and assist each incident according to how it should be.
regarding the breaking of the bone in the hand
When the bone of her nature is broken, if she is made to stay enlarged, then incline her towards the part of her back, and keep her by the rear; then fill the break in nature with cotton, and put a large piece as that of one's thumb inside. Then stand up the woman, raise her back gradually, and then let the cotton go, until it reaches the entry of nature, and brings the bone back together with your hand. And when she wishes to urinate, take out the cotton, and when she has urinated, put her back, like this for seven days or around: if the break will be restored, should you see this, take a goat bladder, tie it with a stick at its top, and fill the whole bladder into nature; then blow forcefully through the stick until the bladder is inflated inside. Nature will return the breakage; then fill it with cotton and let her stay like this for some days until she heals.
And when the bone of the hand or foot is broken, or in a man or woman, if it is restored like what we have said about the hip bone; and these breakages are not overlooked by one who dedicates their effort and usage to this task, and listens to my book. For the break signifies through many positions the right path of restoration: therefore understand it.
In the case of the penis being broken, take an oyster shell and fill it with the penis; then wrap it in linen, and leave it for three days or as long as necessary, and it will heal quickly.
By fracture with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it's large, like in the thigh or shoulder or similar places, that they be treated now, so that the treatments we have said can bear witness.
And if the wound is healed, use vitriol to bandage it up again, if you don't have anything else, then resume treating the fracture at the same hour or day. If no pus appears in the dressing, then proceed with restoring the fracture.
And if pus appears in the dressing, let the restoration continue until the third day, as long as the pus is subsiding. Don't touch it on the third or fourth day either, for you might provoke a bad outcome.
And if you can see the broken bone above the opened part of the knee, it is necessary that you place them slightly together with your hands, in a small extension.
And if the extension is not visible for you to place them evenly with your hands, take this tool made of iron that measures seven or eight inches in length, and its width should match the size of the wound; it's necessary for the surgeon when needed three or four tools according to what they require for each treatment of broken limbs; make sure they are round and slightly larger, so they don't bend under pressure on your limb while working, and they should be sharp in front, and large at the center towards the front, like this:
And it is called "palainche", so the curved bones must be placed on the visible part of the bone; and push with it once, until you feel resistance, and make sure they are even against each other. And if the breakage is subtle, and the tools cannot properly grasp the bone, then you should hold the tip of the bone as long as the tools can apply pressure.
And if you cannot return the bone to its place as we said before, if one has access to an appropriate instrument for this task, such as a file or saw, with your power; then remove what is remaining in the bone's roughness and small slices.
And when the bone is returned and if the patient feels great pain afterwards, you should know that it has not been placed naturally in its location. Do your best to place it properly, then moisten with a pinch of black, strong wine, and do this especially if it's an external injury; and don't put ointment or anything else on the wound as long as there is any inflammation, so as not to cause infection and decay; then give them rest when you have restored the bone, and let the wound be uncovered, and cover it entirely according to the size of the wound. Take care that the wound isn't constricted with rubbing; many people have done this wrongly in the past, leading to injuries or decay on the patient's body every time; and make sure to apply gentle, sturdy remedies instead of other bruises, as they do not cause harm.
And if the wound is deep or large, and you suspect that an adverse event may occur, as we have said before, and you find pain in your arm, it would be inappropriate to apply any remedies; but instead wrap it entirely. Instead of using remedies, cover with hard cloths and secure them. And when you see after one day or two days that the swelling is reducing around the wound, remove what you had placed with just wine, and then apply a healing ointment for wounds, such as the tetrarmofor medicinal ointment and similar ones.
And it must be that you dislocate the limb twice a day, at morning and at vespers, until it is joined and healed.
And it should be such that the limb be adjusted in this manner so that the bone moves down slightly without impediment.
And if this persists day after day and the bone cannot be joined back immediately, you must know that there are small fragments of bone causing this, so it is necessary for you to seek out the wound with a probe, and remove all these required fragments that cause pain.
And if there is a fistula at the site or any other form of corruption, it must be treated according to what he said in his chapter before. And when the bone is broken and exposed at the limb, such as in the elbow or shoulderbone, and others like major limbs, do not attempt to rejoin them, for many times death results from this. Instead, leave them alone until they heal; perhaps it will heal after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can; if you cannot, just let it be.
The bruises that come from sweat
The bruises often appear after the healing of the wound, especially near joints. A strange thing to see is the shape of the limb; and by chance cannot perform its natural tasks.
Take care therefore when this condition appears: if it is necessary to administer stomatic medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, along with sarsaparilla, caraway, and other similar substances; do so by choosing any of these things or all together, and mix them with stomatic wine, or enough egg whites, or vinegar; then apply it on the nodule in poultices and press well, but don't remove from hands until days have passed; after that remove it, and start again with another application as long as the swellings are gone. Or you can apply it over a well-made piece of plaster; because the property of plaster is such that it removes all swellings on limbs; if the swelling has turned into hardness like stone and needs to be removed, cover it, show what is superfluous, or bring it to any surgeon until it is removed, and treat it until healed.
When the breaking of the bone is restored, and after it stays, the limbs are weak and subtle, this happens due to various causes: one reason could be that it was bound too tightly and not released as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, thus preventing the proper movement in the limb; or perhaps from excessive bleeding; or due to overly large movements that didn't occur at their time; or because they lack blood within their body, making them weak.
And the treatment is that you eat the meat in him, and make the body tender, until the abscess multiplies within it; then give baths to him, and provide joy and ease; afterwards apply grease on the limb, so that the grease attracts to the large node, and washes it frequently with water, until the node matches up with the limb; and restore its natural figure.
If the member is bent after recovery.
When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and if the bone is broken open, and the form of the limb is ugly afterwards, it loses none of its natural function: do not believe those who say one must break the limb entirely anew. Many fools have done this in our land, and these procedures are criticized; they cause great harms and even death. Nonetheless, when the swelling and torture are fresh, you should use hot water to make them rise or cook mildifying herbs such as leaves of mallow, roots, and marigold, among similar treatments. Make one emplastre of a mildifying nature, like well-made aqua vitae, take mallow extract and mix it with grease from pork fat or oil of safflower, then make an emplastre. Alternatively, you can take fatty figs, grind them with buckwheat flour, and other medicines that reduce inflammation.
And always apply the poultice by rubbing it continuously and for a long time with wet hands. And have the limb moved every hour.
And if the dislocation has hardened and become tough like bone, requiring treatment with heat, if it's suitable to cover up until reaching the bone in surgery; and apply care and diligence in the treatment.
This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
When dislocation affects none but suits for immediate repositioning without hesitation.
For if one delays, the joints will swell, and by chance put them back into their places in their original position; but it is not right to move it when it is swollen: many times brought pus and other pains.
If this happens, when you encounter such a situation, have the patient see a surgeon, then let them be until all the pus has subsided; then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, gently reset it, and treat each member according to where treatment is needed.
And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder dislocations up to this point.
of the jaw
Sometimes the jaws become dislocated backwards, and the dislocations of both occur in two ways: either they are somewhat bone-like at their roots, and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the bottom of the body, causing saliva from the mouth to escape, unable to contain it, and unable to close his mouth. Also, he envelops his tongue with his speech due to this condition.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by several positions.
And if it's complete and accomplished, you should reset it quickly without hesitation;
And in this manner, have the assistants cut near to the head on the side of the disease, and push one of their thumbs into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth; if the dislocation is two inches, then the other hand should be outstretched to balance; command the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
And keep pushing until it returns to its place.
And if returning it is painful, just the same, even when they are both mandibles together, if you heat with hot water and oil, as long as you gently reset it; do not overly force the repositioning, just as we have said.
And when they are returned evenly, and the mouth of the patient is well closed and has softened, then place wet cloths as bandages in a poultice made from oil roses and beeswax, then bind it lightly with moist strings;
And let the patient sleep on their back, and keep the head between two pillows, so it doesn't move to either side nor try to twist, but rather consume light food until the pains are relieved, and secure the jaws.
And then test it by gently moving the jaw, and do not struggle to open the mouth for eating and drinking until the mandible is well healed and sound.
And if the two mandibles cannot be properly aligned in an hour and are not turned back to their original positions, fever and settled discomfort result, often accompanied by bloating or vomiting.
And when you see this, then you know it's a loss; many times, death has befallen those who have experienced this within eight days.
from the forcefulness
The forces cannot alleviate from within the continuity of it and the bottom, and is dislocated every single time at the front, and one feels this well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; and then press onto it with one's palm, and it will return. Then place them on a stretcher and apply a bind, and constrain them.
And the head that faces the blade cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it gets dislocated even once, then you must reset it to its place as we have said; then put them on a stretcher and apply a bind, and constrain it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are sound.
And in this way, bring back the shoulder blades, when it has returned to its place.
On orders concerning the shoulder joint,
You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated in three ways:
And it never dislocates behind the shoulder or from within the nerves; and many times dislocates from below towards the scapula, especially in those who are thin, as they get dislocated suddenly; for those who have enough flesh, it jumps to the bones, and goes back to them.
And by chance happens to some people a percussion or a breaking, and inflates the shoulder with an abscess, and believes that it is dislocated due to this.
So then you must prove it, as long as you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
And you will recognize dislocations when it is turned towards the shoulder blade, and makes a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find clear diversity between them. And you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and from the shoulder blade to the armpit, the head of the shoulder, as if it were a hole; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move in any movements.
And also, if it is dislocated upwards and not hidden, because you clearly find it at the neck;
This way of dislocation can only be corrected when new, or if there is an underlying illness.
And the method is that the ministers lift their hand from under the malady at the top, then place their palms underneath it and lift the joint up to the shoulder with force; and they lift the hand, stretch it upwards, and put it back down under it; if it comes quickly.
And if it doesn't come as we have said within days afterwards, then the malady should be soaked in hot water; and the attendant should apply soothing hot baths, like a decoction of thyme, fenugreek, and borage in warm water, and it should be applied.
Then surround the patient's back with the bandages, and place a piece of evenly soft or firm wool on the seat. Then position the heels on this piece, and lift the shoulder's head in a virtuous way, and pull the hand towards the injury.
And apply other remedies to the shoulder's head so that it does not move downward; this shoulder is now returning. And if you see that you need to reset according to this manner:
And ensure that the place where you are is larger than the injury; and stand facing the side, and prop up the shoulder against the seat near the injury, and lift the seat upwards so that the injury hangs at an angle. And another form of treatment involves guiding the hand from the body towards the abdomen. And if the limbs are too light, he moves with them without any weight, and the dislocation returns immediately.
And to reset it can also be done in another way: and one sticks a long stick into the ground, so that the shoulder is also placed like a bullet, and it should neither be too big nor too slippery; Then place under the limb, but so that it has earth beneath it, and the shoulder remains of the length of the stick; then extend your hand from the other side upwards in form, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it doesn't return for all these reasons that we have said, then do this treatment: take one stick of two arms long and four fingers wide, which has the head round enough to slip in from the front into the socket, according to this shape:
Then cover the head with a cloth beneath, so that the head does not bruise the patient, then place it on the pillow under the patient; and stretch out your arms along the body of the patient, and place the shoulder in front, and lay the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on one end of an inch of a board of about the width, and let the hands hang downwards on the other side: the joint is now restored.
And when she is like that, in any manner, so long as you must put under the pillow a stick of yarn equal, then place the plastered dressing with powdered flour from the millhouse, together with incense and beaten egg yolk, over the whole shoulder and around, then pull under the pillow additionally, and fasten the tie on the plastering, and hug the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain like that.
And it must be that he eats a little, until the limbs are strengthened, for then they will heal faster; and after that, eat more after five days or seven, and move them; and if it is firm and not softened, it has healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that has caused it, or for some other reason, it is necessary to administer two points of cautery as specified in the previous section on cauteries.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not stay in place, and cannot lift your arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or extended or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Dislocation that is towards the buttocks, and breasts, or behind, if it occurs due to pushing and stretching of hands, and you administer treatment elsewhere; and continue the cure until it heals.
And if after healing there are still pains in the limb, and later with movements, if they submerge the patient's bath many times, as long as that pain is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
From the dislocation of the shoulder joint.
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at points and returns to them; if it has been dislocated from all sides, as well in front and behind, and the dislocation is not resolved, for you can see and feel it very clearly; and it gets dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the shoulder bone with the sound part, if you can see it clearly. Because the joint is rough, and cannot bend your arm, nor touch your shoulder to any extent.
And it must be reset as the pus flees and moves away, because if pus were to flee and return, there would be blame for having re-set it; and perhaps it can't be brought back completely from start to finish, even when it is behind; this dislocation is worse than others, and brings more pain, and perhaps death comes from it.
And during restoration, if it can be re-set to such a state that you can extend his arms with both of your hands; and let his arms spread outwards, and move the hands towards the center following the line of the elbow, inwards and outwards, and press on the joint at its base or at the root of his palm until it regains its place within him.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he holds his hand against his own, and supports himself with the point of the knife which has been reset.
And if it does not wish to return to its place, administer strong extension; and when you administer this, extend the arm with both hands, and move each hand so that the arm does not move during extension. Then turn the arm from every direction, then when you have wrapped a double length of cloth long and wide;
And when the arm touches its joint at the hand, I oil it with some grease to soften the joint, then form the joint vigorously until it heals;
And when it is in place, I put it on with dry plaster and an egg yolk, then form the joint firmly, and bend the arm at the neck towards the side, and leave it for a few days, then release it.
And if the joint is firmly in its place, you release the tie and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not fit well, you redo the binding and the tie, and let it be like this for several days until it is firmly placed; then you release it.
And if it feels painful after the return of the joint and it moves again, you bathe and rub it well, pressing until it is relieved; or you put a lamb's fat on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then reapply the ointment, and have it enter or be immersed in water. And when it sweats, you gently rub the joint, then put the fat back on and then immerse it or take a bath; and do this process twice or three times until it heals; and if you see fit, you apply wet cow's manure heated with butter to it and apply heat over it; if it returns to its position.
The dislocation of the hand
The hand's joint dislocates and the return is light, more than other joints of the body. It must be brought back to its place immediately, in the same moment that it gets dislocated, so that the limbs become swollen or there comes pus and healing begins.
And in the process of bringing it back, you place your hand in a wrong position on a table, and extend the minister's hand, then look at where to put the injured hand so that its palm is aligned with the appearance of the joint, and press it until it starts healing.
Overall, you should check if it is correctly aligned; then place the injured person's back of their hand on a table during extension and repositioning. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then have the patient place their hand's back on the table, and you look to place their hand where it appears that the joint should be. If it returns to this position now, that is well.
And if not, then by the tightening of plaster poultices to ease abscesses, and let it rest like this without beginning anew.
And if he cannot bear it, and you are unable to put it back after some days, then the joint remains twisted;
And it does not harm the patient as long as the hands are covered, and he cannot pull any object at all: then you know that the nerve is cut, or the artery; if there is no other way but to apply heat with a cautery in such cases, and by chance it may offer no other solution.
And when the hands are in place, set them on the plaster that we have described, then hold and let them for five days, then release and leave them thus.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no swelling, submerge it in hot water, and rub until it becomes clean.
regarding the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
The fingers of the hand are never dislocated on one side alone, nor at the back of the palm or belly.
Then apply heat to it, and keep the dislocation at its place until it recovers, then support the head of the neck, and guide it towards the part where it is dislocated;
and let it be for two days, and then place him equally that day; and do not tie him, as we have said, and free the dislocation that day, and allow him to move, and reapply the bandage later; and repeat this often until it is properly set.
And do it in the same way if it is dislocated in the wrist area, and do it as you did earlier until it heals; and do it similarly when it is dislocated on the other side.
for the proper relief of the ankle and back.
When the shoulder blade or neck is dislocated, or if there are multiple dislocations, without any treatment, because death rushes to the patient.
And the symptoms are that the emissions suddenly occur without volition, and cannot be held back, and many times parts of the body soften or become limp, or both the feet or both arms or one.
And many times the shoulder blade moves into four parts; that which moves at the back is called 'shrinkage':
The treatment is that you should reward if the shrinkage has come from childhood: if there is no treatment or healing at all.
And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things, the old methods of treatment using large words told us, yet it does not yield great benefit in all respects;
but I have summarized it according to my intention, and created tools in various ways.
I say that when the belly becomes pregnant before, no one ever gets well;
And also that which comes directly to the two ribs, and one cannot cure from anything but that specifically which goes to the back, as I say;
And that the patient's skin be extended up to their face for one league evenly, and they have control over it, so as not to bruise themselves;
Then insert a single ember in the nose into the ground and form it, and place another at the ears, and tie a band around the protrusions under the skin, and place another on the hips, knees, and ankles;
And two attendants should hold the bands, one at the head and others at the ears, among the two embers;
And make sure that both are well fastened to the embers as we have said, and let her place her palms on the ground formed by the embers until she regains consciousness.
And if it does not come back with this cure, take a board of three arms long and place it over the opening. And if the patient is on their side, have the patient's head under the board, then place the center of the board above the spine; and place his feet on the other end of the board, and press firmly until they return to their original position; and if you see fit, perform this operation at the elbow that turns towards the hand.
And when you insert two needles into the patient's shoulder bone about an arm's length apart, and on either side of their feet, each needle should be surrounded by a space measuring half the length of a palm's width, both above and below.
And place in each ember two broken pieces, or the bend turns, and ensure these embers are firmly in earth, so they don't move; and between each pair of two embers place one turning ember, under which these bend back, and have two small embers of a palm's length in-between the bends, to turn the bend.
And then tie the cord that is between the elbows toward the bend near the head, and the other string toward the feet at the other bend, and each of the assistants turns their bend all along this cord, and the masters make the spine equal as we have said.
And when they are equal, place them with drying plaster and a good quantity of egg white, then apply the ointment, and afterwards cover it with a tablet of three inches in length that cures the area affected by gilbositis and the healthy part of the spine, then tie them with a string as we have said, and use herbs to reduce swelling until it heals.
And if no remedy comes to the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with that which we have said before; and each time administered there is one piece of wax.
And at no time does the appearance come in the rear vertebra of the back, and be careful that it is dislocation; and it's the bone that opens up, for one should not have presumption about this: it could bring death.
Regarding hip dislocations
Know that the joints of the hip and shoulder can only come from dislocations alone, unlike other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside, with less dislocation in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation from within is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and opens more the diseased knee than the healthy one, and cannot make the diseased knee bend like the healthy one; And it is the leg that is swollen from the abscesses, because the head of the thigh bone comes there.
And the sign for one who goes towards fire, it is that this event is contrary to what was before.
And the signs for one who goes towards completion, it is that his leg is well according to fulfillment; nonetheless, he does not bend his knee without pain, and if you want him to move, he cannot beforehand, and he retains his urine, and swells his ankle, and when he walks, he steps on his heel.
And the symptoms of one who has it behind him, so that he cannot spread his thighs, nor bend them, and this leg is more bent than the other, and the groin becomes limp, and the shoulder blade of the arm underlies the ribs.
The remedies for this manifestation of dislocation are that if it is an old dislocation, and it stays in its position, without any treatment; and there should be no assumption about it.
And for those where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, you should quickly return the joint, and stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, then no other treatment is needed.
And if it doesn't return in this manner, you must have two strong assistants and hold the leg strongly with both hands, or with one hand tied above the knee; and another assistant extend his hand above in such a way that he presses the hands onto the buttocks, then pushes him with one strong thrust up to the thigh; and another holds the head against the tie.
and extend both upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground in one movement, and stays suspended.
This method of extension is common among four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, just like we have said, it is correct.
If not, then it's necessary to treat according to its appearance. When dislocations occur in the pantedens area, you need to place the patient on their side with a healthy part visible, then bind the limb at the base of the foot, and the part above the ankle, then secure the bandage higher towards the ankle, and near the forcele region.
Then take hold of another assistant's arms, and embrace the thick part of the diseased foot, spreading it outward in form: if it returns to its place now; and this way of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this way as we have said, then it's necessary that you tie the two feet of the diseased person together firmly with a thick bandage around both heels and knees, and make the diseased leg extended more than two arms compared to the others.
Then have the head hung from the top of a post, and place it two arms' length above the ground. Then instruct one attendant to grasp the top of the crutch, and have another attendant together with the patient hanging as well, who grasps firmly onto the crutch, for the joint will now return quickly.
And when the dislocation is forward, if the patient lies, as we have said for those with elasticity, and stretch one rod along the affected leg properly, and also on the foot;
Then place two sticks, one at the head and the other on the foot, then stick a stick between the buttocks of the patient near their shape. And apply wet cloths inside, so it doesn't irritate the skin, then extend each limb towards him, and place the joint at its normal height relative to his hand during dislocation.
If it returns, that's good. If not, place it on the table and press it like we have instructed in pressing movements, and have the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when dislocation is in front, it's necessary to extend the painful leg quickly, and do as I've said; place the patient's pain on the inner side of their knee, then press with the other hand, and push down towards their ankle.
And if dislocation is at the back, it's not necessary to extend the leg downwards or lift up from the ground. Instead, the patient should be in a position as though their hip was dislocated at the back, just like we described regarding lying on both hips. And place it on its face, and let the ligament be extended as we said before, and must apply pressure to the joint at the table;
And it will be right when the patient extends their legs, and they are equal; then adjust the knees, and place the plaster, and hold with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
And let them rest for three days or four, then release them and place the plaster again; and if you see they are equal, adjust it as before, and leave them for another three days; then release them and let them walk properly until the limb is strengthened.
Regarding shoulder dislocation
The knees are dislocated in two ways: it means, internally and externally, and behind; and does not dislocate in front.
And the signs for this are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not straighten at the knee, know that they have dislocated.
And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient stand straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back on their buttocks, and put their foot on yours.
Then take their knee with your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee gently. And another attendant should extend their foot as long as the knee returns to its place. The sign is that they bend well their leg at the knee lightly.
And apply the plaster, and let the leg hang from the knee, and keep them tightly together for three or four days. Then release it; and do not touch the patient's wounds until the limbs are comfortable.
And if the limbs have not yet recovered, apply strong stretching therapy, as we've mentioned in treating the hip, until they are healed.
from the heel dislocation
The heels are neither fully set nor completely dislocated, both inside and outside.
And the signs are such that the ankle swells, and tries to move towards the part where it is dislocated.
The resetting should be gentle, and one must slightly extend its hands when it is only being manipulated gently.
And when it has been dislocated slightly, then you should make the patient lie straight, and hold one of its legs at both ankles above the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then again with your left hand four times, then lift it up, and firmly hold the foot in place.
And do this twice as we have said, when you pull and drag that bone; if it returns, it is fine; if not, start again with the operation, because it will come back.
And if it cannot return in such a way, then allow the patient to lay on their back with their head in the air, and plant one hand firmly into the earth between their legs, and tie cloths around them, so as not to bruise the patient.
Then cut open their leg, and other assistants extend the bone to their hands or to two men, who hold it up to the neck of the bone; Then extend each assistant equally, and have the buckets be close between the patient's legs to hold the leg when it is extended.
Then place the eye-level with the dislocation in your hands, and have another assistant cut off the healthy leg at its thigh, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the right point, then apply the dressing and bind it in place, and stretch them properly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are behind the ankle, so they do not be tied too tightly;
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage comes off, then tighten it again; then release it on the third day or fourth, and help the patient to walk for another four days; And even if he walks up until this point, it's not certain that he won't dislocate again.
And if there are abscesses around, it is necessary to soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, while they are still swollen.
Of the two
When the two shoulders are reduced, if they fit well and extend in a proper manner, it is a simple task.
And if the dislocations are not in any knot on the back or leg bones, it is necessary to make the patient lie down with one and a half the length of his body or with both feet on the ground completely straight, and place your foot where these joints open, then press with your foot firmly until they heal;
And when they are even and do not open anything, place under the foot of the patient a table with two shoulder heads, then hold them in position, and let him have them for three days, then release him; and make him rest until he is healed.
regarding injuries and dislocations together
When an injury comes with a dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times it has happened that the patient dies:
if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful but patient, do not be hasty;
And at the start of things that calm fears of abscesses, and let the patient endure in God's hand, if you do not see hope for healing; And when you see hope, then reset the limb back into place immediately, so that the abscesses drain and heal.
And when the limb is in place, administer things that calm abscesses and treat the wound accordingly, using dry ointments.
And if there is a fracture with dislocation, and small bones are exposed, set the bones, and do as we have said for simple diseases.
And guard yourself from entering the path of fear, as I have said, for this is what your creator commands you to do, and through knowledge arm yourself and protect your body. Amen
