You, dear children, I have completed this book which is the culmination of the study of medicine combined with its full implementation, and brought to completion through its demonstrations and declarations. And it came to my mind that I should complete this manual with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the manual work is widespread in our region and has been taken far and wide everywhere, it has lost its knowledge and expertise, and nothing remains from it beyond small descriptions in old books that were done by hand. And because of this error and vanity, minds are closed off and the knowledge is far away.
It seems I should revitalize this treatise in its entirety according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together with the forms of the cautery instruments and other tools of work along with their proper exposition and preparation as required.
And due to the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our times, the art of medicine has been prolonged. And it is necessary that whoever intervenes promptly in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the disposition of the limbs, their forms and connections and separations, have knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews, and the number of bones, and their movement and of moving veins and resting ones, and the location of their exit.
And thus states Hippocrates that with words we speak little and with deeds even less; indeed, in the art of manual skills.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever does not know what has been said beforehand, is likely to commit errors and deceive people; similarly, I have seen many who interfere in this science and abandon their knowledge and lack of experience.
And I have seen a fool who attempted to remove an abscess or neck swelling in a woman, and cut the arteries below the neck; because so much blood flowed out that the woman died from her hands.
And I have seen another fool who treated a stone in an elderly man, and the stone was large; he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died after three days.
And I have already been called to extract it, and saw the location of the disease and the size of the stone, and if you had cut him, he would have died.
And I saw another case where he treated someone who was in need of care, Duke of our land, who had broken his leg and suffered bruising. The injuries were incorrectly applied to the wound causing unnecessary harm, and the patient was left with pain for an entire month; he was advised not to relieve himself at all during that period; so he remained like this until the leg swelled completely and the feet became infected, leading to death.
I was summoned to assist him, and I hurried to relieve his leg. And when I heard that it had been released so smoothly without any pain being felt.
But every path of corruption had already been confirmed in the member or body, and it could not be cured; and the process of decay continued within the member as long as the limb was completely lost.
And there is a second site that collapses an incised abscess and then inflames it due to the wickedness of its lordship.
For the ulcer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not permit one to touch it with iron if it is in such a state that all can be removed which is corrupted.
And concerning this, dear children, you must know that work of the hands is divided into two sections: that is to say, where there are dangers in multiple conditions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is danger and peril.
Because it is necessary that you keep them, so that the simple people do not speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in caution, and treat your illnesses lightly yet firmly, and use the best way so that through God's grace you come to health and are healed; and leave the unbearable diseases with grievous sanitation; and remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in them so that you can come from this world to glory in the next.
Galen instructs in some of his admonishments: "Do not take ill disease as treatment, lest you be called a foolish person by others."
I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters deal with fire cauterizations and medical cauterizations, and organize the chapters from the head down to the stones; and about the forms of instruments, and tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the operation.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, as well as suction cups and wounds, the extraction of arrows, and similar matters; and these chapters are organized along with the forms of instruments.
The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, as well as similar matters; they are organized from the head down to the stones, and include the forms of instruments.
Just as we recall our work, it is fitting for me to tell you the quality of each remedy and its harm for every constitution.
I say that the qualities of assistance and damage are the longest speech and most subtle science and secrets in response. And many wise ones spoke about this, agreeing with it. They provided me with little of their words, for I fear lengthiness.
I say that the fire aid works universally on any constitution where there is matter, because there are two constitutions: these are known as warm constitution with matter and dry constitution with matter.
In the warm and dry constitution combined with matter, they devised a plan and said that fire cautery is a great aid. And the other ones said otherwise: that fire cautery only works for illnesses originating from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be treated with hot diseases by heat or drying; and it contradicts those who say otherwise that the cautery provides great help to hot and dry illnesses that come into the bodies of men. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find that the body is cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it true on every occasion by experience.
And every passage, do not interfere with it except that which has been proven, and which a long-time user knows the art of cautery, and the diversity of skin types in humans, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and extent over time; we have no fear for other skin types, especially in cold and moist diseases. And make all the parts resemble and agree with the cautery.
And know, my children, that a fire cautery contains secrets of healing, and is more beneficial than a burning medical treatment.
For fire is simple, and comes out only from the body that is burned, and does not harm another body if you don't name it.
The burning medicines spread from one part of the body to another by removing the evil, causing diseases during treatment. And sometimes, they trouble the patient.
Fire, due to its height and the goodness of its essence, does not create this effect if there is no excess.
And I have found this through experimentation and the length of my service and study in the art, and it is true about things. And for this, I apologize for the length of my words, for I do not wish to withhold from you the secret which lies in fire, and the quality of the work, how it removes diseases from bodies, as the philosopher says by demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
And know, child, that they agreed upon when the cauterizations should be performed, and they prescribed times.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the evils arising from it occur by help of the fire; and likewise if the cauterizations are for necessary pains beyond and before which cannot wait until greater mischief befall to the limb.
And never think like the foolish ones do, child; for a disease cured by cauterization does not recover. And they say this in this manner; but it is not as they think, for cauterizations are only medicine that changes complexion and dries the fluids that cause pain, valued more than medicine due to their urgency of action and the virtue of its work and authority.
And the ability is that disease comes none other than according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness and its virtue; and they are gathered within him the excesses due to the acquisition of meats and similar things, if it is not cauterization given at this point or where there is little excess and moisture, such as cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and that kind of pain does not recur; but this happens seldom.
And no one understands why cautery is considered part of medicine at the end, and that can be seen; but they don't believe that cautery should follow medicine after all, but their understanding is false, and it considers cautery as part of medicine because when we administer methods of treatments in any illness and they do not work, then we administer our cautery, and it works. Thus clearly the cautery is part of medicine, not according to the understanding of the people who misunderstand it.
The old ones said that gold cauteries are better than iron ones, and they mentioned this only due to the quality of gold and its high substance. They also stated that the metal parts of a cautery don't cause ulcers; however, this is not true as I have proven it myself and found that it can indeed occur in some people; and gold cauteries are better than iron ones, just like they said.
And still, when you heat the gold tool, you do not know it is heated by the color of the gold, and it is immediately cooled; and if you heat it too much; then put it on fire; and so there is enough prevention.
And for this, we use our iron cautery that we have prepared for our work.
Otherwise, I have ordered you to write this chapter up to the thumb, so that it is easier to find the vision.
with an olive stick
A fire cautery works for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two of them which we do by reason of an illness called 'soda', and due to many humors descending from the head as sweat, and from ears, and through a multitude of dreams, toothache, throat pain, and especially for all diseases originating from cold such as paralysis, soda [possibly meaning heatstroke or fever], apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patient's body is cleansed by a dissolving medicine altering the head. Three or four times, according to how the qualities and the heat and the custom of the illness can bear it; then afterwards cleanse the head from the ill entity.
And then hold it between your hands, and place his hands on a hot stone; afterwards put the root of your palm under the root of his nose between his two nostrils; and let where your fingers go bleed, then heat up the cautery called 'olivare', which has this form:
And place it at its natural position with ink, and while descending and restraining your hand gradually, pinch a little and then relax; then lift your hand alone, and check if you see the bone. If you do not see the bone, start using the cautery until you see the bone as I have instructed; afterwards take one part of honey, and apply soft cotton within, place it under the ink, and let it stay for three days; after that place a buttered poultice; leave it on until all scabbing has disappeared; then treat the wound with tetracycline ointment until it heals.
And if they were told by the old ones, that the longer a wound stays open, the more it purges; and for this reason, movement helps.
And they were told that we should leave the cautery on until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burnt from the bone, and treat it afterwards.
And it is said that we should allow the cautery to remain there, and press so hard that we lift out of the bone as wide as a small ring that women put in their earrings because fluids can flow out from this place. And should we let the wound stay open for a long time; afterwards we must clean it and bandage it.
And these two methods of using the cautery do not seem to be good for everything, except in those where there is a flow of fear; and I think that I should leave them as they are. For the shoulders become weakened by continuous solutions from nature, as we have shown elsewhere on other limbs; and even when the shoulders are weak due to natural reasons, my first reaction to using cautery is more healing for me, and with this method I work together for health.
from the old pain in the head
When throughout the head comes chronic pain and lasts long, one must use the patient's remedies and pills that are called 'cochie', and treatments for clearing the head and ears and bandages; and if one applies the cautery as we have previously stated to it, it will not help.
Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and not too cold; thus apply to it a little from this cautery as we have said above.
After you do the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and apply one cautery where the bone is called "vassel"; and apply another method for suction cups; and lift your hand so that you don't touch the bone: patients feel much more pain in this cautery than others, and I will speak about it elsewhere; and it should be known that the cautery on the horns should be gentler than the one used for the middle part of the head, and that has a certain form:
The use of a hot iron commands the patient to allow hair growth until it is long and even; and if it pricks at its base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. When sudden pain occurs in the shoulder part and the disease spreads up to the eye, and the head is purged with mild medications, and we have performed other treatments that I mentioned under the division of diseases, but none of this helps: therefore, I apply cautery according to two ways, namely through a medicine of fever and fire.
The medicine-based cautery involves taking a spoonful of oil, and using the peel and the re-cooked (a process akin to cooking in broth) for one or two times per joint. Then apply it onto the temple area where the pain is localized so you can place the spoonful of oil on top of the skin; once she's placed there, hold and tighten well and leave like that for 12 hours; then release and remove the garlic paste, leaving the wound in that state for two days or three. Then apply a butter bandage until sweating appears.
After the application of ointment until it is clean; and if you see that applying some burning medicines, as I have written or detailed in the second part on burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done like this. Heat up the shape of the cautery as described:
And call it "closed" because its tip is shaped like a bell or has .i. point of curvature, and in the middle there's a small appearance; and put it on the painful area, and hold your hand and gently twist the iron until half of the edge of the wound is burned; then lift your hand so that no artery burns, let blood flow abundantly.
After placing sailcloth in the wound area and keeping it for three days; then replace with damp cotton in butter, and treat the wound with ointment until it is clean; and if you wish to cauterize this headache using the iron cautery which is called "cultellare", do so all over but be careful not to cover the artery in this headache that isn't old.
Of the migraine
When you treat migraines as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases before, and if it doesn't improve, and you observe that the cauterization methods previously discussed in medicine don't work on this individual either, then it is necessary for you to heat up the cauterizer called "cultellare" until it turns white; and do so by placing its tip half a line of about two inches along the spine, and take your hand once, and apply pressure ensuring not to touch an artery or cut until you reach bone; and be cautious with the jaw when one eats, making sure no food is left in it which could lead to choking, and that nothing else besides the silence occurs in the throat, avoiding any spasms that might affect the patient, and guard against bleeding from the artery once cut, or when you experience excessive fear about it, especially those who are not familiar with these procedures; just let me finish my work here for now; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and show you its location in this book.
And if you notice that these cauterizations do not help the disease and the patient is suffering, apply cauterization to the middle of the head as we have said before, and treat the wound until it heals. And if you observe this, administer the cauterizer we mentioned in the chapter on extracting an artery, along with a double-edged cauterizer; and these are better than others and more helpful.
From the pain of the ear from part frost.
When frosty pain strikes the ear, and remedies have been applied along with other treatments we've discussed in this section, should the pain persist, then apply a heat cautery known as "pains," as follows:
After applying the heat cautery around the entire afflicted ear, or around both if the pain is felt in both ears simultaneously, remove it slightly from the base of the ear after you have marked its position. Place ten points around each ear; continue treating until the area heals properly.
From the pain of the mouth
Pain that should be treated with a cautery isn't removed by those that move due to lymph flow, just like we mentioned in the sections of diseases; and there shouldn't be any cautery for symptoms that come from dryness and irritation of the nerves.
When you treat this form of pain that moves due to lymph flow and head discharges and gargling, and it doesn't respond well, then it's necessary for you to apply the cautery at three points: one at the root of the ear, and another slightly outside the temple, and the third in adjusting the two lips; and place the cautery over the healthy part that is exposed, and make it cauterize the area above the ear a bit below the head keratin layer, and another on the temple to the length of about an inch; and leave the cautery there until half the brain is burned; and this is how you should apply the cautery:
And the form of cuteria we placed earlier, but it's a bit more refined and requires that the knives be slightly thicker; after treating the wound as I said previously until it heals properly, until it is healthy.
When dealing with an apoplectic stroke that is long-lasting and you treat it as we have said, and if it doesn't improve, and the patient has a fever, then do this: make four cauterizations. Two of them on the two horns of the head, and one under the head, and one where the neck is called 'wattles' as we had previously mentioned, and the final cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it accordingly as we had said before.
from Liturgy
For this illness, you should give the patient large grains and powdered pills that purify the brain; afterwards take the scalp of the patient thoroughly, and place the sinapic plaster on the back of their head as written or described in treatments for plasters. And this is how to do the cautery: do it like I have said.
If it is clean like this, well and good; and if not, proceed as follows: make three cautery burns descending from the head to the collarbone, leaving a space of about one finger between each burn. Treat as you would with other cases; should you see them adjusting and the patient tolerating the pain, perform another burn in the middle area. If necessary, do two more on the tips of the remaining two parts, treating until it is clean; among these burns, call those performed in the middle 'olive-shaped' like I've mentioned before.
of cold from the head It is necessary to cleanse the head of lice and what we have discussed beforehand; after treating the head with oil for the patient, then perform a cautery around the scalp and on each horn, and once more at the base and three times along the spine below the neck; and if you need to do more, and the scalp is moist and the patient tolerates it, and the illness continues, then do four more cauterizations along the spine down the back; and leave until the most unpleasant parts are well charred, then lift your hand; afterwards treat until it is clean, and among these cauterizations, call those performed in a way that results in olive-shaped marks as we have mentioned before.
From the treatment of epilepsy
The epileptics should only use the cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and first modify their years of treatment and other remedies that we have discussed in the section where the patient is large and suffering from physical ailments.
And if it's a child who can't endure it, then do gargling and chewing, modifying the brain frequently with good meats; after that he takes his head every three days, and I apply one cautery according to what we said previously, and another one on the jugular vein, and on each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffering, then do cauteries in the way I have said for those who are paralyzed and have a flaccid body, over the spinal column and around the neck, and make olive wood cauteries according to the method I have described.
And if the patient is a child, then do one delicate cautery in this manner:
When due to the reason of melancholy are excesses or fluids corrupted and thick, then apply the fire cautery from parts as we have said for the one who has paralysis.
And if due to the reason of melancholy are the excesses declining into melancholy, and the body is damp within the flesh, then they should drink something so that the brain may be purified, according to what was mentioned earlier in the division.
After having the head of the flesh; after make two pieces of linen well made, as one circle, if you place it on the head; and if there are maladies sitting still, they should be held in all directions; afterwards present the liniment, and warm with old goat butter; and heat it over fire at a moderate temperature so that it can be applied without causing discomfort; after drain out the circle through from within by keeping the head covered, and let it cool down; and do this to each part of the body once per week with good governance until it is well.
If you see that the cautery is being applied by making several points on the entire cautery. This method of cautering moistens the head significantly; and then place wet cotton, butter, and gelatine fat on it.
from the power of the eyes When the onset comes first with the eyes through the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and continue to make the patient consume something that purifies the head, and protects it from all moisture, and make him sweat or take multiple baths while fasting.
After giving him instructions about his head, and make him undergo a cautery on the head, and apply two cauteries on each temple when the weakening due to the illness is in both eyes together, or if it is only in one eye; and seal off all veins and arteries that are around the brain, applying the cautery long according to the width of the temples; and guard against bleeding out, and if you see excessive blood coming out, then stop it as much as you can using a similar method.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions with cauteries, how to apply them; and in every case where a cautery or hot iron is applied, it must be done between the two bones behind.
of the two paths of tears
When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed, and lie on the veins, or under the arteries that are visible at the neck outward; and one can see that they are cold superfluous phlegm. Therefore, I do as I said at the beginning of this work when descending to the eyes: i.e., apply a cautery to the head, and two cauterizations on the two temples, and two cauterizations where you apply an iron near the two bones; and if there is need for more, carefully cauterize above the eyebrow with one small cautery.
of the paths of tears within the eyes
When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give three nests of calves to the patient; after this, drink the head, and apply a cautery or mid-way through an olive oil cautery; and perform two cauteries using the 'clavilis' type of cautery on each wrist, a little above the hair; and be careful not to cover the artery. And this is the shape of the cautery which is called 'clavilis':
When the oil paper is softened due to illness and moisture, then apply the cautery that is called 'olive'. Here is its form:
And if you see that they do this twice on the two candles as long as the candle is, and don't let go of your hand until the third part of the paper burns, according to the method I have said.
of hair that sticks out from the eye No time has it been that the hair of the eyes turns into the gums and touches the eye, and then one performs a cautery according to two methods: namely by fire or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let their hair grow long and evenly; and if they are grasped at their root, hold their eyelids so that they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then set the patient in a state of health; after this on the paper by which there is an eye, draw a figure that shall be as if it were a leaf of myrtle, and mark its beginning by the sign before the hairs; then place wet cotton saturated with quail's egg white and garlic paste over the eye, then warm up the cautery to the shape indicated here.
After cauterizing at the figure you have marked little by little a few times, until the scars are healed in that place; and the signs of health after the operation is when you see the paper retracting, and the hairs raised to the eye point's level; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then put wet cotton in butter as long as the scorching disappears; afterwards apply an ointment until it becomes healthy.
And when this comes about and the paper softens, then restart the cautery at that same spot as before; if the hairs have fallen out, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level and evenly matches, not touching the eyes.
The cautery of medical fire commands the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; then shape parchment like a leaf of myrtle. Then take French soap and fresh vinegar, each one part, mix them well; do this quickly so it doesn't cool off, then spread on the form as like a leaf of myrtle, put on paper over the eyes; if the patient is sick for less than an oil (unit), they should open in one place, and if both sides are similarly affected. And fill each hole with moist cotton from an egg; keep your hand on the sick person's body while spreading the medicine, press once every time the patient feels the irritation of the medicine, as it feels like fire also. When you have done this for some time, if you apply the medicine to your finger. And when the irritation has passed, if you lift your hand away, and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted as it would be lifted by constraining fire or through incision; and if this is so, then it is well. If not, reapply the medicine to your finger or where the medicine hasn't worked yet, until your actions are even, and your eyes are ready; then place moistened cotton in butter until the skin burns under them, after that cleanse your hand with balm which is called 'dyafenis' and another, until it is healed.
And if it is your task to protect well within your work by great caution so that you do not let any medicine enter into the eyes. And if the paper becomes moist afterwards, and the hair grips in the eye, then restart the medicine on that side of the head which was softened by the proper paper; just as you did before; after it heals until it is sound; and this is the shape of the leaf of myrtle:
Know that the eyes of people are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints; and do not let the right way respond to him who is studying this craft.
by the treatment of fistula via cautery
When you treat fistulas as we have instructed under the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not benefiting, then it is necessary that you apply a cautery in this manner to them.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your healthy position; and guide the surgeons' hands on their head so that it does not move or shift from its position under your guidance; after this apply moist cotton in preparation for an egg or garlic juice onto the eye; then heat up the cautery which is prepared: and hold the heated cautery above the head as if it were a feather pen, assembled to be placed on the skin where it will touch. If you can see that its tip moves from one corner of the head to the other, or if you observe that it resembles an umbrella; but in any case, remember this procedure is crucial for your work.
After pressing if the fistula has been opened, and treat the infection by drying it out; and if it is closed, open it again and remove any pus. Afterwards, place the cautery in order, hold your hand on the cautery at the part near the nose above the eye, ensuring your hands do not cause chaos; then insert the cautery into the oil's grease, and let it become impure.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery until the bone, that would be well. If not, retry the cautery one more time and if needed, do so again, and let it rest for three days; afterwards apply moist cotton in butter, and continue with the drying ointment cure until it heals completely. If forty days have passed and it is still not healed, then apply a corrosive water medicine until the bone is exposed; and follow this procedure according to what would be recommended in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing fistulas that none of the old ones mentioned. Understand what a fistula is, and prepare to treat it; afterwards place one sharp needle in the opening, following its natural shape: And do it to the size of three inches of wood; and hold your hand or needle firmly, and don't move the body at all, so that the heated wood doesn't sear its oil; and one must put on the oil of the body cotton moistened with egg white or ash: The wood is the source of the fistula, and the body enjoys marvellous healing.
And if the fistula is cured by the cautery we have mentioned, that's good. If not, it should be treated with mercury, and bring back the fistula to the body according to what's proper in its own place.
cuts in lips Over the years, cuts occur on the lips that are referred to as "hairs", and similarly on the lips of children.
If the treatment for these cuts, as we have discussed in sections, does not help, then proceed with heating a small surgical knife like this:
And place him quickly in those holes until they grow; after that, cleanse the area from wax while it remains healthy.
from the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the lymph node, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it turns into gangrene and swells up until it hardens and becomes a fistula; you then treat it as we have explained in divisions, but if this treatment doesn't help: then it's necessary that you use one fire cautery according to the size of the fistula; after draining or removing pus from the fistula, hold your hand until the heat penetrates to the bottom of it and wherever else is affected. And do this once or twice, as we have said in treatments, while it remains healthy. If this treatment works, that's good; but if not, you must expose the area and remove the infected bone as you find it in your treatise.
movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat this with medicines but it doesn't help, then place the patient's head in a healthy position; afterwards heat up the cautery according to its form which will come after this in such a manner that you insert one piece of wood into the tooth; and put within the cautery hot for a short time, hold your hand so much that the pain feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterward lift your hand and continue the cautery as you desire it; afterward fill the patient's mouth with salted water, leave it there for an hour and then rinse it out.
And in this way the moving tooth is stabilized, and the softened gum is restrained, and the moisture is corrupted and dried.
from the pain of the teeth
When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or veins involved, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it needs to use cautery according to two methods: and butter cautery and fire cautery.
Butter cautery if it is such that you take butter from a cow, and the tip in a metal spoon or spider; afterwards take cotton and wrap around the tip of a needle, and let the butter melt, then place this butter against the painful tooth quickly and hold until it has cooled down; do so repeatedly as long as its power reaches to the root of the tooth. And if you see wet wool and cotton in cold butter, and place them against the painful tooth, and place on a hot iron until the heat reaches the nerve of the tooth.
Fire cauteries if it is such that you take a piece of iron or spider, and make sure it is large enough so that the fire doesn't reach inside the wound; after heating the cautery, from which heat will come afterwards, place them against the tooth and hold your hand until the heat of the cautery has cooled down; do this repeatedly, as the pain will be gone by today or tomorrow. And make sure the wound fills with good butter when you hurry with the application of this cautery, and then remove it with force; this is the form of the cautery:
When the scrofulas are caused by cold pus and moisture, and do not respond to digestive remedies, then prepare the cautery as described below, and make two openings for fumes to exit on the other side of the cautery; and place the hot cautery against the boil once or twice, or three times until it reaches the bottom of the boil; and if the boil is small, adjust the size of the cautery according to the size of the boil, and leave it like that for three days; and cover with moist cotton dipped in butter until the pus is removed; afterwards treat with oils and poultices until it heals.
When the moisture invades through the channels of the lung, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary to have the remedies first empty out by diuretic medicines; after that make a cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go all the way to the throat, but just a little bit. Then make another one at the junction of the neck and the base of the spine, and this is where we have the form described in front; and treat it as explained earlier until it heals.
From the cautery tool For when all and the diseases of the womb are caused by cold moisture, and the patients do not have fever or dryness, and if it's an old disease, then apply two cauterizations on their force lines in their veins; and one other cautery between the buttocks, near the nipples; and let the cauterization be called "clavile" according to the form that was previously described.
And if you see fit, apply the cauterization as when you touch the whole tool called "points" which is described in the ear disease previously; and keep the points up to thirty or even more than that. After this treatment clean the area according to what was said beforehand, and place three burns according to this form:
And for these are lighter cauterizations, because you perform them at three places each time.
On the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After that, bandage the wound on his back and ribs; afterwards, gently move the abdomen which is inside the womb with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated internally, apply the fire cautery which has two points like this:
And apply the cautery to the abdomen until it reaches the ribs, and let the shape of the cautery combine with four applications; and for this, use the cautery that has three points, because the pattern of application consists of three cauterizations; and place the nerve according to the intricacy of a tent, which is the form of the cautery that has three points:
And never once is it applied to this first nerve, because there are seven cauteries involved.
After placing the cautery on, rub with oil; afterwards let the patient rest, and do not move their limbs for a long time until they are well settled.
And if it is dislocated from there, very little happens, then apply the cautery to the thick part of the wrist bone, or several in succession. Because the joint is closed, and the moisture has been expelled, and the patient recovers.
of the cautery made from rue
The old ones said we should do pleurisy-searing iron cauterizations from the roots of aristologe, and in this way: take a long root of aristologe, the largest you can find, let it be dry, and make sure it's as big and long as your thumbs; and put its juice into oil, and set it on fire, then apply iron cauterizations once between the strength and throat, twice smaller ones slightly lower towards the part that is beneath the beard; one cauterization at the fifth rib and another near the sixth, a little behind; one cauterization under the buttocks, one on the stomach, one in-between the two shoulders, then two more across the ribs below the cauterization between the shoulders; don't squeeze your hand, instead perform it openly just as you would when smelling.
And it was said by the old ones that no man uses a pretend iron cautery to one rash person, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess; and then came out the pain, as we have mentioned in the abscess near the liver. But in this work there is fear or perhaps now the patient has died, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
"de la mice" seems to be incomplete or written in a non-standard form. It appears there might be a typo or it could be a specific term from a certain context that is unclear here. The phrase could potentially be related to "mice" which, depending on the context of the text, could refer to rodents (possible in pest control advice), or more likely, it's possibly a misinterpretation and should actually be associated with another word that begins similarly but isn't correctly identified. However, without further information or surrounding sentences from this medieval medical treatise, accurate interpretation is challenging. If "mice" was meant by mistake due to similar spelling or pronunciation in the original language (Old French), then it would need to be replaced with the correct term based on the context provided elsewhere in the text.
When you treat the illness of the mouse in those that we have discussed regarding divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit, therefore try three methods of cautery which are all good.
There is a method in which you make three cauteries, or four, marking according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver as we have said before; and do not rush your hand over the entire cautery, and let the patient frequently be on their back;
And another method for cautery is to heat the cautery which has two ears, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; lift the kidney that is located under the mouse, or where the pain starts coming from the left side, and let the elevations you lift the kidney according to the kidney, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries should be according to the width of the body.
After I have burnt the two fingers that are inflamed as long as their ends are pierced from the other side, and then remove the cautery, afterwards there will be four. And if you see, cauterize with all the cautery at three fingers. After the cure when it has expelled gangrene for a long time, and this is useful as another of the treatments mentioned before.
from dropsy
Cautery is not effective for dropsy, except according to the method called 'asclytes'. When you treat it following the methods we have discussed in divisions, and if your treatment does not benefit, then you must give four cauterizations around the anus, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the kidneys, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place on the breast; and make sure that the cauterizations are well close to the kidney.
After allow the cautery to remain in place for a long time to burn off pus, and do not stop cleaning after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and the two intentions would come together with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is like the fork that we have demonstrated before; and for the back it's olive-shaped, according to what was placed here previously.
regarding the swelling of joints When the joints swell in someone who is hypoplastic and filled with yellow bile, it is necessary for you to apply the cautery on the back of the foot between the first and second fingers. Lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not insert too deeply into this point, otherwise it would remove the yellow bile, and apply the cautery according to this shape:
After performing on both legs, two cauteries each on the point of the cutticle in every leg; and have the cautery long, one near the knee before and the other behind, centrally in the leg; then leave the cauteries for a long time without treatment until something comes out; after curing other treatments that we have mentioned.
from memory
When the belly ache comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retaining and digesting power, which is in the stomach and within the intestines, is being overloaded and cannot be cured by regular treatments; you see that patient suffering a lot with very green symptoms, then make one major cautery on the stomach following how it was described previously or abdominal cautery, at the circulating cautery. And four minor cauteries inside the mouth in all places, making one major thin cautery for each point and two minor cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the body suffering, make a cautery on the bellybutton, and one cautery on each armpit, and two small cauteries in the stomach beneath the navel, because treatment benefits when there is good assistance.
regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are rooted or multiple, and they're old, with large cold moist pus, if the treatment doesn't help as described in sections, then you should make cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, that is all around behind some bone a little by little in triangular fashion, and one near the anus. Four times;
And if you think that the stomach is chilled and food isn't being digested, and we see swelling in the abdomen, then on the stomach you would apply a large cauterization as was mentioned before, and another one on the liver, and yet another on the spleen with the entire cauterization down to the clavicles; and leave the cauterization for a long time. After that, let the body heal until it becomes healthy.
Regarding the diseased area which is called "thehlul"
When you treat the "thehlul" condition, if it appears as a rough area, and you apply the fire cautery that seems like a razor's edge, then set it fully ablaze over that "thehlul" treated spot; and keep your hand there until the flame reaches the base of the vein from which the blood flows; perform this once or twice, and if there is more "thehlul", cauterize each part as we have said; after the treatment with antiseptic ointments when they are effective; and if you cauterize with a large fire cautery over "alchatim", it will provide greater relief.
Of improperly treated wound
When the patient cannot bear surgery or incision, as we will describe in its proper place, if such sickness occurs that can only be cured through cauterization.
When there's a fistula that has aged and developed into gangrene due to moist infections, you should test the entire area with a thin needle, and remember to know exactly how many points the fistula penetrates. Heat the cautery to resemble the size of a small knife, then insert it into the fistula according to its depth, and reheat until the pus and decayed materials are burned away, one time, or two times, or three times depending on your need; be cautious not to burn nerves and major veins. If the fistula extends into the abdominal cavity or intestine, handle them with care, performing the procedure only inside the abdomen, consider that it's not a minor operation. After healing the area thoroughly until it is clean, if the wound has healed over and the contents have been digested for a long time, you can determine that the wound has fully healed; otherwise, know that there are still infections present in the fistula, decayed bone at its base; do this with understanding as we will explain further within its context.
Of kidney disease When the pain in the stomach comes from the kidneys and large congestion, it affects women differently, hence you should apply a cautery on both sides of the kidneys with the same cautery we mentioned before; and if we cauterize at the midpoint, there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will provide more assistance.
Of the bladder When the bladder is full and weak due to heat and moisture so that the patient retains urine, then the practitioner should perform a cautery procedure on the lower part of the bladder, where hair begins near the thumb. On both right and left sides, each cautery should be as long as the span of one's hand; and apply a single cautery behind the back, or two if needed; and make sure the cauteries are in the shape described beforehand.
Of the liver When the liver is cold and moist, and fails to allow conception to occur, and the flowers (likely referring to some medical condition or symptoms) are putrefied with their ends delayed; and when they come in, there is much pain: then it's necessary to perform three cauterizations inside the womb, just as we have said about the cautery for the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and make sure the cauterizations are made in the shape of a claw, as we have said.
From the thigh
When the viscous fluids descend to the crotch area of the thigh, and because of this reason it moves out of its place. The signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and the limbs are found from the division visible point, then you should cauterize the diseased part on the crotch area of the thigh with one fire cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the limb inside the crotch so that the crotch be within the circle; and let the cauteries be as those used for cauterizing the stomach.
And if you do not have these fire cauteries ready, make three olive-sized fire cauteries instead, and ensure that the cauteries are as large as all your nails; and treat with them until they cool down.
Regarding the pain in the thigh When pain comes in the thigh bone, and this is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated using what we have discussed about treatment for joint disorders, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: thus, it is necessary that you cleanse the body of its large fluids with putrid pills or other good-looking pills.
After you do the cautery; and the method of doing the cautery is according to two ways: this means combining hot medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is done in several ways; among which one method is as follows: you apply triangular cauterizations on the thigh bone in this shape, and each one should have good depth and be large, with an interval of about a coin between each one, and these cauterizations are olive-shaped; no one makes a middle cauterization in the middle part of the thigh because there are four according to this shape:
And if you see that it is cauterized with the circular cautery as we have explained before in the dislocation of the thigh bone; but make it like this so that the circles contain all the thigh bone, and all the points around the wound are heated.
And this is the method for sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and doesn't reach up to the thigh or down to the leg. And if it does come up to the thigh and the leg, they do two cauterizations there where the disease says the pain stays, and one on top of the ankle three inches, at the left side a bit; and be the cauterizations cutaneous, and burn the thickness of the skin; and if the patient senses that the pain extends up to three or four inches deep in the body or almost up to the knee, then they cauterize where they feel the pain.
And if more work is required, do it; and should the pain extend from the knee towards the thigh, use cutaneous or circular cauterization, and take great care in all your cauterizations to not let off until you burn both nerves and major arteries, and make no greater harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who performed cauterization on the ankle down to the foot, and left them until their leg was completely swollen, and even so with the feet, which became inflamed and rotten. After an abdomen treatment, he/she died from it.
And if the pains are in two parts together, do the cautery on each part according to this way. // And the surgeons said for the fire cautery of the hip, as stated here is the method, make one rod of iron and let it be at the head also as thick as a small carpenter's auger or slightly less, and have it with interstices and let them extend from one to another of space equal to the size of a button; and may the interstices be above the two parts and are like knots, and each has a well-made iron hand and this is the shape:
And heat it until it becomes entirely toasty red and you smell scents emanating from it, and then place it on the sore area of the hip wound, and rotate it over the healthy side. And apply this cautery once with one piece of iron, leave it for three days; and afterwards cover it in butter, and let the wound remain open long enough; after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use a little of this cautery for the fear caused by its application, and we see few who use it; however, all the same, this is good cautery which one can endure, and allows where it happens.
Of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by fall or from percussion or due to too much evacuation, or through indications of spread of cold matter, none of these appearances warrant cauterization. For it is the one who comes from the infusion of cold matter that deserves cautery.
It is necessary that after the body has been emptied of fetid pills or other indications, one performs this on the back where the pain occurs, three lines marked with a cross, and in each line according to the virtue and quantity the body can endure, more than .v. cauterizations; and do the cauterizations according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see fit, perform 3 or 4 cauterizations at the mid clavicle according to this form:
This disease often befalls small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they feel tightness alone when they stand up and faint; and you find in the last spine at the back and upon us the appearance that comes to other spines.
When you see this [condition] and observe its cure, if you treat it with the fire cautery according to this form.
If you see this [condition] and observe its treatment, apply the reddish hot point to each part of the spine equally. And if you see that needs treatment, sear inside the spine with a sharp cautery for two or three lines, and have the points close together. After this, let it heal until it is clean according to what we have said, and be careful not to use the cautery in an area of gilbositeit which is near nerve damage.
of the pain in joints
When the pain in joints is due to moisture that spreads throughout each limb, and when pain comes from inside the foot, which they call "gout" properly, and when it's caused by cold and needs medicine to cure it, then it can be treated using cautery in this way: make the shape of the cautery inside the joint of the foot, and apply olive oil to the cautery according to this form:
And if you need to touch the face near the foot, then apply heat over the entire area with this cautery. And if pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens frequently, then apply heat on each knee three times or four from each part, all across the olive oil heated area; and if you need more, make more but do not let your hand stray beyond until the inner warmth is burned out completely.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then apply the cautery as we have said in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points inside the armpit two lines deep; and if there is no pain left on the back, then apply heat over each joint and the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and well govern your patient and provide medicine. For if you govern him well and purge phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
regarding the rupture of the scrotum
When rupture happens in anger, and the bowels descend into intestines it's new, so it must be that when you see him being cured, he does not consume anything that day; and he should use things that lighten his stomach, so that his innards descend from his stomach; after have him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to shave off his armpit hair until the intestines are repaired, then pull them with your fingers, and scrape over the rupture on the bone of the finger, and at every sign it should resemble half a circle above the chest; then warm up the cautery as described here:
Until it is white and releases scents. Then pull the intestines by their ends; and have his servants shave off his hand so they do not turn back; and work well on his thighs with the patient, and place one cloth on his thighs and another under his buttocks, and another at his anus who shaves his hands; then put the cautery over his sign on your entire hand, and keep one straight and one bent until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, try again once more until you come to the bone; and take care to ensure that intestines do not spill when you apply heat; that you do not burn him; and that in this way, the patient does not suffer or other harm.
Know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your works are useless. And it must be that children's cautery irons are subtle according to their size and large people's also large according to their measure; after three days, wash his abdomen with butter oil until the scab is removed; afterwards, apply other ointments until he feels well, and let him rest on his back for forty days until the wound heals properly; and it must be that his bedwetting becomes exhausted for a long time, so that intestines do not spill when he wants to go to chambers.
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, a well-made bandage should be placed on him and worn for forty more days; with good rest, he must work little and guard against excessive drinking and eating, and loud shouting; and once this instruction is followed thoroughly, he will be completely healed. And I shall speak of the treatment of tailing in my chapter afterward. regarding the rupture of the abdomen
When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, and you notice that they no longer grow, then with each of those ruptures apply fire according to its quantity; let it be three parts of the cup's measure for the third one after each cure following what we have said; and none of the elders have said that one should cauterize at the cautery at three angles according to this form:
Firstly, there is the sign of the entrance wound and make a line across the width above the tear, and another below, and keep your hand steady with all the rodirite of the cautery tool. But the first applications of heat are lighter and less intense.
from old pain in no limb When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or being hit, and if this pain lasts long, and the cure of medicine doesn't help, then it should be treated with a cautery known as 'poins', and the cauterizations should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its function and location of twists and pain. If the first application of heat is effective, that's good; if not, apply another one on top of it, for such things are accustomed to move towards the body part closest to them, so you must do the cauterizations until the disease has healed.
Of cautery with fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
The treatments for cautery involve many times and with great assistance, and similarly the disease that comes from the putrefaction of bile and melancholy. If you see them being cauterized, take care when this disease is in its beginning phase, and if it's cured according to what we have said in division, and doesn't recur or stay, then doubt that corruption spreads through the entire body, so do this: give five applications for cautery: one on the head at noon, and another towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the cheekbones; and let your hand be such that the heat of the cautery reaches up to the bone, and so much that the crusts come out forcibly so as for the vapors of thick humors could emerge; and cauterize also under the skin according to what was explained earlier.
And if the meseil is everywhere spread out; and it becomes apparent that you should cauterize with these cauteries we have said about earlier: on the head, and one cauterization in the nose area, and two cauteries on the spine from neck to shoulder, and six on the spine of the back, and a large one under the chin and another at its center, and two on each shoulder blade; and two over the ribs, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one over each joint of hands and feet, and over the hollows of the hands; be careful not to burn any nerves that are behind the heel, do not burn them. And never make a cauterization above the bone under the nail, and another over the bone of stomach, and another over the liver.
And know that the more I apply heat from a fire, the more assistance I give and benefit accrues; and know that patients do not feel pain during heat treatment as healthy people do, because their bodies are already completely corrupted. And it is necessary for the application of heat to be large and small according to limbs and joints, just like you will find in guidelines on using tools. After care, apply a mixture of flour with honey and other treatments until it is properly healed.
of inflation
When swelling appears in any part of the body and is treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, and does not heal properly, then I apply heat to the affected limb according to its size; and if the swelling comes through the veins, I perform cauteries on the limb. Then continue with treatments until it heals completely. And one should never do a cautery at the hand, foot, or back, where the nerves are found that can paralyze the limb, and thus remove the swelling in this way; and no one should interfere with this if they aren't familiar with limbs and the functions of moving body nerves.
Of cautery with fire, command the sick person to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they poke at their root, hold their eyes still so they don't move until they fully grow.
When the illness referred to as 'albaras' matures and medicine does not help, then cauterize using a small fire cautery according to the quantity of hair on the area. Do this until the boil is removed and its color changes; then cleanse with flour mixed with lentils, rose oil, and plantain leaves, along with colostrum and almond milk from each ingredient in equal parts. Mix all together, wrap with a cloth, and apply to the affected area until it heals.
The treatment for the sore by cautery
When the ulcer begins to form and you observe it stop, if you want to cauterize it, use the fire cautery that seems like a half-circle, all around the circumference of the ulcer. And always some say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer; and always I do not think this is good because I fear it might lead to ulceration and corruption, and I have already decided never to do so; and more proper procedure would be to cauterize around, using the cautery called 'circule', as we mentioned earlier about types of cauteries.
Of the swelling that cannot die away
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is slow to die out, due to excess or because of the old age when it's decrepit (that means too old), and he has little blood left in his body, or because of tension; then you should observe for its hastening towards death. In that case, cauterize with small fire cauteries while holding them there; after this, leave him as is. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierced through completely by the cautery, so heat the cautery as shown below:
And place your hand in the middle of the illness that is called 'adubelati', while the cauteries have pierced through the whole body, and make these cauteries such that the patient feels them penetrate outwardly in such a way that the process of decay is alleviated. Afterward, proceed with the treatment until it has been fully healed.
The cure by fire using iron.
Another way of illness is called 'corrodens', which is simply a diseased member, causing it to burn like dried wood. If you see this disease in someone who can withstand the iron cautery together with fire, then heat the cauteries slightly and large according to what suits the body or where the disease is; after that, cauterize around all parts until you remove all corruption, leaving nothing behind, so that everything that has been corrupted is removed. And leave it for three days, then apply burning with oil to those cauterized areas as long as the burns from the fire heal and eliminate all corruption. After this treatment using remedies that produce pus.  And if you see after three days that healthy skin doesn't emerge, it's good; but if not, then start cauterizing in the same area that has remained of the corrupted flesh. This diseased condition can often be treated with medicine from water instead of fire cautery; however, fire cautery is a greater aid, and I have already mentioned the treatment for water remedies under its division: take it as needed when you have it available.
From those who come to the stones
Not many times when stones produce a disease which we call "cyst" according to our understanding, and it is a large swelling that presses on the foot. And for this disease there are two ways of treatment. These are known as fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery involves heating up one iron rod like a feather from a rooster, and it should be made of good iron at a size that it can fit around any nail in all directions, and it should have thin margins; after this, place the heated rod completely on the nail, and twist your hand tightly around the rod until you reach the tip of the nail; then leave it like this for three days until pus starts to form. Then apply a plaster made from crushed wild garlic mixed with butter oil onto the area all night long, and the nail will come out along with its roots. Afterwards, treat the wound with anointing oil until it heals fully.
And if they are inverted from within, causing disease in both the hand and foot, it is necessary that you apply a hot water cautery; and proceed as follows: take a hair stick or iron rod, or a rooster feather, and place it on the nail along with a small wormwood plant, this being for wart-like growths; then place the hair stick so that it touches all around, then add some hot water, hold your hand firmly in place, twist your hand back until the edge of the stick reaches to the root of the nail, and can find the deep passage of hot water down to the root; and let the patient endure a little bit of the hot water's irritation for an hour; then leave it like this, and all its roots will come out. Do this again repeatedly until you have removed all those that are in the flesh, then treat any ointments that produce pus.
The treatment for shaking
When some shake from cold or nerves, or from the quartan fever or other causes, it is fitting that you apply four or five cauterizations to the spine of the back. Apply one cautery between each vertebra; and one on the chest with an olive oil cautery; if this does not stop the shaking, hasten the recovery of the patient's health from the cold illness.
The pus-sores
When pustules or sores become visible due to the exposure of the body or from large decayed matter, it is fitting that upon their appearance you apply a subtle fire cautery on each part of the pustule: a small stick of myrtle wood, which has its tip set alight with flame, or a long root of aristolochia, or an elliptical shape fire cauterizer. Never apply the cautery when they first appear, according to this manner, but rather it should remove the excess fluid causing them; and they become healed. But it is necessary that this be done after blood has been evacuated.
When the artery is cut Many times there occur great streams of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound when it flows outwards, or during incisions on an abscess, or with the cautery applied to limbs, and similar situations; it is much distressing to hear this.
And yet, when this happens to anyone, if you need to quickly place your index finger on the vein wound and apply pressure until the pain subsides under your finger, and no more drops leak out; then heat various small and large olive oil lamps until they are all red. Then take one (or adjust based on the size of the wound and the location of the artery), and position it over the vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery in place as long as the pain is relieved.
And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is off the fire, then quickly take another one (.i., meaning 'one') of the cauterizing tools that are on the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after another until the bone is broken; and be careful that you don't burn the nerve which lies beneath it, nor allow any harm to come upon the patient; and know that when the bone breaks from the artery, you may not properly set it by yourself even if the artery is large, unless done through one of four ways as we have said: by cautery, or extraction when it hasn't been treated yet, or with a strong hold on a thread, or through medicine placed upon it which has power to set blood; and then bind and restrain it immediately afterwards.
Who will administer the setting of a fractured limb by tightly binding it with cloths or placing burning objects upon it, or other similar actions, if they do not benefit when done correctly.
And if this happens to anyone and they do not have any sight or medicine nearby, then they should place their thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until the bone is set both over the wound and over the vein; and do not move the arm but keep it moist with cold water often until it becomes very cold, until the bone is frozen, swollen and set. And make incisions in front of what needs cautery or medicine treatment.
We have explained in the first chapter all illnesses for which fire cautery or hot medicine is required, including the applications and causes, as well as the instruments and forms of cauterization. I ended that chapter at the knee joint, and now I will proceed through this chapter using the same approach because we find more easily what we want here.
And as I begin this one, it is necessary for you, dear reader, to understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of cauterizations, so more caution is required.
For in the course of this chapter, there are often instances of blood evacuation when opening veins and incising abscesses, as well as treatment for wounds, extraction of arrows, cutting into stones, and similar matters; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to embark on folly. For many ways of people come in cures. Some come from those who were so afflicted by their illness that they died lightly because of the madness they found in their disease, and the great suffering from their malice; and one should have fear towards these. And there are some who give you their insight and say: "Wait, I am skilled"; and the illness is deceitful. It would be inappropriate for you to consent to those who come seeking your help with this manner, but place more consideration in honoring yourself than in your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely of what you are certain of and can have; and use prediction and guidance in treating your ailments where health is converted; and this will assist you to acquire good reputation, glory, and long-lasting memory.
Dear child, our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or I have instructed you this chapter by chapters, according to what is before or the section on cauterization, that I have outlined from head to feet, for you find it more easily of what you will need.
from the head full of water
Know that this illness comes very often to children at birth, and when the mother presses too hard on the head of the child; and it also happens sometimes due to reasons unknown.
And I never see this illness occur except in children, and among all those I have seen, their death came quickly; and because of that, it seems to me that it would be better for me to abandon the task of treating such illnesses partially.
And I saw two infants of this condition, the shoulder was filled with water, and the head swelled each day until it couldn't bear it anymore; he believed in so much moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled underneath the bone near the axilla, between the muscle and the bone. And the incisions are such that if there's moisture between the muscle and bone, and the abscesses are small, you cut through the head one wide slit; and it should be as long as two fingers, as long as the moisture flows; and see this form of the spathilium:
And if there's more moisture, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in a manner resembling a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is underneath the bone, and you see that the edges of the head open from each part, and water splashes when you press it with your hand on the inside, and this does not respond to your touch: then you must make three cuts in the middle of the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all moisture outside. After bandaging and powdering the cuts, apply wine and oil, letting it stay until the fifth day; then reset the position, treat the wound with bandages and ointments, let it heal properly, and finally give the patient dry meat of a small animal devoid of moisture as long as the limb is strong and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look at where the opening of the abscess lies, and align with the water; for it never stands before; never behind; neither to the right; nor to the left.
Cut therefore where the abscess opens, and where water fills it, and cut in accordance with what you can do; and be careful not to touch an artery; and watch for a flow of blood, so that the patient dies due to the release of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
Of cautery treatment instructs to allow hair growth long and even; if they are sharp at their roots, hold tightly so they do not move until fully grown.
When any disease called 'catarrh' affects the eyes or anus, and it's an old ailment, and medical remedies don't help, then the last resort treatment is to use a cautery with cutting off of both arteries.
Therefore, when you have to cut the eyes off, perform this treatment after removing its head; afterwards wipe out the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries are visible, then pull out the eye socket as far as two cloths. Then look where the vein is located, and compare both eyes from each side of their ears, and make sure they're properly set; then mark the eyes diagonally, then cut each one with an extremely sharp knife up to bone, ensuring it reaches all the way down to the bone.
And if you see it, block the spur off of the artery and vein above, by cutting as well as two inches through.
And when the vein is severed, make sure that the heart continues to pump blood upwards constantly outside.
And if the artery does not open upon feeling it, you need to measure the length of about three inches, then cut until you reach the bone; and what needs to be removed of blood is about 7 cc, plus or minus depending on what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then examine the wound: if there's still a point directly under the bone, or if no part of the abscess remains in place after removal, then you need to clean out the wound, apply bandages, and treat with ointments until it heals.
Of the cautery treatment,
When old age comes and acute coughing occur, because of the moisture in tears and body heat around the temples and elsewhere for many years, it's a condition that can be treated with methods of medical cures and all this doesn't help. We extract veins from the temples and apply hot cauterization techniques as we have detailed.
The method of extracting them is such that the patient feels on their temple's hairs, and you can hear the artery emerging from the temple, for it opens well with its pulsation, and responds only in some people who are too cold; and if it does respond, you guide the patient using a strip of cloth, then rub their head against a rough cloth, and heat it up with hot water until the artery clearly appears. Then take the silver cup that's shaped as follows:
Then lightly remove the skin until you reach the artery, then guide it up with tongs and remove well the webs that are at each part; and if the artery is delicate, cut it at the tip of the claw. Then cover that part according to the quantity of two joints. For if she isn't covered, if not all in all.
And guide the blood from seven cuts up to three; and if the artery is large, it's necessary that you tie it with two threads of a strong silk line for seven lengths, so that putrefaction doesn't occur in front of the welding of the wound, nor repeatedly bleed; then cut off the excess between those two threads at that moment. And then, if you see fit, apply the cautery gently up to the bone as long as the joints are covered; and this is the rough work, if the patient doesn't have fever and has a warm complexion.
For the cauterizations assist in finishing off moisture: for this is more assistance against moisture. When it comes to extracting arteries, one must fill the arm with old cotton and place well-made bandages on it; and when they are released, apply dry medicinal substances that produce pus and bandages until the wound heals. And if there's no artery bleeding, do your best with cautering tools or use the space filled with vitriol in your hand to ensure the wound is sealed; and if you don't have this on hand, place ice inside it until the bleeding stops, then rinse with cold water until the bleeding ceases, ensuring a proper seal. When the artery extracted is softer and lighter during extraction of the artery, you should cauterize the vein from that cautering tool cutting down two parts but ensure the cuts are well-spaced to preserve heat for longer periods. For when the tools become too tight, they retain less heat. And there should be about one finger's width between the two knives, and then when you have heated them up to touch bone, place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, cauterize the vein in two places; and keep them apart by a distance of about one finger for this cautery tool doesn't fuse completely throughout; and this is the shape of the cautery.
Of tears
When the tears from the eyes are flowing from veins that are above the test of the head's main part, and medicine treatments do not benefit, you see the face turn red, and feel or sense like trembles; and if they stay there moist such that the paper's hair falls, and the papers heat up, and burn due to the burning tears, it requires this treatment.
And they called the old one 'healing burn', and do this: tell the person with this illness to keep hair on their forehead, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to its length; and make one of the cuts like two marks all across the forehead downwards until it stops just above the nose, and the others two each over a rib by the papers, and be careful not to cut the arteries that run over the ribs by the papers; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and ensure each wound is about the size of three marks across.
From the incision that is made near the temple up to the second incision; and burn everything in the channel that is between the two gaps right up to the sinew which lies above the bone. Then make another cut from halfway through this incision up to the other second gap, and then extract that pus-filled area.
Place the tool called a "cultellaire" in the first gap; it is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, not sharp, and its shape is: And place the blade of the tool towards the airbone muscle in the tendon, and the blunt edge towards the bone, and push the tool until it reaches halfway through this incision. And remove all vessels that descend from the main artery to the veins up until the incision continues until the opening appears at the tendon, then continue this operation halfway down the first incision until the other gap; and then drain blood evenly, express the wound for the taken blood; then place a piece of old cotton in each gap, and cover with wrung out cloths soaked in wine and oil and garlic, and make sure no pus leaks out; and on the third day remove the stitches, and apply large amounts of vinegar compresses, then do the ointment cure of basil with oil rose, and other treatments used for wounds, until it is healed.
of the eyes
When it comes to persistent catarrh and common colds, and you see small eyes and eyelashes, and weakening of vision, and burned paper; and the man's hair turns gray, and his head is full of ague pain, and the patient sneezes. So recognize through these events that those materials and this catarrh come from many veins, and the cure used, if it is such a thing.
And you instruct the patient to place his head after the forehead, then make a large cut through the forehead, and another wide. And start from the left temple incision to the right temple, and let the cut go until it reaches the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples' nerves that move during eating; and when the bone is revealed, drain all the blood with a sponge, and then clean between the two lips of the cut, and put in old cotton and linen; then bandage above in damp cloths soaked in wine and oil. And you must not be afraid of an abscess; once it's removed, you should rub the bone until gristle begins to appear, then treat with desiccating substances that soften tissue.
In this manner: take two parts of the flower of wheat and four parts of clove oil, and make them into a paste; and apply this to these wounds to encourage flesh growth everywhere.
Of ear piercing
Everything that chokes in the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or animal, or mine stone or similar objects such as iron; or seeds, such as beans, peas; or flowing substances like water and oils and similar things.
When it chokes in the ear a piece or some other object that doesn't fit into the ear or doesn't grow inside the ear, place the ear under the sun. If you can see the piece, apply a drop of violet oil or juniper oil, then proceed with extraction; and let them sneeze with consin, and stop up their nostrils when they sneeze, put pieces of cloth or wool into the ear, and elevate the ear above. This cure works many times; and if it does not work, apply extraction using small sharp forceps, as described here:
If it jumps as if under pressure, that's good; if not, proceed with the extraction using small, sharp tweezers; and if it doesn't jump like that, use an arachnid's claw and pinch the tip of the claw or the ear fur. And when you are at the part covered by wax, stick in a piece of beeswax so that the needle cannot enter with the claw; then press the forceps into place for forming, as often happens according to what we have said; and if it doesn't come out forcibly like that, take glut from one end and pinch its fleshy part, insert an instrument suitable for this task at one point, and put a bit of cotton in between; then press the glut onto the stone or anything else, and pull forcefully. And if it doesn't jump like that from all these things we've said, hurry to pierce the ear in such a way that pus and chalz come out with spasms; and the way of piercing is as follows: you make an incision first in the head vein, and remove blood according to its size. Then place the patient's hand between your hands and turn their ear up, and make a small cut at the base of the ear by the fat or what hangs down; and let the cut be like a crescent moon as you go towards the stone, then break the bone according to your ability, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and treat until it's clean. And if it's grains that are inside and they swell, proceed with extraction; and if it cannot come out, use this small spatula according to this form:
And make an incision on that grain. But do not do this when you think the grains are wet due to ear moisture, until you have done many pieces; then extract them with delicate pincers and the suction tool, as we have said, so that the extractions are smooth.
In water therefore, when someone discharges in the ear, then the patient should use a saline gargle of certain initial solutions, and generously fill the ear with old cotton. And be standing right beside that ear where it's infected. If she jumps out through this, it is good. If not, take several stones according to their length and gently, then warm them slightly over fire; and place one or more of these on her ear, and remove from two parts of her feet, and perform another incision with a stone on the stone that's in the ear; and do not stop doing this stone by stone until all the water comes out entirely, and thus she discharges it all completely; and if you see, take one reed, and place one shoulder inside the ear, and the other shoulder over fire until the hotter end of the reed is burnt; then redo another part with more reeds until all the water comes out, as we have said about this stone.
In the removal of the beast, if it's of small size, like fleas and similar things, treat it as we have said in division; but if there is something large enough to be felt, then perform extraction with pincers; this is the easiest thing to remove that might be inside the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you are curing it as we have said in the division and treatment of distillations, if the cure does not help, then you should look at the ear by sunlight: if no worm is open, treat it with subtle prickings, and if nothing appears, take a matchstick that matches this form:
And make it narrow at the bottom and wide at the top. And use the finest tip in the ear according to the amount of suffering from the illness, then apply the matchstick all around; do this repeatedly until all worms have emerged. And if they do not emerge, subdue inside the cotton stick as I said in cutting into stones; and if they do not come out freely as we said, give distillations that old ones have proven effective in worm extraction, and you will find it in treating distillations; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this tool, according to its form as you see:
And make it of silver or an animal ear narrow at the bottom to half a small spoon, and wide at the top for distillation; and in order to press within the distillation use one well-made tool from an animal ear suitable for this. If you see one rasp and wrap around the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the cotton, and let it be inside the ear; then place the rasp throughout all the cotton and press your hand appropriately until the oil is distilled or to the point of the ear; and sense the illness within, and let this distillation simmer for a moment as one would when distilling into the ear; and keep in mind that it should not be too cold, because medicine would not be as good.
Of the cauterization with fire,
No child is born without any remnants in their ears; and this very thing happens to people due to the pinching of wounds, or dead flesh within the ear canal, and these pinchings enter the ear on no account if one cannot see them; and not once does a single piece escape being seen by all.
That which enters the ear and cannot be seen is due to pus in various dispositions, and you should understand that it is appropriate for you to place the ear of the patient towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the superficial pustulation, if the operation has completed this formation:
And indeed, and cutting in front and behind completely flatly so it doesn't hurt the ear; if the swelling is of a newborn or a part of the ear, if you have delicate pincers, gently scrape it off, until that bone is fully removed.
And if the swellings go inside the ear canal, take a fine rasp and lightly scrape it with heat, then insert into the part of the ear. If you feel the swelling that causes the skin to itch in the ear, pierce lightly, and ensure not to damage the ear's nerves; then insert a tent according to the width at its tip, and fill the ear with Egyptian ointment.
Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and fill it with rose water and powdered vitriol; and if you see swelling in the ear, you should replace the tent and use another one filled with a wad made from rose oil and beeswax, until that swelling bone is removed; then continue to treat until it is clean.
And if bleeding occurs, one dips an sponge and wraps it in cold water, placing it on the ear, and uses other treatments that help to stop the bleeding which are akin to those of distillation methods.
From the flesh of papers
If the hairs come out in papers when they are moist and dry, it is necessary that you spread them with forceps and tweezers, and apply a poultice made from the roots of a spatumile; then place it on the affected area with vitriol powder.
And if it's not removed by peeling, cauterize with a thin lens cautery and then cauterization after incision is effective; and repeatedly apply, since nothing remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots burn completely and do not return.
From the stone
Many times in papers there are things that seem like stones both in shape and hardness, and because of this, the disease is called 'hail', and it's a gathering of moisture being large on the paper above and below; the actions to take are: watch if hail moves from one side and another, and this is a light thing to know; do then widely, then burn each part lightly, then grab it with tweezers, and cover. If you can't cover without piercing a bit of the paper, or if it doesn't hurt anyone; and if the tear is large, if there's an opening in the gathering, treat until it heals; and if it's small, do not exert any force on it, for ointments restore it quickly and nurture flesh.
And if hail falls into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper and have hail at some tweezers, cover and press from both sides; and if the paper is moved away by the cut, it doesn't hurt anything; and when hail is covered, rinse with salty water, treat the area where flesh nourishes until the patient becomes healthy.
from the oil of the eyes
Exina is an oil that gathers on the sheets of papers above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, causing much discomfort to their eyes. It comes as mucus in the morning, and they can't look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; hence they lie down by their sides until noon, lying straight up, and have their papers damp beneath their brows due to Exina spreading into the eye. And when you press your finger on it with your thumbs, you feel the Exina going in between them.
And the way of treatment is that when someone with Exina puts their head on a healthy place; and then take one linen cloth, and set up a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of Exina contained by each part, then put it there; press your fingers from both sides so that all the Exina gathers inside the circle; then make a cut in the middle of the moist area diagonally, not wider than the wound you would make when opening a vein; and let the leather cover completely until you see the Exina through it; and multiple times the Exina comes out from the slit according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Take it out then, in one piece, the thick cloth strip between your fingers at the front, and turn your hand right and left until it is spread; and be sure not to adjust in the crack, do not come to the whole pus-filled area up to the eye, do not prick it.
And if it exits through the start of the crack, widen it gently slightly until it opens; then take it out as we have said, then moisten with a cloth and water, and place on the affected area, then remove by bending.
And if there are any that grind meal and put it on to corrupt the moisture which remains. Then treat until it is well. And if pus comes out at the wound, then treat with restorative plasters until it is well.
Of the hairs of papers
When papers grow hairs in an altered manner and they age, these affect the eyes and cause maladies such as habitual watering and paper yellowing and swelling, all of which are consequences of eye damage; and one treats according to four methods: or by applying a cautery together with fire, or with medicine according to what is mentioned before in the chapter on the cautery, and it's done either through incision and suturing or with bandages, depending on what I will explain.
It is necessary for you to place the eye's head in its healthy state, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it turns, that is good; if not, if you stick a needle with one thread on it at both ends. And do this either within the edge of the paper or beneath where the hairs grow from these altered hairs, and pull the thread across the entire length of the paper, then turn it using scissors. Then cut in the area under the paper, under the grown hairs, up to the root for the large tear all the way to the small one; then remove the thread, place a small cotton tent and lace over the paper, then on the paper make an engraving, like the leaf of myrtle, and remember that the design should correspond to the amount you see raised above the paper.
And when it comes to the part that requires one to use a large quantity of paper according to how soft the paper is; then do everything on top of the two lines you have indicated, and start with the largest hole until small. And there should be one of the cuts close to the natural hairs in the growth stage of a root, then pinch the thyme into one of the angles near the nose, then scrape all over it; then join the two lips together by one stitch on an ivory needle with one thread of fine wool and wipe away the blood. And do this process around the two corners with some sticky substances if you see fit; and should you not be able to perform this step correctly, don't worry about it, leave the stitches open until three or four days or five; then treat the wound without stitching with dry and constraining things since paper renews itself from the healing of the wound and the joining of them together. However, the stitches will dissolve (as said by the old ones), and this is work done without fear;
And if there's another way: and you should mark the paper with a shape that is as like the leaf of thyme, as we have described it, cut out three inches according to the form shown here:
Then cut those that are above evenly with small forces according to the shape shown here:
And if you cannot hold the forceps, and if the thing is not even, take one thread or has it two threads, and place the needle through its figure; then pull another thread from under the large sinew, and the second thread from under the small one, and assemble between your fingers the threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin above which you have signed, as we have mentioned previously, then stitch together the two edges of the wound by suture, and treat it until it is healed; and if pus comes to your incision, soothe it with tallow and similar healing ointments.
And it often happens that the paper hair gets mixed up: so you should use what we have said about incisions; but the stitches in one and the other are more artificial.
The treatment of the eyes follows this form: and you should invert the paper and make a hole inside according to what I have said, and then create two canes by art, and two thin strings as long as the paper is wide; and shape each eye out of one half of the sheet; then carefully join them both together above the part of the paper that covers the eye, and stretch the two canes from each side in a formed manner; and leave it like this for several days, and the skin which has been stretched will shrink and harden and fit well, until it falls off by itself.
If it lingers, if the patient bears pain, then treat him until he becomes sane; and when the wound has healed, and when you lift the bandage, and no longer will hair grow; and this is the form of the two canines that you must follow in accordance with this figure, and according to this length and width:
The procedures are as follows: you should take a delicate needle, and tie two pieces of fine silk thread together; then join the threads and skillfully knot them both finely. The length of each thread should be about a palm's width. Then place another short piece of fine silk thread in the chase and knot it at both ends. Next, place the patient's end on your healthy part; and when the light shines upon it so that you can see clearly, this is due to its subtlety and minuteness. Then insert the needle into the root of the hair where you've adjusted the silk thread, and pierce through the paper swiftly as you pull up from natural hair. Next, remove all hair until it is out of the chase along with the natural hair; then knot in the chase any remaining hair if there are two, three or more. Finally, remove your hand once the hair has come out of the chase together with the natural hair throughout.
And if the chase has been treated and no hair comes out with it, pull out the chase from underneath all the thread that you have ordered in place until the chase is removed beyond the tip and you can see this through your vision; then pull out the chase and thread, and apply oil to them for two or three days. Wait until the hair hardens in its place and the hair grows back; and if the hair is small, accompany it with one long strand of a natural cow's hair, raise it along with that or leave it hanging down until it becomes longer, then lift it up.
Regarding the decay of the eye
For the illness which is called "aleacrati" or eye decay comes within the eye, if there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. And happens suddenly from a wound, or from a tailor's work or a cautery, and from similar matters.
And the manner of this treatment for it is that you cut through that seam, and open up the eyelids, and insert linen strips inside, and hold them until they are healed; and you should not use things in its treatment which dry out or restrict. For if you do this, the illness will return worse than the first one; but work with softening substances, like fennel; and let water or decoctions of linseed oil be used, and linseed paste applied to it, and wrap a linen strip around it, and treat it in that way.
And the treasures of your treatment are that you must take care not to have it heal in a manner that conforms to its original form; and these treatments which we have mentioned here do nothing but address this illness, so that it does not recur according to its original form.
The material that comes to the eye
This disease which is truly called 'axacrati', and is natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds, splits, cauterizations, and similar things; and the way of the operation in it like you pierce with a needle into the flesh, where there's two threads inside it. You insert them on the left tear duct until they are at the backside, so that the threads emerge through two cuts in the flesh; then the flesh goes above all over to cover the entire needle, and the paste forms around one large lump.
And if the paper figure returns according to what should be, it's good; but if not, take a needle and place it in the cut, then turn the paper and make two cuts inside the paper itself; and let the ends of the two cuts be at the corners of the incision that you made, so that when they are joined together, the figure looks like a letter which has no 'griesche' (a term used to describe a particular type of character or style); then remove this flesh according to its thickness until it's as much as was under the paper, following the one who placed the paper; then join the two cut-off parts and sew them with thread made of wool. Then perform the cure as we have said for medicines that soften, and with remedies, until it is healed completely.
And if the disease comes from a wound or stitch or cautery, then it is necessary that you cut a full crease along the hairs of the papers, and according to what was said before; then cut between the two flaps of a tent, as I have said; and must do the work according to the shape of the disease, for she is very diverse in shape, and the surgeons prepare equipment everywhere so that they can know how to return the figure to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what it requires from work and tools in various positions.
quickly of the paper
When this stitch occurs with people in such a way that the paper above is bound by the white of the egg, and cannot move or do its natural tasks, then it follows that you must pierce the corner of a pairer under the paper, and lift it up; and place it on tweezers, until you feel the fine spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too deep, so that the patient does not suffer from the sharp spatula cutting their eye or causing redness in the eye; make your incision, and burn this assembled part lightly, so that the paper heals according to its natural form; and it is cured throughout this whole thing, and do not put any salty water into the eye once, then take it out with cool water and a bandage; then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and cover the eye with wet wool; and after a few days use a colander and other tight things until it is fully healed.
From the eyelid of the eye
Know that the nail is in two ways: it is nervous and resembles one hard bone, and another which is not nervous, but resembles white moist congealed, that when touched with iron and cared for like with needle pricks, you cannot do; and both appearances begin near the major lacrimal duct, and grow slowly and slowly until it covers all of the eye and all light and movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is such that one removes the mucus from the eyes and then opens the eyelid; lift the lid with your hand, and then stretch the nail using small pliers, and place it above. Then take a needle, and insert two horse hairs or calf hairs or beef hair into it, along with a sturdy thread; and double up the needle tip slightly and poke through the nail, piercing all of it completely, and bind the nail with the thread and place it above, then scrape across the entire length of the hair follicle on both sides of the pupil until you reach the root near the lacrimal duct, leaving only a fine trace of the spatum (secretion) and small forces below; and leave nature in the lacrimal area, so that the body does not perceive any change in the habit of tears through this incision; and simply stretch the nail to its original position as well as the thread, just as we have said; then scrape off all of the spatum from this side until you reach this form:
And make sure that the cautery does not touch the flesh and tear it, and that the tip of the needle doesn't puncture; and after cutting, pour a little rosin into the incision hole and place an amalgam collar there, and leave it until another day; then treat him as needed when he is well again.
And if the nail is not purely nervous and you cannot push the needle in, many times this issue of a nail-like thing can be treated with medicines; and it will grow just as I have described in the division part, and if you see that it has turned red, operate the eye with the disease, take the cautery tip to a sharp point according to this form.
Cut the nail carefully from above, and if you see that it doesn't diminish at all and presses the reason (presumably a term for a vein or nerve), then let there be distillation from your mouth into the eye, make an amalgam collar and a red collar with rosin, and immerse the eye until another day; then restart this next work according to the same operation, until it is completely extracted.
If there is nothing against your sight, such as pus-filled blisters, then let it proceed, and first treat the pus-filled blister until it is clean. Then continue with the work process as described previously, until it becomes clean.
And if the appearance of the tissue under the eyelid causes harm to your eye, suspend its use and take a portion but not all at once, ensuring no tears occur. Then apply red balm made from litharge to your eye.
Of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Of some men who do not grow any hair at all, and cover the pupil, restraining it over the eyelids and turning them outward, and appears like a rose of carbuncle; and in this work, let your eyes rest in their healthy position, then remove these hairs, and so that entire flesh as uncines suitable for this one, and hold it with the force; then cut off the first layer of flesh, and shave everything down to the very end, making sure you don't injure the eye during this work; and make an incision over the upper eyelid as we said in the nail incision and the small forces that you remove the skin from, just like the figure after this chapter demonstrates;
And when the incision has been completed and all the flesh removed, then apply oil of sulfur or distill it into red colander and similar corrosive medicines, and place cotton soaked with egg white over the oil as a dressing for any abscess; if it remains in place without an abscess forming, and there is no warmth indicating infection, leave the oil on and treat the abscess with things that soothe abscesses until they subside. Then return to your work until everything is healed, doing so many such incisions under this manner of treatment in oil.
However, it must be that you attend to the treatment of each weak oil in its natural passage; and through accidents as well; in ironwork tasks too. And do not thrust your hand into any of these operations until you see that this member is enduring this operation.
of veins and eyes
When the veins around the eyes turn red and cover the eye, and weaken vision for several days. So it's necessary in the beginning to observe where your eyes are, and not have any other disease except this one; then take the following steps: instruct the patient to put their head in a healthy position, then suspend those veins up to the whole inch according to their wisdom, and let the inches be subtle and double as per this form.
And let them be one inch by stages in two sections according to this form:
Then perform this operation by gently moving those veins, and after each removal of blood for an hour, continue until you see the veins being removed from around the eye; and make sure not to cut into the eye with the points of the instruments, and do this procedure at noon in front of the sun, and be very meticulous in your work so as not to remove more than just those veins; and once you have done this, apply a collar of green and red cologne to disperse what remains due to the inflammation.
And if you do not have the strength to perform all this in that hour, then make a plaster with substances that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the eye pain is soothed and assured without any pus coming out. Then resume according to this method which was mentioned previously until it becomes healthy; and this is the form of applying force:
of the tear duct of the eye
The treatment for what's called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with a cautery and hot water according to what I've said previously, and if it doesn't heal, then there's no choice but in the area where you cut into the pus sac, at the place where it should die out, remove all the moisture that is present, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is revealed and you see corruption and blackness, if you retrieve it with all the tool used as described; and call it 'rough head', and make it of iron in the shape of a head reon for one inch, and sharpen it like a file as it is in this present form:
And place on it the portion of the corrupted bone, then hold your hands over it and press them a bit until you know that this corruption has been removed; and do this one time, then replace the area with medicines that have been dried out.
When the bones are joined and the scar has appeared, and the body of the bone is also joined, and remains this way for forty days, and it doesn't heal and isn't infected again, knowing that it's healthy; if not, then there should be no other means than to re-introduce the fistula into the place where the metal is lost according to this form: and when you uncover the bone a second time with iron and medicines, and once uncovered, take one rod following this form, and create the metal head at three angles, and make the shaft as thin as a needle as shown here.
Then place the knife between the bone and the eye socket, and remove your hand from the eye for a moment. i. po (eye), then return to pressing firmly on the forehead until it pierces the bone and you feel the pain of the patient; should their hand be holding onto their nose; and then restore the limb with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the child is born and the tissues harden, go towards the nose; if something lighter than a feather disturbs the patient.
from the exit of the eye
When the eyelids open completely and nothing comes from disturbing the heart or diminution, it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal him, then apply suction cups or a hat without piercing in order to draw out impurities, then place on the eye (the mixture made of myrrh and aloe and incense and sarcorrhaphia), and then strain the eye, and plaster it with bandages and cloths; and the method for the cloths should be that you take cloths that are sufficiently soft and double each one in half, and then place them one on top of another according to the amount that the eyelids need; then strain from above with a hard cloth formed into strips, and repeat the suction cups without piercing; then remove the suction cups and let the eye strain day and night, and if the bandages loosen, it is necessary that you strain as much; then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, it's good; if not, continue with plastering and cloths and the bandage and suction cups until it heals.
from the bursting of an ovarian
When disruptions occur in the ovarian, then opened and filled with pieces like a resin grain, it's observable as dust; thus, if you see that coated, the organs are such that you pierce one side of the sac down to almost halfway up, then pierce another place with a double thread from below the uterus; and do this piercing, leave the first needle according to its position; then pinch the part of the double thread and tie it around some part inside the, firmly hold it, then remove the needle and put moistened linen on the eye above an egg; and let that be until the thread is separated with the, then treat the eye with comforting substances until the wound heals; and without fail, the wound is contained by the each part of a circular piece of cloth until it heals.
And when the has a large appearance, if it is pierced through the delicate part under the eye and blood comes out from beneath the eye, correct the moisture into albumen and let it descend in the, start doing this immediately; then remove until it becomes healthy.
From the socket of the eye
This disease known as "alcunnati" only affects the eye socket, resembling a descending sharp object, but it is not actually sharp; and the way of its manifestation is like this: you should place the patient sitting upright on their seat and straight, then hold their head between your hands for half a pace, and move them until you see the eye socket come above your eyes; then have it remain so, do not let it descend again and clear the vision, and notice the eye's movements as it was before; and if it does not descend from there on, know that it is sharp, and when the movement of the eye doesn't match what we've said earlier. Having the patient sit upright between your hands, then take the delicate spatula and cut along the corneal tissue for one part through the continuity of the conjunctiva with the corneal tissue and crown, until the socket comes out; and when it is out, pour in hot sharp water mixed with honey into the eye, or hot water mixed with fenugreek that's boiled and honeyed, then apply other treatments until the eye heals.
Of the waters of the eye
We have the appearances of water in the division, and what needs to be pierced; if it is done according to health. It is necessary for you to place the patient between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, and tie the healthy eye tightly; then put the paper of the eye on your left hand when the eyes are aligned there, or on your right hand when they are aligned there; then take with your right hand, if the eyes are aligned on the left, the tool called "almagda," or with your left hand, if the eyes are aligned on the right; then place the tip of the tool below the crown through about a finger in the wet area of the eye, then press firmly with the tool named 'almagda,' and twist your hand until it pierces the wet area of the eye, and feel that almagda goes to the empty thing; and the measure of the path of almagda should be at its full size compared to the distance from the corner to the end of darkness; this is the crown of the eye; if you see the bone through the paper due to the clarity of the corneal surface, then place the tool until it reaches where the water is, and express it after another path. If the water now descends, you will see the patient in front of him and the tool in his eye.
After a short rest, and when the water ascends through the second passage, use force with the tool, and when it is inserted and no longer rises, gently remove almagda by turning your hand back and forth; then put a little pearl juice in the eye socket or wet linen in oil rose and plenty of eggs, tie with the healthy eye. Now, those who are like us, let's use egg whites abundantly for treatment.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye through its hardness, because there are people who have too hard eyes, it is necessary for you to take the tool which is called 'alberit', having this form:
And then puncture only the conjunctive part and do not go too deep, but make it about one finger's width. Then put on alum, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, provide the patient with an additional one bed assistant, so that he sleeps on his back in a dark room for three days; be completely still, eat light meats, and do not move your head either to the right or left. Bind him according to his position until the third day; then release him in the same dark room and have him see things, let him show you anything, and afterwards reapply the bind until seven days. It should not be done during the healing time or after the incision now, but it is necessary to apply this because fever rises quickly.
Cutting away an abscess occurs when you release the eye before the seventh day and have someone who eases the abscess pain. And when it is soothed, then release the eye and place one eyelid on for three days to cover his face, and stay in this dark room. Then leave the house little by little, and return to his normal life; know that no apprentices should interfere in such a situation.
And one person came to us who was from the Yrach region, who told us that in their land they would pierce the alum (a type of herb), allowing the water [of the body] to drain out, but still, I never saw anyone like this in our land, nor did I ever find it described in old books; perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of mercury, for those who do not know them can see them; and they are properly of the earth:
And there is the head of these from this same subtlety, and the last one in three angular points.
from the flesh around the nose
None of them are born or die from various knots, some of which seem like scorpions with the mouth of a pie. And if there is such a case where there's an attached knot of fuchsia color, and if there's a knot of good color, in that case, for these knots that are of good color and not attached, it is fitting that you place the patient between your hands facing the sun; and work their nostrils, and pour vinegar onto those knots, and force them out. Then collect what you can endure on the subtle sharp edge of one side until you know that that knot has been entirely removed.
And if there is any part that cannot be cured, when opening the entire body with small and gentle instruments, making sure nothing remains; and if without causing pain or forming pus, in case of abscesses, cut them according to need; and if it's malignant ulcers, quickly treat and cauterize until all pus has drained out, and all the wounds are healed; then let the patient bathe with cold water or use vinegar.
And if it's the nose that's affected, and moisture reaches up to the palate, you should know it's infected; and if moisture doesn't reach as it should, there is new tissue forming in the bone above, so these tools are not able to cut properly: thus, it's necessary for you to insert one twine of linen slightly thick near each nostril, holding them with your fingers, keeping about an inch or less spacing between each knot; and place each patient under this linen thread while it comes out through their nose, pulling gently until the pus comes out from inside the mouth; and often children do this in school, and it's a simple task for someone who wishes to do so. Then hold the head that comes out by one hand and the other head that comes out by the mouth with the other hand, and know them one after another while you're holding our fingers together. Do this until you can tell that the pus has corrupted that tissue, then remove the threads, drain the blood, moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back under the nose as before; do this for three or more days, until the ointments have dissolved all the remaining flesh; and after that, place a cotton plug in the nose for some days until it heals, and if there's need for dried medicine use them; this is how the tool to purify the head works, which distills oils and medicines or wine.
And use silver or sulfur, resembling an open lamp like a stick, and guide it this way; and if you see the need, make a closed stick, and let these tools be full for purifying the head; and hold one part of the head when heating oil or any liquid.
from the flesh to the nose
Many times a disease is born under the nose which is called "telul" and grows to become large until it can be seen; and for this reason you should cut at its beginning, remove all bone, then place the cautery or burning medicine there; and if you delay cutting until it becomes large, take care not to let it be hard, change color, lose sensation: do not touch it with iron as it's a trapped abscess; because once you cut it even once, it causes great mischief to the patient; and if the abscess is due to soft pressure rather than changing color, and you see that it can all be cut, let the patient bleed without fear, and treat the area with dried and restricting substances.
When the nose is cut and stitched.
Know that when a continuation of the venous blood comes into one of these veins, it benefits little, for not in all people. Therefore, let this happen to none if the wound is fresh throughout its blood; and then adjust the two lips to a stitch, afterward treat until it heals completely. And if the lips have become dry on both sides, it must be that you scorch all parts of their cure until they heal, then join the two lips to a stitch, and compress them, and dust with dragon's blood powder, and incense ground; and place the powders under a piece of plaster of great strength or another soldering plaster, and let it remain until it discharges by itself, then treat with ointment until it heals.
The method of stitching is as follows: you join the cut: either with needles, as we said in stomach stitch; or with thread, as I have informed you.
from the abscesses of the lips
In the hands of the surgeon within the wound abscess firm, resembling grains sometimes, and smaller and larger; therefore it must be that you close the mouth, cut into each nodule, and take it with forceps and remove in each part; then use the hand after the vitriol incision until the pus is drained; and then drain the fluid quickly, and clean the wound from dry things until it heals.
from the flesh of the gums
Many times it forms on the attached gum flesh, which the old ones called "albulus"; it must be held with forceps and cut at its root, allowing for bleeding or blood. Then place under the vitriol (sulphuric acid) or other drying and retarding powders; and if that flesh returns after incision, and many times happens, if it is cut a second time, then cauterize it: if it does not return after cauterization; these are the forms for cutting.
Of cautery by fire, command to the diseased person to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their origin, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Many times they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, and ugly and hard scabs; and it happens many times that a black tooth and citrine and worms exist until corruption reaches the gum, and then the tooth becomes stinky. So when you need to have them seen by the diseased person with your hands, and their teeth are in front of yours, remove all until there's nothing left; and do this for the darkness, greenness, yellowing, and other tints, until they're completely gone; if what is removed on the first try is enough, it is good; but if not, you should start again on the second day and third, until you have everything removed. Remember that teeth require different kinds of instruments to be cleaned depending on how their work demonstrates, because the rasp used for removing teeth between them has different forms than those for teeth protruding outwards. These forms and others are prepared with you in mind.
It is necessary when you are treating a tooth for pain that you continue the extraction as long as possible, because it should not be done hastily. This is due to its position so high up in the mouth where one might have an excuse for rushing the procedure. When the patient is forced to remove pus, you must be certain of which tooth is causing it. Often the pain indicates the infected tooth, and you should extract a good tooth; but until the infection is completely removed, do not assume all pain has disappeared because we have already done this in these situations; and when you are sure about the tooth causing pain, you must burn around the tooth with hot oil for several spoonfuls to preserve the gum from all sides; then move it to your hands or onto fine tweezers at each pinch until it is well dislocated, then firmly set the tweezers in place; and have the shoulder joint of the infected body part between your knees, and keep it steady so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not jump out on its own, take any of these tools and gently push it in from every part, then move it as you did initially. And if the tooth is pierced and cracked, you should fill it with cloths where the teeth are; and when you extract it softly with tweezers, do not break it during extraction; and you must carefully open around the gum to remove the tooth.
And make sure you don't break it and leave any part behind. Inform the patient that due to the root's malice, they may experience even greater pain than before. Be cautious not to do this as ignorant healers might, who in their haste and bravado break the tooth once or more times, without considering these precautions; but rather allow the disease to come back every time due to the roots remaining inside or because of the broken tooth parts that remain, just like we often advise. When the tooth is extracted, wash out the socket with wine, vinegar, and salt; and if bleeding occurs (which it often does), wash the socket with vitriol water; and if this doesn't help, cauterize it.
The shapes of the tools, by which you make your teeth first, should be with long points and large handles, so they do not bend when you pull the tooth; these are the shapes:
And let them have large parts that do not bend upon pulling, and be made of well-forged iron, and have teeth for gripping.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains during extraction, it is necessary to place moistened cotton in the mouth with butter for .i. jor or ij days, until the gums are softened. Then pull out the forceps that are called "algefri", making it look like a beak of care; and they should also be made inside just like a file, this is its shape:
And if the roots do not want to emerge through all these clamps, it is necessary that you uncover the entire flesh up to the root, and place the instrument called "althali", which is known as palmache, as follows:
And let it be smooth and substantial so that it doesn't break at all, and if the root jumps out through this, it's good; if not, use all the instruments you have, as their forms come next:
And if assistance is taken with this tool which has two spouts, as shown below:
and other tools that are in front according to the order of teeth, and this tool which seems like large pliers, as depicted below:
And let this instrument not be able to break it, and know that many tools of bone exist; and also other tools, which are not listed; and the wise surgeons find their own tool through themselves, according to what their operations and diseases show them. For there are parts of diseases where the old did not teach any instrument because of the diversity in some and if they break from the carriage or from other bones, or if it decays, then when he searches for the tools that he needs, that I have told you about, and helps with gestures, which is shown here, this is the form: And let them be large and well holding so as to hold the bone without it escaping, but able to hold and remove it; and then restore in its place the medicine suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then seek all that instrument.
When the teeth appear not according to their natural form, and the shape is ugly, even in virgin women if it's necessary that you know whether the teeth are grown after the tooth, and they are not in their rightful position, and one cannot pull or file them: then remove them; and if they adhere with the tooth, take this instrument as depicted here, and resembles two small beaks, and should be made of sharp iron at its tip.
And the edge is thin and thin in my hands by the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, so I file with a single file as it is shown here:
and it is also like the file used for making needles; and in filing I make the tooth thin and thin in my hands gently, so that you do not move it until it finishes cutting; then smooth out at the end with any smoother, and if its edge is too sharp and hurts the tongue, it's necessary to file down the roughness until it becomes flat, so that it doesn't hurt the tongue or damage speech.
when the tooth rots
When the tooth in front of the socket, or through percussion or falling out, and if the patient cannot press on what he is chewing so that he doesn't defecate, and you have cured it with medicine that restrains, and this proves ineffective; they must be restrained with a thread of gold instead. For threads of silver turn green and rot, but gold never changes. And use threads neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you see the need to straighten the teeth, then take the thread and the needle double between two healthy teeth, then place the dislocated teeth between your own teeth, as long as there are one or more of them. Continue this process until you can see clearly up to a healthy tooth from the other side; then start covering again until you covered that spot before, and pull your hand delicately and carefully, until it doesn't move; and tie your ligature at the root of the tooth so it cant escape. Then cut out the threads with the pliers, gather them together, and place them between a healthy tooth, and then set it so that it doesn't irritate the tongue; and then leave it like this as tight as it can stay without causing discomfort. And if it loses its position or the threads break, then tighten it with another thread; if it stays and serves well for all its time, and this is the arrangement of teeth and the insertion of two healthy teeth and two dislocated ones, just as you see:
And when the tooth gets dislodged, if you return it to its place, step by step, just as we have said; and don't interfere with anything that isn't suitable or can withstand it, and never make a shape of an ox bone tooth, and put it in the place where the defect is, and tighten it as we have said, and stays and serves this long duration.
covering the thread of the tongue
No time comes from within the tongue or nature where we are born thus; nor through an accident of sewn wound. The processes are such that you work in your patient's mouth with the disease, have its head over your health, and lift their tongue. Then cut down the nervous ligament as wide as possible until the tongue is dislodged from its place. And if there's hardness or lump, it's due to sudden wound, then pinch the hook and cut the ligament; and ensure that the wound isn't too deep because an artery is nearby. When you are done, lift the head from pinkish water and cool water, then put under the tongue a linen cloth; and cleanse your patient each night so their tongue doesn't stick. And if bleeding occurs, apply vinegar to the head. And if the tongue fails to come back, cauterize with a slow-burning cautery which is good for this case; then cure it with another cure until it's healed.
And if you see that it's of rust color or black or hard, but your patient doesn't feel pain, do not touch it as it is an ulcer; and if it begins to turn yellow and there's moisture, then pinch the hook and drain with a subtle spasm, and release from both sides; and if your tongue fails to come back in your treatment, apply vinegar until it dries out, then return to your work until you have used all force; then lift the head from cool water and salty water, and cure him with other remedies until he is healed.
from throat abscesses
No time comes within the throat cavities which are called 'godath', and they are properly named as two almonds. When you treat them, just like what we said in the division part, and if they remain unhealed, always be careful: if these are pus-filled lumps of small sensation and have a straw-like color, do not touch them with metal tools. And if they are red and their root is large, do not touch them with metal tools as well for blood's escape; but leave them until they're healed completely, then you will remove them, or they would break on their own; and if they have a white color retain, and their root is subtle, prepare your instrument to cope, but first ensure the pus-filled lumps have settled and are in peace. Then make the patient lie under the sun, and their limbs be in good health, expose their mouth, and let the surgeons hold her tongue between their hands, pressing it from all around against the tool; this is how you should do it; use silver or finely made copper as thin as knives:
Can't you press the tongue to all this tool, and you see the pus-filled lump, take the tincture and put it into the almond, then pull it up more than you can; and don't remove anything from the layers with it, then push against the tool in a way that resembles pressing something strong; and the head is tied together, one part after another, and they're very sharp, made of silver or copper:
And if you don't have this tool available now, just use tweezers, like this form:
And make cuts on one side and the other; and when you have made a cut in one of the cheeks, then make the same cut on the other according to this same manner, and after the incision gargle with the hot sick patient's saliva, or gargle with both hot and mild water, and when bleeding occurs, then gargle again with hot water, or use cooked green grape pits, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until all of the pus is cleared; then proceed with the treatment until it has healed; and no new abscesses form in the throat other than the two cheeks, so treat them accordingly.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, one small abscess. I had almost completely closed the entire throat so much that she could not breathe due to the obstruction and could neither eat nor drink, and died after only about one day or two days. The abscess had risen so high that it had forced out two fluids through the two nostrils. So quickly then, I inserted an inch into one of them, then pulled it out, removing a large portion of mucus; afterwards made another incision near the other nostril, and opened her mouth pressing on her tongue; after this, I inserted the inch in these abscesses, removed part of them, only bleeding out a little bit. And thus cleared the passageway of the throat for the woman, and began now to drink warm water and then wine, not ceasing to cut away at that abscess over long periods of time; and the abscess grew again immediately filling up the space I had emptied until it was very large; then bandaged her up and treated inside the throat with cautery: she remained without growing any more. And left these parts, may only God do good after me.
Regarding the eye
When the head of the shoulder begins to descend within the body cavity and is squeezed and long-lasting, it is called "perpendicular". And if it's bulging and rounded, it is referred to as an "ovoid". When it has been treated in the manner we have discussed earlier during treatment of wounds, but does not improve, and you observe that the removal of pus has subsided, and it exhibits subtlety, then it needs to be handled; and if it's ovoid with a rounded assembly and isn't long-lasting; whether it is blood-red or has an iron color or is black, care must be taken on when making the incision. For there is great risk for the patient here. Therefore, when you see this condition, according to the manner I have described based on its location and size, make the patient face towards the sun, press their tongue with the tool we have previously remembered; then insert the needle into the ovule, drag it outwards, and cut at two-thirds of the three tools we mentioned earlier during cutting through the two amandines. It must be ensured that no unnecessary force is applied when cutting beyond the natural limit; for if you cut more than necessary, it can cause discomfort with speech or words. After making an incision, use what was discussed earlier about cutting through the two amandines and treat until complete healing occurs. And should the patient experience fear during the cutting process, then it is recommended to apply ingenuity during the cautery treatment of the pain area. The manner of the cautery is sharp. And when the disease puts its head into your healthy part, then press their tongue with the tool we mentioned or in the chapter on cautery and apply hot living skin, but not excessively thick nor too thin; and use the movement of that instrument as described above.
And let my head have a hair or where we put the medicine, like movements of a spoon, and place the tool with all the medicine on top of the ovule; and make sure the disease stays within its own limit, so that saliva and mucus flow from its mouth into the medicine inside, not descending to the throat or causing inflammation; then keep your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the ovule for half an hour's worth of quantity, until you see it absorbed and the reactions to the medicine are calmed down; and if you see this happening, take cotton and wrap it around any tool, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and place the tool on top of the cotton in the wick above, until the cotton is heated by the ovule; and repeat this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and cleanse after four or five days. And if you need to start the medicine cautery again, do so, and after the cautery, clean around the ovule with cotton soaked in butter; and rinse from cold water, and gargle until it's healed completely.
This treatment is safer than incision or using the cautery; if it's treated with steam according to this method, take calamus, myrrh, and thyme along with rue and chamomile and parsley and similar herbs, and combine all of them or any of these in one pot, put them inside and let it boil; make sure the pot is filled tightly with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot place a hairpin according to this method: And use either silver or iron, and place one of the shoulder blades in the mouth next to the malady until the vapor rises from the gland through the throat; as long as the gland is dead. After that, repeat this often, until the gland dries out, be sure not to do this at the beginning of pus ejection, for many things happen then; and do not perform this technique when the pus ejection is declining. And if this instrument isn't present, take a rod and place an eggshell inside your head so that the mouth next to the malady doesn't become too hot; because the eggshell won't let the vapor weigh down the mouth, it's a good treatment combined with health.
Many times one finds in the throat bone or spinal part of a fish without anything; therefore, it is necessary that you remove what you can see and press your tongue to the sun with all the instrument until you see movement; and whatever does not open up and remains in the throat, it is appropriate for you to induce vomiting so that the malady leaves as if the meat was cooked in the stomach; by chance if the thing escapes through vomiting; or if the malady swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a small chunk of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it; and when she comes up to your mouth, if she breathes out, and then pull forcefully; and if this does not come out as what we have said, take one tool of thorn according to this shape:
And let the forceps be applied to the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head elevated high above; and beware not to touch the epiglottis, lest anything go wrong, nor push any bone inside; and move when the patient pushes the instrument back out, because if it's moved or the thing is slippery; if it pulls down, or if it drags with equal force on all parts of the instrument until it can drag fully.
from the lumen of the throat
No single time is medicine administered to the humor of the throat as I have mentioned in the division through treatment with medicines. If this doesn't benefit, then examine the throat of the sick towards the sun. Press their tongue against the instrument that I've told you about. And when you see the humor, draw it out by half an uncia (ancient unit of measurement), or with delicate forceps suitable for this task. Should this not work, take a long piece of hair and place it in the sick's throat near their mouth, then pull out twice as much hair as the length of one iron nail repeatedly. And let them be dipped in cold water all day; take a full cup of cold water and rinse their mouth with it, then swallow slowly while moving your hand frequently; and just as soon as the humor perceives the water, they will vomit.
And if she does not give birth as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the tool that I mentioned for fumigation of the eye. Do this several times, because it will be without pain. And the method of fumigation is like this: take one pot where there are charcoal briquets and place a cover on top pierced in the middle. In that piercing should go the head of the instrument; then pour your fumigation, put the tip of the herb into her mouth, and close her mouth so that no fumes escape but they move up to her sinuses; and now the mucus will come out, if it does not give birth, repeat this fumigation several times. And make the patient thirsty, feed them salty things and alike, and do not drink water; then she must leave for herself by this method.
And the shape of the instrument used to clear mucus is such that when it can be seen, it resembles hooked tweezers for pulling out in the throat; and has a resemblance at the tip as if for trimming, and it has roughness like sandpaper, so what she takes cannot be left behind. And here is the form:
The chapter on abscesses
No extraction methods are described according to what memory brings forward from one and another in this book, they vary in perforation and sizing; it is done in two ways out of which one follows its own form and due to the moisture. And the second method is for those located on the body. Because abscesses at the head differ from those at the base, and abscesses on the fatty parts are different from those that come at joints, each has their judgement in operation.
And if in abscesses you should not pierce until the body is dead according to its maturation. And if there are such that piercing should be done when they have grown and are not yet dead, as with abscesses at joints. For when abscesses originate at joints, if left until they are rotten inside by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint might become corrupt, which is a cause of contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is deep within the main member, if you delay the perforation until it is dead, it will harm the main member; or if it's under the foundation, piercing should be done when it is dead; and you should not pierce an abscess which is still growing without completed maturation digestion, except for that one which might have come from deep within the foundation, it wouldn't rot properly inside and would remain buried, causing a fistula; and it couldn't heal properly over a long period.
It is necessary that you know the time of abscess perforation which occurs according to maturation, and this is when the pain has subsided, and departure of fever, and diminution of pain and heat, and from movement and firmness of the head of the abscess, and other signs; it should be that the perforation stays above or at the level of the abscess, where it opens outwards. And make the perforation long across the body, and if the abscess is near hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere where there is no fold.
In those that bend, according to the body part. And when abscesses are in the fatty tissue, you should let the perforation be until it is confirmed by digestion being completed, just as we have said. Because if you puncture before this, it will likely leave the body filled with venom and full of mucus; and might harden the lips and the depths within. And for abscesses that are punctured across the width of the body, according to what the limb needs. It is necessary to make small incisions, small slits; and in large incisions, large slits, and many tears according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such incisions where it's appropriate to clean out the pus, and cover; when it becomes as one piece with a drapery, and has softened, then proceed just like what is done on blisters: and for those that split into three angles, and for those that resemble the leaf of myrtle in terms of how they're covered, such as abscesses of angles; and for those where you make a round incision, and other sizes of incisions and similar cuttings.
Those who lack a head, such as abscesses beneath the skin superficially, it is necessary that you puncture them completely; and when an abscess is large, and it contains a substantial amount of pus, if you drain only part of the pus at once, but take out some portion. Then stop draining until tomorrow, then do not touch anything to the wound; repeat this procedure from large to small multiple times until all the pus has drained; likewise for those with weak strength, or women in pregnancy, or young children, or elderly and decrepit individuals. Because each time there is a jolt of anticipation when the pus discharges, it may cause the patient's condition to worsen, and you might not notice it happening. Therefore, proceed cautiously with this chapter, and when you puncture your abscess, if the wound arises, check if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a full incision, use linen or old cotton for dressing; and for large abscesses, and there are many slits within, then each slit should be covered with a tent so they lie against each other. And if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and tied it tightly, then it is necessary to fill it with old cotton or linens that are moist-proof, and bind until the third day; then heal and apply ointment until it heals properly.
And if bleeding occurs in your operation, prepare cold water and ease it, and moisten a piece of linen or cloth with two pieces of it, then apply this to the wound repeatedly. And if bleeding persists, ensure governance and cure, and use the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is in ice or cold, and your limb or abscess is heavily muscular, then it's necessary to place moistened tents and cloths on it using wine and heated oil; and if it's internal, and your limb is fatty, then it's necessary to apply moistened cloths with water and oil, or wine and cold oil, until the third day as we have said; then remove and clean the wound and cure it according to what needs to be done, until it heals properly.
And it is necessary to know completely in the treatments of abscesses: or I have told you how one should act before treatments of abscesses, and here comes this chapter.
of the womb
Or let's consider small abscesses that come from the uterus, and their appearance which resembles a linen cloth like in a rabbit's belly, there are many similarities. There are those with fatness as well as those who have moisture, similar to seeds; and some of them are hard and stony-like for the tailor, and there is no doubt they contain an artery, not acting against it. The action during tailoring involves using all .i. instrument called 'entromissoire', from which its shape follows next: something it contains. If it contains moisture, then make a cut along its entire length. And when the moisture is drained out, then scrape off nothing the skin containing that moisture, as it will return immediately if you leave nothing behind; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if available; if not, use water and vinegar, and apply this to the wound, leaving it until the next day; and these practices work well when the abscess stays during the night. Then restart the cotton process again as before on the second day, and the third day onwards, until you know for sure that it doesn't stay during the night; then apply ointment cure on this wound with what is suitable, until it heals completely. And if the abscess contains one hard nodule, cut according to this shape along its entire length; and remove all the linings, scrape off from all sides, put your entire treatment for drainage into this cloak where it lies; and if the artery causes you opposition, do as I have told you after. And similarly handle abscesses that are stony, using a tailor's method and then curing in accordance with what I have told you.
And the size above the abscess stone and the moistness, it is lighter because there's less blood. And if among these abscesses or head or there is no moisture, and of these two abscesses that I described or head from an old woman; and found the abscess as a soft stone, rough and white, and couldn't break; and if we had cut through any, we would have done it equally well like with a stone. For other abscesses coming out or head, those who come from children's heads and roots of ears, the opening must be totally depending on its position, for bowe to come out; and treat them as they should be treated.
of the scrophula
Many times an abscess has occurred at the neck, and around the lymph nodes, and in the throat, and not once elsewhere or on the chest, they are small, and they stick to each other. And every scrophula is properly contained within its bone, like a nut and an abscess from the head, as we have said; and there are many appearances of these scrophulas. There are some that contain moisture, and others that are malign and do not obey healing. In this one therefore that you see with good disposition towards treatment, and resembling the color of blood, mute on each side and is neither too close to the neck nor near the artery or in the path, and is not deep; it is fitting for you to touch it from above, and remove from every part, and extend the two lips of the throat up to the lymph nodes, if you need them, as we said with abscesses on the head; and handle gently, and be sure that you do not cut through the nerve or vein, and neither be too deep nor trenching, so that your hand does not escape, and do not look too far ahead, that you do not remove what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and this does not allow you to open, put vitriol paste or any powders that stop blood in the wound, and restrain the wound; and leave it until the abscess is soothed and the wound softened, then begins to rot. And when the blood has stopped, return to your task, as long as you complete it; then judge according to your duty if there are still small nodules remaining, remove them and clean them out. And if the root of the nodule has a large vein, it is not right that you cut this nodule at its root, but tie it with a thick double thread and let it fall through without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then start treating.
And if you remove the whole nodule, it is necessary for you to assemble the two edges of the wound and sew them now. There should be no excess left because of the size of the nodule; it's necessary that you focus on cutting into the root of it, draw out pus, and sew as we have described. Those nodules caused by excesses, open them up where they break down; then pierce in a similar manner to what was said before, hanging downwardly. After that apply ointment and such things, allowing for corruption; until whatever is infected becomes healthy. And when the wound has been thoroughly cleaned, start treating with ointment applied over flesh until it heals.
"De squinance" refers to medical practices concerning deformities or abnormalities related to angles or positioning. It could be associated with conditions affecting bones, joints, muscles, or other bodily structures where the natural alignment is disrupted. This term might cover a variety of scenarios from anatomical malformations due to birth defects, injuries sustained over time, or diseases that alter body parts' normal orientation and function. In medieval contexts, such knowledge would have been part of the extensive medical and surgical practices aimed at diagnosing, treating, and sometimes correcting these abnormalities.
The old ones spoke and wrote about neck surgery; but I never saw anyone do it in our land, and this is the inscription of their speech.
For those with squint, it is necessary that the incision of the throat known as "epiglottis" be made; and one should not help this, because all the veins and lungs are near in the body for those who have abscesses deep within their mouth, or in their throat or between two bones. When the illness is within the bronchial channel, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent loss due to strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary to make the incision through three circles or four, with a small slit going through, between the two circles. The size of the slit does not extend into the cartilage;
And these parts are suitable for cutting the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessel is long inside it.
And if the surgeons are fearful, it is necessary that they extend the skin of the throat to all the inch, then cut into the bone until it reaches the knuckle; and avoid blood vessels, if you see any sort of thing, and then shape the socket as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the cut across the knuckle stream which jumps through the bone that has been broken, and due to loss of voice.
and leave the wound open for a bit.
And when the hour has passed in which one doubts strangulation, gather the two mouths of the wound as cleanly as possible, and all along the line without touching the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce flesh until it is sound.
Albucasim insists that one should not perform such operations until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient's organs are deemed dead, and the deficiency has been achieved. So you cut off the epiglottis because the organs cannot evacuate, and they breathe through the wound, and thus are protected from death;
And because of this, the ancients instructed to leave the wound open until the disease's malice passes, and it has passed in three or four days. And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and treat it, until it was fully healed;
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a maiden took one knife and stuck it in her throat, cutting out part of the windpipe;
And I was summoned to cure her, and found her just as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found where the blood was issuing from it, and indeed she had no cut veins or conduits other than her throat, and the wind went in through the wound.
I acted quickly, treated the wound as much as it was healed;
and there was nothing left for the maiden but to recover her voice and she returned after that to her condition.
Because I say that in the crafting of the epiglottis, do not use fire.
of the large throat
Thick abscesses are called "throat hernia", and they are large, dark-colored swellings, and are very common in women;
And it occurs in two ways: naturally, and by accident; or natural does not have a cause.
And the accidents occur according to two ways, of which one resembles the pus from us, and the other way resembles pus that comes from our arteries; and there is fear, and it is not necessary to make incisions elsewhere than in that which is small, and prove and search through every means of introduction: if you find it as well as one fatty lump, and cannot reach any vein, then cut it, as one cuts fat, and probe through all its covering, if there is any point; and thoroughly investigate it, and treat it according to need, until it has been completely cured.
From our
Many ways there are to approach this matter, which I will explain as if it were all similar.
And so it is fitting for me to describe the whole difference that exists between us and them.
I say that in the state of fever and illness, it lasts as long as the boiling (of bodily processes) has not passed, and is accompanied by putrefaction; thus, once the fever and heat have subsided.
With the new there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains one yolk, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a gooseberry, and becomes large;
and follows two likenesses, or greasy, or moist, and much of the color are as I said in the division.
When you come to treating the new, you should first inspect and inquire about all the instrument which is called 'entromissory', according to its shape or chapter that comes after.
And the method of inquiring about abscesses in the new is that you take the wettest part you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers a little bit by little bit, until you know that the instruments have reached the core, then it should be according to the size of the abscess;
Then remove the incisor, and take care not to let it jump.
When moisture is involved in cutting, whatever its color may be, cut it as I've described for other abscesses;
And if after removing the incisor there is no moisture, know that it was fatty, then cut it in a crosswise manner and take hold of it with forceps. Gently burn each side of it and remove the coat where it lies; do this carefully with a knot to ensure its safe removal.
And if you cannot remove it intact, remove it piece by piece so that nothing remains.
For if it stays as it is, it will recur many times;
And if it stays for a bit and doesn't bother him, use some corrosive powders on the wound from time to time, keep the wound clean, place soothing substances over pus areas, and treat other wounds until they heal.
And if it's a large wound, stitch up the two edges of the wound, and treat the one causing pain due to stitches.
And if the vein is too small or another issue arises causing urgency, use the left over vitriol from the process and let it sit for two days or three, as long as the wound is healing, then rest the body with blood baths; then return to the treatment that has been paused due to a new situation.
Here are the forms of the instruments for internal treatment, and they come in three ways: large, medium, and small; and among them there are four squares which are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and amongst these there are also three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encompass the abscesses of fistulas;
and they are also like needles used for cutting roots, and they can be made of citrine, or iron, or silver, and yellow needles are preferred over those, and they are more effective than black honey to encompass the bends in fistulas;
They come in three types: large, medium, and small, depending on the width of the depressions.
The shapes of the joints resemble certain likenesses, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if it is joints that have two curves in three different ways;
and if it is joints with three curves, and they are also in three ways; and if it's joints with two curves, and single-jointed ones, and these are all necessary in their place.
The top of these is sharp, and there are some among them that only cut from one side, which we call stripping, because in this case one does not cut the vein or nerve;
And these introducers have their arms restored, so that the patient does not notice them during the incision of abscesses;
and there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you can see;
and only use force in the raw meat area, like legs, arms, nipples, and joints, and similar places.
and never use another small instrument, resembling the bark of pomegranates, according to this shape, which stops bleeding:
And let it remain one time in its healthy position where all veins are properly connected and the arteries too, never once conforming to this grand form:
Never do the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, until they seem like breasts of women;
And remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them should proceed according to this form described in line b., up until g: Then strip off the fat, and apply medicine to the wound that stimulates healing tissue, then join together the two sides of the wound for stitching, and continue with the treatment until it is healed.
And if the mammary gland sags down, and is flattened by its size especially like in women, so that she divides them into two lobes, by two similar fissures; From which one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the largest line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b until this line g; Then burn the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and I will instruct you as we have spoken about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in treatment until it heals.
And if it has not healed, or if the incision is not fully done, because the wound does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, it's necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment. And let it grow until it feels it, lifting it and its fat; then treat it until it is clean.
remove abscesses from the armpits
Abscesses that come from the axillae are methods of hard scrofula or when there are nodules, and if they contain moisture.
Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from line b. up to the line .g.: And when all the pus from the abscess is drained out, fill the wound with much cotton, and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment to the area until it heals.
And if the abscess seems like a lymph node, cut it as we said in incisions for lymph nodes, and if there is pus, apply heat cautery as we said previously.
regarding the rupture of an artery
When the artery is cut, and the skin is sutured above it, many times abscesses result. And similarly, this happens in cut veins and abscesses;
And if one knows when it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep. And when you can feel it with your fingers, if there's pressure; and when it's due to the vein, then you'll find a bulge appearing.
And it's foolish to cover this abscess, and similarly when it's under the joints and bones and in the neck and in many other places, and they are very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid the iron treatment. The one for the head should also be avoided. And in the case where there's an inflammation of artery below the skin, do it above the leather until long;
It is therefore necessary to avoid the iron treatment. The one for the head should also be avoided. And in the case where there's an inflammation of artery below the skin, do it above the leather until long; Then work on the waist with scissors, and neatly remove the artery from the tissues, as long as it is exposed;
Then insert a thread through it with a needle, and pierce until the other side, and secure the artery with two threads in the middle, just as I instructed you when extracting the two arteries in the temples;
Then with an introducer, puncture the middle that's between the two threads until blood starts to come out and make sure you've released the abscess;
Then perform the treatment that excites the blood, as long as the wound leaks. Then apply the accompanying ointment to it, until it becomes clean.
And if the abscess is as large as a vein, it's necessary that you remove with your hand all of the pus from the abscess until it touches the skin. Then pierce the needle through the part you are holding with your hand, and do so while passing it, using two threads of thread, making sure to pull one from the other side. Then remove the abscess, just as I've told you, or tie one of two strands with a piece of thread;
And if you doubt that the threads will hold, then sew another needle with both of these threads all across the abscess, at the incision of the first needle, and keep the threads tight in four loops;
Then cut the abscess as much as the excess comes out, then carefully remove the excess and leave what is tied;
Then put one moistened linen cloth with wine and oil on it, then give them treatments and applications until they are healed.
from abscesses of nerves
So, just like abscesses occur in arteries and veins, abscesses of nerves happen when nerves are cut, or due to too much labor, and similar conditions.
And this happens more often at shoulders and arms, and everywhere where joints exist, and it's one type of nerve abscess, and its appearance resembles the color of flesh, and is in various positions with pain;
And when one constrains it to form, the patient feels pain in the body, and is not evenly throughout the body, but around the head;
And move well in all directions, neither forward nor backward, neither to the side nor on top; and someone who is connected should not be covered by iron: perhaps they would cause constriction.
And that which is at the head or forehead, makes the skin hot to the touch. If the abscesses are small, use tweezers and grip them at their base;
And if they are large, lift them at the elbow, cut and excise them, then close the wound with stitches, and continue treatment until it is healed.
Of large warts hanging down Nowhere occurs in the belly and nowhere else, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" by its appearance, and has subtle roots, and big lumps; there are also small ones and some of varying sizes;
And I saw two homes where there were two bellies that resembled fungi more than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had small roots, and were cut open, they corroded immediately upon the presence of moisture.
I cut them open and found that in one there were 16 ounces weighing, and in the other 5 ounces, and when you look at the organs during incision it shows that the disease is moist, and the color of the fungus is white and moist with a subtle root;
If the wound is wide, and are within your sight the fire cautery. For the surgeon often experiences too many flows of blood, and if you're not cautious, then hurry to apply the cautery;
And if you see the patient terrified and fearful due to the incision from the iron, then take a well-made linen thread, and tie it around as we have said, and leave it for two days;
And then apply pressure, and never cease to pull the linen thread until you feel it tighten against the knot, and no pain occurs through that; and if the roots are large, then fear for the belly too, but you can comfortably adjust half of them.
Then apply the cautery so that it does not bleed again; then treat the wound, and make sure you do not touch the part of the blood clot which is discolored and lacks sensation and milk.
For it is an abscess inside, and I will come to the treatment of the sore afterwards.
When the bladder burns.
When the appearance of the bladder comes from a wound cautery or from a fissure of syphilis, and is on the belly and in some of the intestines, just as it happens in other injuries, where blood seeps out from veins or arteries according to what was done previously, or due to windiness.
And if it's due to the wound of syphilis and from the excretion of the intestines, then its appearance resembles that of blood, and is a slight condition with no pain, and opens through various exits. And if it's due to the issue of the intestine, then it's more varied. And when you press on it with your fingers, it tends to straighten up and then comes back, and by chance if it is squeezed, it gets bigger much at the entrance of the bath and because of strong work.
And if it's due to moisture, it's easy and opens well when you press it with your hand, it doesn't constrict; and if it's due to blood, it opens through these signs, the abscesses are large and hard, and occur according to a quantity;
And if it's due to wind, it smells at the nostrils, and the organs are such that when you look at their appearance, it resembles blood from an artery, or a vein, or wind. If you must allow the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if it appears to be through the intestine or the bladder, you must instruct the patient to pierce their bladder, and stretch it all straight, then cut around its entirety around the opening. then command them to heal while holding some vinegar in their hands, then go inward to the area you have indicated throughout the entire body, Then half of the abscess is above all the large hook.
Then operate with half of the abscess stretched over the tie, and place your index finger, and grasp the intestines; If you find that it is caught by the tie, release it, and push the intestine forward towards the belly.
And if you find the boil, take it by the root, and cut away the excess.
And if it goes against the artery or a vein, or if it goes deeply inwards, then come back to your work and take two needles, and I put out two pieces of thread, and put those two needles inside where you have made cuts that you pierced;
Then press the pus through four lengths above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the wound to heal, letting the dead flesh heal by itself; Or cut it when it becomes tender and scabbed, then treat it according to what is necessary, and remove the pus as we have said;
Or cut it when it becomes tender and scabbed, then treat it according to what is necessary, and remove the pus as we have said; And remove the blood or moisture you find, then treat the wound where it's necessary, and stitch up the wound.
and the sore
We have discussed the appearances of a sore in division and how to address it with medicine and how to avoid iron treatment. Let us discuss an ingrowing sore, and there is great caution needed in its treatment; the old say that when sores are found on skin or can be scraped off such as under breasts and in cooking areas, and those common places, they should all be removed at their beginning; but for large and old ones, it's not suitable to approach them, because I have never known anyone to recover from such cases; no one has ever recovered from these types of sores before me.
And in the case of ingrowing sores, when they can be scraped off as we have said, it is that you cleanse the diseased area of black scabs once. Then let the surgeon know if there's visible swelling, then prepare the diseased area to be open - that means making sure it's clean and clear skin ready for opening; then remove your warts or sores from all around, and scrape everything off without leaving anything behind; and leave no wound open, press well on the wound with your hand or any object, and if the bleeding stops opposite the cut of the artery or vein, cauterize until there's no more bleeding; then treat it further until it heals.
Of cautery from fire command the sick person to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. We have discussed the appearances of dropsy in division, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs for each appearance, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is treated with iron: these are all clearly detailed; and should we not use iron in these two appearances: one is known as tympanites and the other is dropsy, since it is a deadly matter; therefore when you medicate this appearance of dropsy called "dropsy" from medicines, and the treatment doesn't help, if you notice that the patient's condition is weak, or they have another disease besides dropsy, such as stomach solution and similar conditions; then do not use iron, because there is doubt in this case; and when you see a very green color on the patient, and they only have dropsy without any other disease, and if they are neither too young nor too old, then proceed like this to operate: Lift the patient's side with your hands, and have the assistant press the stomach in the lower part near the ankle while pouring water downwards. Then take a thorned spatulate according to this form: And make two incisions of about half an inch at a point, but do not make them too deep so that they can only reach up to the intestine when inserted inside, and you cannot bleed them;
Then look to see if the ascites has progressed towards the intestines: if it requires that you cut in the area of the belly, then make your incision .iij. inches to the right above the navel; and if the ascites is due to liver disease, then place your incision on the left side of the belly, .iij. inches; and if it's due to bile, then do so on the right side, and do not have the patient lie on the cut as excesses should not flow towards that weak part.
Then cut all the skin with the instrument and pull it back, lifting your hand halfway between the skin and the stomach as far as you can stretch them when they are scorched to the size of a nail or in proportion to their thickness; then cut through the stomach until the pus moves up half way towards the body cavity, this is the opening for the water, proceed cutting further with force, and here's how the tool looks like: It resembles a fine silver rod and is made of iron or brass, light in weight, and has two small bumps. On one side it has three bumps, on another it has four bumps, and on yet another, there are two bumps; and the shoulder is cut just like a feather, this is the shape of the incision that the writer describes as cutting the feather.
At the top is the needle, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it starts to pull away from the instrument; drain then either half or one-third of it. For if you remove more than should be removed at this time, by chance, the patient might die due to the release of his spirit from the weapon, or he might faint, or he might approach death;
But in accordance with the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the indications of virtue on the patient signify, and their pulse; then take the tool and hold the water, and it is held now by the knife which numbs the nodule I've spoken of, from which I spoke, that you pierce in this manner; then continue with the tool another day, if you see the patient suffering under this, and draw out a small amount of the water.
Do this for any number of days, and don't stray from it but use only a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and leave too much water, if there is fever or sweat or bath or sun exposure, and if it turns discolored, then drink; and continue with the medicine-drying cure until it's healed, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after removing the water, as I said before.
On circumcision No child is born without having hair on the penis, or if it has none that are small, or not in their place. If it suits immediately after it has pierced two very fine spatumile according to this form: then place one very fine piece of bone, and tie it up for three days or four; and when it wants to urinate, remove the bone, let urine out, and then put it back. And by chance nothing is necessary because the urine that comes out does not make it closed off again. If the hair on penis is small, if there's medicine using a piece of bone from a stag, as we have said, and it will enlarge. Those who do not have their hair in place are crippled, because no child is born with hair at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they raise their penis upwards; and they cannot procreate either due to the matter unable to reach the prostate gland, which is a male disease.
And the method for opening is that the patient lies on his back, and holds the tip of the penis and its surrounding area at the size of a feather's width, so that the hair is in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding that occurs repeatedly, and if it does happen, stop it using someone who can handle blood, and treat the wound until it heals.
The blisters of the foreskin Many times ulcers appear in the foreskin, and there is an ugly appearance; and among them are benign and non-benign ones; it should be that you take .i. ounce of this subtle thing, mix and cleanse them all, then place on cotton soaked with Egyptian ointment; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it heals. And if the ulcers are malignant, they have color and ooze; it should be that you treat them with cautery. When you remove them, and if the ulcer is within the foreskin and has part inside the skin and part outside, it should be that you extract the ulcer that is inside first; and when it heals, then clean up from the outside as well. For when you heal them together, they do not properly secure the head of the penis, causing blackness and corruption in the penis and the area around urination; it should be that you remove all that is black and corrupted, then cover with a plaster made from the peel of pomegranates and sugar, then continue other treatments until it heals.
And if bleeding occurs, treat with the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizations should be carried out in two stages: that is, during blood discharge and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and removed, it should be that you insert a piece of opium into the foreskin, and let the patient urinate through it. And when the skin is dry at the head of the penis for those who have not been circumcised, or it has occurred due to injury or abscess, then it must be seared with one tool in haircuts until all the threads are untied, and the head of the penis is freed from everywhere;
And if it is a grievous thing to discuss this, then you should burn it at .1 inch across on the head of the penis and the skin; then cut cleanly between .2., and I put .1. fine linen bandage soaked in cold water that does not touch directly.
Of circumcision
Circumcision is not an alteration of the body like other injuries; nonetheless, when we perform this act voluntarily and on children, it's necessary that we do the best possible job and cause the least harm for their health.
I say that the old ones did not mention circumcision of their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
But I wanted the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision before one day old, and during infancy, and for all male infants; if there were any errors because there are two layers, and by chance this was done above and that remained below.
Otherwise they receive two layers, and the pain is doubled, and in the circumcision which happens at one day old, the point of the member isn't securely made; and during the shaping of nails by chance it escapes the blade, and penetrates the work, and many times they are born like this without needing circumcision, and I have desired this.
From the shaping done forcefully on all the thread line, I have found the benefit of experience, for the force cuts them just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, cut it equally in half; but let the threads be well woven inside the skin. And use the method of the first operation so that you make the child think if he hears that you are only tying the thread inside the penis just then and afterwards have him relieve himself in every way you can; Then hold the penis straight between your hands, and distribute the strength between your hands or under your feet where the child cannot see them, nor any of the tools; then move your hand up the penis and blow or hum, and pull it upwards until the head of the penis is inside. Then clean it well from the accumulated filth, then tie its root with a double thread, then tie another one halfway through each other threads; and hold it at two inches above the pouch and index finger, cut between the two threads, then lift your breath quickly and pull the tip of the penis;
Then hold the penis straight between your hands, and distribute the strength between your hands or under your feet where the child cannot see them, nor any of the tools; then move your hand up the penis and blow or hum, and pull it upwards until the head of the penis is inside. Then clean it well from the accumulated filth, then tie its root with a double thread, then tie another one halfway through each other threads; and hold it at two inches above the pouch and index finger, cut between the two threads, then lift your breath quickly and pull the tip of the penis; Then let the blood flow in and out little by little, because this is mucus; apply powder on and over it with one spoonful of glue mixed from a raw egg tempered with pink water, combined with rose oil that's been boiled and fresh, then leave it on until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it heals properly.
The form of forces at the creation if thus: let there be two shoulders be together and intersecting each other, and let them be equally large as hands in equal manner:
The error in creation is when the knees inside move at incision; hence it's necessary that you extend them to your angle, so that they make an incision; and cut equally, and if you can't hold them to your angle, take them with pliers, then cut.
And if they protrude for three days, and the one beneath the foreskin is swollen, let it be until you are able to make an incision there, and gently scrape; cut as much as you can, and guard against the part of the foreskin, it will not harm him.
Therefore treat the rest of things related to the disease with powder, as we have said or treated about powders, and if you cut too much at your hand, and it goes above, it will do no harm; therefore treat it accordingly, as we have said, until it's healed.
The retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to the presence of stone, or frozen blood, or bile, or pus, or similar things that we have discussed in the division;
And if the urine is not relieved and you see retention due to stone in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be propped up on their knees. And have them place their feet under the back, and extend their belly above the back part, and restrain the patient so they lean somewhat as much as they can; and then force the neck of the bladder to allow the passage of stone above, because then urine is relieved;
And if it doesn't come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "syringe", of which here is the form: and let it be made of subtle and light hair like that of a bird; and let its tube be one palm long and half, and let it be subtle at its head.
And the method of discharging urine is as follows: take one double thread, and tie it around the head with one loop of wool or cotton. Insert the head inside the syringe through the thread; remove any excess wool until it stops at the tip of the syringe. Then grease the syringe with oil or butter and mixed yolk of egg, and place the patient on a seat, then pressurize the bladder and penis with wet oil and olive oil while applying it gently.
Then gently place the syringe in the penis until it reaches the root of the penis. Then press the penis upwards towards the opening. Next, insert the syringe before reaching the bladder, and feel the patient urinate up to the empty thing. This is not fully achieved following this order because wherever the urine was meant to go has become twisted; then pull out the thread little by little from all the wool loop by loop, and the urine follows the wool, then squeeze it out, and ensure proper urine flow;
And continue with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and make sure the patient urinates fully.
Of bladder diseases
When burns or blood arrive in the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled, and you see distilled waters and medicines within it, then prepare with every tool that's called 'clepsis' (a type of water clock), and its form is such:
It is sealed and if you have three: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the ears are over this way so that the medicine can be such that it numbs the penis completely without addition, provided there's no moisture and it needs to be expelled when necessary.
And when you see the medicines being released in the bladder, place the tip of the instrument in the moisture, and direct it towards the puller who is there; if pulls out the moisture with the extractor and then seals the puller tightly again; if the moisture enters and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
And this is the shape of the subtle bladder stone where we catheterize the bladder: so it's like this:
And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is placed higher; and between two breasts you squeeze. Take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture used for catheterizing the bladder, then join the ends together forming a strong double thread, and heat one end of this moisture on the fire; then place the tip of the catheter in the urethra, then hold your hand over the bladder until all the moisture has been inserted, so that the patient feels when that moisture reaches the bladder;
And if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make one circle, and poke it roundly through the middle. Then thread a strong string into those holes, then join the circles together like joining two plates, and put inside what you see is liquid and moisture and water, and tie it in this device; and do as you did with the bladder by pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
of the stone
We have discussed the methods for dealing with stones in division, and their extraction along with medications; we also explained the differences between hard stones that cause pain and others, as well as all the signs, and which stone requires cutting into size; regarding bladder and penis; and I will clearly and briefly tell you about them.
I state that the stone inside the bladder often occurs in children, and this is a sign that the kidney infection jumps into the bladder like an acute illness; one should cut open here, and rub the painful parts of his penis, it will happen many times, and then heal; and at these jumping points; and the healing process for children lasts up until they are four years old, and causes much pain in the elderly, and is in between in those who are in their middle age; and the treatment is more gentle for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the body through urination, in order to remove all the toxins that are in the intestines. For it hinders once every time trying to get rid of the stone.
Then take hold of the patient by the thighs, and lay them down and move backwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and exits only once from their upper part; then have them sit between your hands, and their hands should be placed under their thighs, so that the bladder is fully lowered downwards; then look and touch thereupon.
If you feel the stone in place, then hurry to cut on the stone right now. And if it doesn't pass upon touching with your entire hand, wet your index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is fat; or moisten your middle finger, if the patient is slender. And press at its base, and touch the stone. When you feel it with your finger, remove it to the neck of the bladder; then apply pressure at that point and guide the cutting forward where you see fit.
And command the surgeon to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to extend both his hands above in front of him, placing the skin over his pubic area at the location where the cut will be made; then he should push out the bladder smoothly, as this is its form:
And make it between those who are in the middle of the kidneys and the foundation, not exactly in the center but at the edge of the left kidney; and be straight on the stone, and your hands should touch either the kidney or the foundation, and its size should go through so that it is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big.
Suppose the press is what I need that's either kidney or foundation, it should not fail under pressure; and know that there is part of the stone with angles and margins: if it is easy to come out; and if it is under a part resembling a walnut, and round, from which the output is light.
So when it has angles and margins in the stomach, make the size larger; and if it does not fail, then you must apply force with the tongs that are as sharp as a file to strain against the stone so it doesn't escape; or you can use an instrument slightly curved at its end, which is one and two inches thick when straight. And if you cannot engineer this way, make them one inch and two inches in diameter on the tip, and if they are unbroken, strain them with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stone, start by removing the largest from the neck of the bladder, then remove upwards, followed by the larger ones after that if there are several. And if it is very large, make an incision and create a bigger opening. For two things happen to the patient: he dies or urine starts leaking out through the wound while his kidneys can't heal; but always strive with your tool for pulling or using forceps until you remove it piece by piece;
And when you have completed your task, fill the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, compress it, and apply a poultice of oil and wine, or oil and cold water and rose water, to soothe the inflamed area; then reattach the patient onto his neck, and do not undo the stitch until the third day.
And when you undo it, make sure to wash the area with oil and water thoroughly, then apply a daifinicon ointment and a basilicon ointment until it heals well.
And if abscesses come into the wound and corrodes, and blood congeals in the bladder, causing urine retention which can be recognized like this - without jumping along with the urine: then you should apply to the wound, extract that blood, because if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and damage it.
Then cleanse the wound with water and salt and soap, and assist in all ways that you can see fit, until it heals; and when treating every injury, tie the legs together and place the medicines on top of it.
And if the stone is small and it's inside the urethra, causing urine to not be able to come out; when treating as I have described, cut many times and excuse the cuts due to this treatment. I have already found this effective.
Take one piece of iron according to this form, and have it pierced at three points on one point.
Then take one thread and tie it around the shaft of the penis so that it does not come back into the bladder; then insert the iron rod in the penis gently until it reaches the stone; and twist the iron rod in your hand on the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; if urine starts coming out quickly, then press your hand on what is left of the stone inside the penis. If it breaks quickly, and there is urine with the action, and heals the patient;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie one thread around the stone and another above it, then place the penis between the two threads over the stone, then forcefully pull on the penis, untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and treat until it is healed.
of the stone in women
Sometimes a stone occurs in women, and if it happens even once, this is treated with the utmost care, and precautions are taken against three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows how to conduct herself properly when looking into mirrors, even if she is chaste.
And the third way could be that by chance one cannot find a woman who is well skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone in a woman is closer to the surface than a man's stone, for which reason it requires a deeper cut and considerable fear arises.
And if necessity pushes you to this, then it is necessary that you seek out someone well skilled, and touch their knowledge with truthfulness, or if you do not find even one chaste person who tells the truth, choose instead a cunning old woman in women's affairs, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to perform as you instruct on the examination of the stone;
And very carefully observe if the woman is a virgin: then it's necessary to press her womb or foundation and look for the stone; and if she finds it, make her place herself on her back over her womb and take it; and when she has found it, keep her to press it down with her hand as closely onto her abdomen.
If she finds it, then it's proper for her to move the stone from side to side while entering the bladder up until under it, as long as she reaches the root of the thigh; then press against the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the inside of the hip, where it's slightly larger and feels the stone in that area; and do not move her hand above or underneath the stone, but make sure to stop after a small movement.
Then press on the stomach, if you feel the stone increase the wound until the stone can come out forcefully, and know that there are many types of stones: this means small and large, hard and smooth, long and round, and some have bumps. If you understand these characteristics to know the exit point.
And if it doesn't heal with you, apply vitriol and keep it there for an hour until the wound is healed; then return to your work until the stone is removed, and use instruments that I have told you about in removing stones for helping you in your task.
And if the wound doesn't heal and it's an artery that's been cut, apply powder on the wound and bind with cloths and hemp, and do not repeat this step again, leave the stone and don't try to remove it, in case accidentally it kills the patient; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of blood has been calmed and the wounds have healed, then return to your work until the stone is removed.
Of fatty hernia
Of watery phlegm is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white sputum, which resides within the folds of the testicles, contained in the egg; and it is called 'sputum', and has no proper place within the fabric of the egg, should one think it's another kind; and this is the skin under the testicle where we have spoken; and this does not have a pore.
And the production of such phlegm is so weak that it comes to the testicles, and spreads this material.
And it never comes from striking the testicles, and this moisture can have many colors: or it becomes declining to jaundice, or it is without redness, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more often.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is or white like we have said, then the abscesses are present, that is, one as long as an egg figure, and does not open within the skin, because there is moisture throughout.
And if there is moisture in the inner lining, then the abscesses are present with part of an egg, and because of this, one might think it's another egg;
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicle and the white part, you can feel it well; therefore, when you see to know the color of the moisture, you test everything in the incision area, from which the shape is as described before. Following this, as those who come after the initial introduction, judge according to what is inside.
Following this, as those who come after the initial introduction, judge according to what is inside. And when we cure it with a iron, the patient should be treated according to our skill and their body's capacity; then they should be laid upon their back, slightly elevated, and blankets should be placed under them.
Then sit on their left side, and command the minister to sit on the right, stretching out one arm under one of the patient's ribs towards the heart area.
Then take the spit and coat the skin around the ribs with it along its length until below the elbow, and make sure to cut the incision straight across through the skin until you reach the white fat, and gently remove the overlying layer of skin according to your ability.
Then pierce the wet spot fully with an awl of size one and a half inches across, remove all water, then insert your forceps, have the wetness up front; and do not touch the center of the kidneys, but only the wet area; take out the entire rib or piece by piece from his backside, since if you don't extract it carefully enough, water will return.
And if the egg jumps to your work, then reset it in its place once you have completed the work on the wet spot; then join the two halves of the kidney's center with a stitch, and then treat it like other wounds until it heals completely.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the ligaments that are suspended, fearing the bleeding; then cut through the scrotum up to the suspension point, remove the egg, and treat it as we have said before.
And if the wound is formed into two joined parts, know that these are two branches; so handle the other part in the same way as you did the first equally, then bleed it out and apply wet wool soaked in rose oil to the wound.
and apply another layer of wet wool in wine and oil, and place it over the two stumps, then cover with folded cloths, and secure them above following this form.
Then take two cloths and fold them with striped wool according to this pattern and have them joined by sewing in the waistband of the trousers, and one end of the shoulder goes down to the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part near the wrist; and the second neck above the two corners, and make sure the tightening is inside the loop of the garter.
And never is this cure of the fire cautery in the size of iron, and you take one small surgical instrument cautery, and cut the skin of the legions, and heat it up as we have said, so that the white fluid contained in the water becomes revealed;
Take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white spot like oncinia (a unit of measurement), and scorch with that subtle fire tool:
And cut in all the ways you can until you exhaust everything; and make sure that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this operation is more safe; and watch out for bleeding, and be aware of the size of cuts.
And if nothing opposes you, or if pus comes out or bleeding starts, or any other thing happens, then treat what is opposing you according to the one who spoke before.
And if the patient is fearful and cannot bear to undergo this work due to its horribleness, then perform a puncture, as I have told you, and know that when you are well convinced by the meanings we have explained that watery matter is there,
And make the patient sit on a raised seat; then puncture the abscess in the part below at all the broad pus-filled area, and make the incision long along the body; and make the holes wide so that all the liquid flows out.
Then place cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the liquid flow away through it, then treat until the wound is healed.
And if the whitened cloth does not allow water to escape from the wound's mouth, then it is necessary for you to stuff in a feather or an instrument used to treat the water drops from those with dropsy, which has been described previously; and make the opening one inch wide of the wound, and know that the water returns, and assembles after about seven months or more, and when she returns like before, then this will pass through the disease's days.
Regarding the extraction of pus from the testicles
Know that in this part of the branch there are various ways to cause fear, which is why I think it's better if you let it be.
And I will tell you about how to do it, and what an abscess looks like when cut open.
So I say that many abscesses come from thorns or even within the body; and it happens by chance.
This is to know that through excess of sharpness and fever, which spreads in thorns or due to impact;
And the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the thorn; and you don't find any pain, it's a thorny abscess;
And by chance there may be an abscess filled with pus and stones, of a red color, and it never comes from the heart or inflamed vein.
When it's due to an artery, if you recognize it by the location of the pulsating abscess, when you press on it with your fingers; And it is not right for you to touch it.
That which is made of inflamed vein can be identified by its location and the feeling when pressing with your fingers on it,
And can certainly do the measurement on this kind of thing, and on other parts; And you must cut the womb of the calf, then it is in the middle part, and the main tendon should be under white skin, and release all suspensory structures from the egg.
If the calf has already been born with these parts attached, then you must remove the calf and its copula.
And if it is under the skin or within the vessels, you must release all that tissue and then remove its copula in a circular motion.
And if the place of birth of the child is at his rear, it must be that you take all of it, and remove the egg, as we have said.
And when your tasks are completed, apply the wound with moistened wool in oil and wine, then continue other treatments until it is clean.
from the abscess of the glands
This is an abscess surrounded by a wrapping that resembles half a ring, with the gland swelling. And when the patient is suffering greatly as they move;
And the treatment of this disease is also very similar to what has been done before.
Yet we will tell you about its treatment according to how the old ones did it.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated stool, then hold their feet up with the stirrup for the heels. In all the parts of the body near the penis, and the diseases that afflict them, and those that are extended in form;
Then proceed with a sharp cut through the vessels at the place where they lie open, until they are exposed.
And then burn from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
Then I prick with a needle where there's one two-strand thread, and tie it to the first bone where the nail came out, and tie it directly to the other end. Then remove them straight down the middle, according to the length of the body, and cleanse out the corrupted moisture.
Then treat the wound like others or cover it with a bandage, so that no vessel bleeds until one of the coagulants begins to grow.
because this causes no harm, and if all the vessels come into view, then it is necessary to apply the coagulants to all the vessels; so that the body does not lose its healing through the incisions of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
Of the rupture of the scrotum The occurrences of this branch happen through the section that leads to the scrotum or the abdominal expansion in the part of the groin, because the intestines descend from that rupture into one of the testicles.
And this rupture is either at the scrotum or due to the expansion of the belly in the part of the groin. These two ways of happening originate from these four causes: impact, jumping, crying out, lifting of a heavy object, and similar actions.
And when it's due to the expansion at the scrotum, symptoms occur gradually and over a long period of time, not suddenly. And the abscesses are even up to around the front side, because pus rushes towards the intestine.
And the signs are when it comes to cutting across the gland, causing a sudden onset of pain at the beginning, and abscesses appear in various forms, near the skin area, because of the exit route from the intestine and the body beyond the gland.
And it happens that the lymph nodes descend with the intestine, and are retained therein, causing great suffering to the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these times of fear and anxiety, it's advisable to avoid them.
And the way of performing it is that you instruct the patient to have the diseased part remove the intestines from within through the wound with their hand if they can fit inside. then sew up his neck. hold him between your hands and lift his legs;
next stretch the stomach upwards, and peel off all the skin from the belly as long as possible; next cut into the belly skin in inches according to your need to open the wound, and do it so that the intestines can possibly come out;
Then scrape off the testicles which are beneath the skin of the scrotum, until all the white part of the testicle is exposed from every direction.
Then cut into the testicular bulb where it covers the penis, in the one between the white part of the testicle which is under the testicle skin, and between the second testicle,
Then separate what is behind the womb and between the second testicle; and then insert your right hand into the scrotum's cavity, and have the white part of the testicle on top of your left hand, and lift the womb towards all parts of the testicle towards the waist. And command the attendant to extend the womb upwards, and to free what is behind the ligament;
And inquire of your hands if there is any part of the intestine wrapped up or white and hard yellow, and if you find no thing, release it in the belly immediately.
Then take a needle or where it has one large thread made of ten threads, and insert it into the yellow part behind the yellowish area, which comes after the skin of the balls; after cutting, then clip the hairs that appear from the threads, until there are four threads. Then join them one on top of the other in a manner resembling a cross, and secure the yellowish substance, as we have said is behind the skin of the balls, with a strong string of two parts; Then wrap the hairs of the threads, and tie them firmly with two parts, so that none of the needles that pierce them can enter into it, preventing any pus from entering the wound. And make the tie right away according to the first long tie of two fathoms from that, and after these two ties leave down a depth of about half a fathom beneath the knee joint where it's broad enough for one fathom.
And after all else according to the roundness that he has worn; then cut in the area where it is under the skin of the knee joint, as long as there's no bone or joint, like we have said before.
Then apply wet wool in oil, and put it on the wounds, and I will show you how to tie as we have said before. And afterwards burn the white syfac that we have said, after the incision, due to concern for blood escape.
For this happens many times, and leave the link until it heals by itself; and if it takes too long to fall off, then use hot water, and apply what we have said until it heals.
Then treat the wound with other remedies, until it is fully healed.
regarding fatty hernia
In this case, I never find anyone who dares to undergo the iron treatment.
And the old ones said that it is done like a branch assembled in a spiral, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after trimming them lightly above;
then finish with me, and treat the abscess of the one who works, while the vessels are bleeding; and treat it as we have said, until it is clean.
None of it should happen in the abdominal cavity, as we have said, and open the abdomen; and do not allow any parts of the intestines to come out, and if they do come out, it is little, and repair them constantly.
and even if it stays too long at this point, suppose there's a wound or gangrene, as long as the intestines come out.
And this happens through the extension of the sycophant that is in the joints, just like we said, because it is extended, then softened and swollen up his limbs and exposed;
And the treatment involves using a cautery, just as we have mentioned before; and sometimes the wound is treated in this manner with iron:
And when the patient lies on his back between your hands, then press down on his limbs from the swollen area outward in a manner according to three fingers' width;
And then remove the sycophant that is under the skin which follows, then take hold of it and place it in the swollen area of the sycophant.
And he presses towards the front of the belly, then cuts the two that appear below the navel on the backside of the head of the rib, and cuts both sides.
Then he removes the head of the rib, and does not cut down to the navel or stretch out the egg for another thing, just as I have instructed you in the treatment of removing thorns from the intestines;
Then proceed with the treatment according to the treatment of wounds. And when you cut out the child, if it defiles and treats the wound until it is healed.
The syphilitic must be constrained, and does not show any appearance in the routure (syphilis), and the cauterizations are hardened in this area, and closer to salvation.
From the softening of the skin of the nipples
Many times the skin of the breasts becomes soft in some men, because what is inside gets softened and it can be seen; when one wants to treat this condition, they should let the ailment heal on their back and cut off the soft skin above the natural skin. Then join the two edges at a seam, and if you wish, sew the first excess of soft skin with three or four seams securely. Then cut between the seams, then treat the wound as other wounds until it heals, and remove the thread.
Regarding sexual restraint
Understand that chastisement is part of our law, and it's my preference that I don't discuss this in this book; and they are necessary only for two reasons: one being that the person should be able to respond when asked about chastisement and know how to treat it. The other reason is because we often need to restrain certain animals to assist us, such as goats, sheep, cows, and others.
Of those who are hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites can be in two ways: one way is that between the two openings where they urinate, it looks like a woman's figure, or that she has hair, and sometimes passes urine. And the second way is in women, with a structure above the navel similar to a penis and two openings. The treatment for hermaphrodites and females is that you take care of all the connected parts as if they were others, treating them like any other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of the openings, there's no need for treatment.
Of the measles
Measles is a connected spot on the natural part, so ugly to see; some women also have it as large as their hand, and this is what we treat. It is necessary that you color the excess of measles with your hand or nails, and cut it gently; and don't go too deep, because bleeding may occur, then continue another treatment until it heals; and on another spot that appears at the mouth of the married woman, and she uses it, and sometimes burns it, and resembles the appearance of a cow, and for this reason they called it the old "cow disease". It is necessary to remove it as we said measles, and treat it until it fully heals.
The fire cautery commands the patient to allow the hairs to grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they fully grow.
If the nature of woman is unknown or small; it's natural through birth or accidents due to sickness that have happened; or comes from fat, or because of delicate or thick syfac (body parts), and occurs in the front part during marriage, on the ribs, under them, wherever it might be; and one needs to understand conceiving, childbirth, and potentially bearing flowers; understanding these is through the observation of a midwife. If the miscarriages are visible and near, if they're at your fingertips or the sides.
Regarding hemorrhoids
Surgery is an opening of veins without usual practice, and when the hemorrhoids become large; and we have mentioned these symptoms in the division, along with signs, and I will discuss those that require treatment. I state that the hemorrhoids and the large ones, when they are hot within the marron, and do not appear to smell, except by iron cure if there is any. Those at the mouth of the marron, one can feel them, hence these can be treated. Therefore, you must put the woman in a cold room, then place the large one under the pincers, and the marron on its roots, then apply powdered medicines that restrain bleeding such as acaica and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bandage her feet to keep warm for an hour, then immerse them in cold water; and if there are signs of bleeding, have her bathe in a decoction made from sumac, apple peel, gall nuts, and similar items. Then take corn flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and apply as one poultice to her back. And should she stop bleeding, this is good. If not, should she burn suction cups on her back and breasts without cutting; then take hair, and make a paste from plantain juice or agletier juice with old wine, and let her bathe in it.  And when the abscess rests, cure the wound until it heals properly; and the one called "albathir" is red, resembling .i chief roughnesses, so it should be treated as I said for the large ones; and then treat it until it fully heals.
The contents of the marron (large bowel)
Various types of abscesses come about in the marron (large bowel), such as gangrene and stone abscesses, herpes, indigestion ulcers, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other diseases that I mentioned in the division. Therefore, it is necessary for me to describe in this treatise the abscess that appears in the marron, which isn't one that hardens within; if you notice symptoms of the opening process, look for signs such as warmth, fever, and turning redness; hence don't rush to puncture immediately but wait until the pain subsides. Then place your patient on a single seat, with two small seats at their sides for support, placing them so that they lean against their back and have their feet elevated off the ground. Their buttocks should be spread apart, and their arms should rest under their knees, tied together securely; then guide the opening towards the right side of their body, inserting an instrument to open the marron mouth from which the abscess forms. You must check this tool when you have it prepared to ensure that it doesn't penetrate too far into the marron and cause harm or bruise the patient; if the instrument is larger than necessary, cover the depth of the marron with a cloth so as not to bother her; also place the nozzle of the instrument above, allowing it to cut through. When the abscess opens and you manually compress the opening, then proceed to care for it according to its severity, covering it in oil-soaked cloths or dry oily cloths; place the oiled cloth over the marron and on top of a clean piece of linen underneath; after this period, apply ointment for two days until healing begins. Then, once you have cleansed the marron and wound with water and honey, followed by water with cooked lily roots and aristologe leaves, reapply the treatment. And should the wound recover within the marron, then avoid using a metal instrument for cooking in this area but treat it according to what we've discussed in the division.
Regarding childbirth
The art is first in the game to know the shape of natural birth, and these signs are when you see a woman about to give birth and smell the amniotic fluid: then the child begins to forcefully emerge; this indicates that the birth proceeds naturally according to its form, coming out from under her head, and with it comes its second part; and when you see these signs, it is proper to gently press on her stomach, so that the child emerges quickly; for when it descends through its head, it also accompanies its second part and exits cleanly from her reproductive organs via good cleanliness; any other way of coming is not natural. For it comes at times on its feet, and forcefully emerges with its body or shoulder, and hands, or it comes on its stomach, or back, and can be turned by chance around her neck, and through other harmful postures; skillful knowledge and subtlety are necessary in these matters for the midwife to avoid errors and deception, and I will show you all the shapes of how they should assist.
When the child comes through its head by natural exit, and the woman is in great pain during childbirth, and her strength is weak, she should sit on a stool, or have women hold her; then let her draw out from where orfenic (possibly meaning 'her own nature') or fenugreek be cooked, and then place the midwife between her hands with a small sparrow, whose form is as follows: And cut the second one, and remove up to his nail until the moisture that was inside is out; and press the woman's stomach as her child descends, and if it doesn't descend, it becomes necessary to enemas with fenugreek paste mixed in oil of safflower for the woman; then make her drink and sneeze on consi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: if the child comes out now. And when both hands come out forcefully, it is necessary that you gently push them one by one; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, lift her feet high; then pull off the chair onto the ground, cut the woman so she doesn't defecate during lifting; and if neither of her hands can enter and the child dies, you clip her hands with the knife that was previously set up, extract the child, and pull out equally.
from the birth of the baby on its feet When the child comes out on its feet, it is necessary to lift it up. and then twist slowly and gradually, until they are even;
then apply one finger and extend it slowly and gradually.
Can he jump up to his thighs, if the command is given, and make him exhale with consideration; If he can jump, may God will it.
And if it doesn't move as we have said, if he twists a little bit by a little bit, until it follows the natural figure. Therefore, he should be gently handled.
And if it doesn't act as we have said, take a masticatory stick, and oil of saffron, and gum resin, and melted down gum; grind all of this together in a one-liter mortar; and place the body of the woman inside and outside of this ointment, Then make them sit in cold water up to their ribs;
And when they are thoroughly moistened below, give them one spoonful of turpentine and place it there, leaving it for an hour; Then make them sit on a stool, after which have them sneeze and restrain their mouth and nose, and gently massage their abdomen, because the child jumps now. From the issue of the child on its knees When the child comes in this form, if he places his hands slowly and slowly.
From the birth of the child that emerges with one hand during It is necessary to engineer how to bring back the hand: If one cannot bring it back, then have the woman stand up and move around;
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed for one day, and stretch out her legs fully;
then proceed with the massage that I have described;
and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a stool, then try to guide the hand back in place; and turn the child according to its natural form, make her sneeze, and instruct her to pray until the baby comes out.
From the birth of the child at its neck, and it spreads its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back I must have the child wring out its hand, then turn it gradually and gently, and let it be gently;
And when they are even, I place them in the natural lifting and oiling position, as we have said, then command that it move gradually and gradually;
And once you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and command her to pray; and make her sneeze. In this same manner for all the rest
In this same manner for all the rest When it proceeds in this way to all that follows, if the second part comes to be with your thumb, as long as the moisture is drained;
and if it enters both on its back and on its neck, when you are at the belly, ensure that it doesn't get trapped, so let it pass through for the child to die;
Then pull out the child inside, as long as you have placed it properly, and instruct the woman not to try again at any point:
about the birth of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four at a time; and this is not an uncommon thing, it simply happens. Two are exceptional things, and they do not live long, if ever mentioned;
I know this, when they are multiplied, and they are removed by the syphilitic disease which creates them, which is linked to the body;
And they also emerge naturally as one under another, just like we have said.
And if they emerge painfully, as the treatment that we have described, and it's a subtle matter, and do this promptly and lightly what she does; Do so in such a way as to achieve health. Of several children
Of several children They are formed in marriage once or twice or three times or four times or five times, and sometimes up to fifteen times, and they are all shaped like a child by the measure of their glory,
And it should be that the husband knows all this, for by chance something similar has happened to him; Do so according to what is proper.
From the dead child
When you treat a woman who has lost her child or is miscarried, as I have explained in the division section, if it does not come out and you are forced to intervene manually; It is necessary that you know whether the woman is healthy or has had any accidents, and if she experiences fear of death;
It is necessary that the woman be seated on her back, and have her arms hanging down, and her legs elevated;
And the minister applies to two parts, or she is bound to the bed so that she does not treat in the descent of the child;
Then rub the mouth of the pregnant woman with oily musk and fenugreek, and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these musk preparations. Then support the pregnant woman gently, then let her walk for an hour or until she is able to take steps as needed,
and watch that when the child descends to its head; If there are hair pins stuck in his eyes or at his neck or in his mouth or under his palate or around the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs,
And if there is a discharge in joints, then it might be stuck in them or at half of his chest;
It is necessary that he heats the hair pin in his right hand, and places the bend between his left hand's fingers, and pushes it with all of his hand gently, and sticks the hair pin into none of these places which we have mentioned until it reaches an empty state;
Then insert another inch of a nail, or cut off three inches if required, so that the extraction is equal;
and then move them equally from one side to the other so that they can be withdrawn, and whether the nails are pointed for holding them in place, as shown here:
And if some remains, anoint the area with oil from its own body parts and apply it to that section, then pull out the other part;
And if there remains nothing of it, place this cautery or higher on the body, and do this until everything comes out.
And if one hand comes before the other, and cannot be pulled back by constriction, and it is necessary that you cover with a piece of cloth until it completely comes out;
then apply the paste at the junction of the sole or on the cut, and thus you should do for the other hand, and with two pieces.
And if the head of the child is large and it is stuck at the exit, or it has an acute head assembled, then you must push the spinous spine between your fingers and make the head and extract the sharp one; or you will have it with the instrument that is called 'almond', from which comes its shape with the instruments or chapter after this one.
and in the same way make those children grow naturally with large heads; and then apply force to the bones with tongs,
and if the shoulder pops out and is held by force until it breaks, as long as the moisture is or worse comes out;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it piece by piece according to what you can do;
and if it is swollen in the belly or around the ribs, it is necessary that you puncture it as far as the moisture goes.
And if the baby is on its feet, there is a slight attraction, and the connection to the mouth of the mother is slight.
And if it is turned in the belly or the buttocks, it would be suitable for you to extract it at two spans wrapped around the hand; and while the moisture that is there corresponds, do so with the belly or the buttocks.
and if any other bone is broken and the head remains, if you want to cure the hand's cut near the thumb, and cut it all the way up to the opening of the wound; then cut off one or two inches, or however much needed, and cut it through;
and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to pus that has come in, then it does not need to be probed. therefore, you should administer moist and fatty things; And the surgeon applies plaster, using it both in water for its softening and moistening properties.
And if the child is under his ribs, you can put it level, then apply what we have said in case of a live birth;
And if you cannot do so, then pull by sections, and don't leave anything from the second part.
And when you have done this, apply what we have said concerning wounds coming in the mouth;
And if blood is still coming out, then place it under cold water restraining, and bring other treatments to him.
And I saw a woman who had lost an unborn child in her belly, and later recovered for another one, and the other gave birth to it again. After a long time, an abscess came in his belly, and swelled so much that he had to open it, and started causing severe pain.
I was called for the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and couldn't manage the wound.
I placed them under a strong magnet, and out came one bone, followed by others after some days. I was very surprised, for it seems that this person's abdomen lacks bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I examined the wound, and with my hands I found bone, until the woman was in a better condition. And let the woman wait long until thus, and it will become somewhat more to her liking.
And I remember this chapter only so that if the masters find a strange thing, they know how to give help.
to bring back the married one to their place
After this comes the form of the presser, to which books are attributed; and for two forms each of four limbs. Always, the horns should be finer than a reed's mouthpiece, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the pipe's opening be two inches wide, and the edge of the tree trunks be one inch, and in length half a palm; and in the middle of them there should be two joints from this same pipe, which must be firmly set in both ends, in length half a palm or slightly more.
and these two joints are set in the mouth of the maris to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, of similar appearance but more delicate and lighter, can be made from the stick of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the tongs; and has four joints, similar to what you might see, each one as long as your palm, and two sticks of width;
And when you see the cervix fully open across the entire instrument, make the woman lie down on one bed, with her feet hanging and her legs spread apart, Then fix the two joints placed together on the cervix, and hold the handle of the instrument just below her buttocks; Then use your hand on all the tool, just like you have done with pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the saw, as long as the fly does what she wants.
All these instruments are arranged at the top and multiplied in their forms; and when you have them set up, your work will be faster, and you'll reach higher positions for their quantity.
Do not despair of the tool until you have set it up, because its necessity is not excusable.
When the second stage of labor is held back during childbirth, it should be commanded to the mother to retain her amniotic fluid, and then make her sniff considerately, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose; And if she jumps over this [barrier], well done.
If it doesn't cross this [barrier], take one or two pots, and make a lid or cover, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the ulcer, such as poppy, rue, fennel, chamomile, calamus, and hyssop.
All these herbs, or any of them, whether cooked or steeped in water on the fire; then put a reed or a cover inside the pot, and the other one at the mouth of the ulcer,
Let the steam come out from within the ulcer as long as the vapors rise; then make it sniff, just like we have said. If it leaps ahead quickly. And if it remains after this treatment, and does not get stronger, so instruct the patient to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or myrrh powder, and then use that hand naturally,
And when she finds the second bone; and once she has found it, take hold of it gently and straighten it little by little, so that the marriage does not occur during extraction; But you must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it comes out and gets released.
And if the mouth of the throat is constricted, we have said the treatment for coughing, and fumigation with herbs;
and if it doesn't include all of what we have said, then make sure you don't poke at the extraction site;
but it is necessary that the one at the mouth of the throat be tied to the woman's belly, then enemas with ointment from the four farms should be performed;
if it passes and there is discharge, and a smell comes out; but still, if it persists and leads to an unpleasant smell in the stomach and head, and irritates the patient.
So then it is necessary to use applicable fumigations for this: none of the old ones have proven effective in fumigation with mustard and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman during the retention of flowers and the second stage is this:
And it looks like a cane, and one places the delicate part in the flame, and the ends wide above the fire;
And let the fumigations be over the coals, and continue until it is extinguished, and start another one if needed.
To pierce the base
Many infants are born who have not had their base pierced, but instead something subtle and difficult has occurred: So it is necessary in the birth to pierce that difficult thing according to its purpose, and do not perforate it with sharp tools, and guard the positioning so that it does not touch.
Then place on wet wool in wine and oil, then apply the salve treatment until it is healed.
And if you doubt whether it will remain, then place or insert a thorn stick, and let the patient keep it for days, and remove it when the child wishes to move about in chambers.
And there are no sudden complications from the wound or abscess; it is necessary to treat this sudden condition: if you can heal it, as we have said about the thorn stick.
from the sinus with its foundation Fistulas that come from the base are nodule-like, and grow larger than those that come from under the base or within the space of two parts,
if there is one fistula or several;
and these fistulas are perennial; and they are recognized by the fact that there is discharge or windiness when the patient expels, and sometimes one towards another.
And if there are fistulas that reach up to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they can reach up to the joint of the leg, and even to the root of the testicles.
And thus one knows whether a fistula is perennial at its base, and not so. And you bend your index finger or its base, and insert a delicate needle or a spider pin in the puncture where there is no winding.
And if it has winding or twist, if you insert a subtle plug, or even a horsehair, as long as you feel the plug or hair on your index finger;
And if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of pus nor wind nor infection, as we have said: You will know that she does not pierce at all; if you hasten to cure.
And when the fistula is situated right up to the bladder or all the way along where urine leads, if the urine jumps there, and cannot be joined by medicine.
If it's punctured up to the knee joint, then the flow comes up to the thigh; If there is no twist and the source of pain lies internally, then it's as if it were within, and it doesn't respond to medicine or by means of application;
And for these fistulas that are down to the end, there is no remedy except work and the folly of those who interfere with them.
In neither the Persian nor the ancient medical practice, there was hope for healing through iron, as I have proven.
And it is that the patient lies on their back with their hands in your grasp; and you raise their legs up to their hips, and have their thighs leaned towards their belly; Then place an araigne web, or if there's twisting, as long as you know where the web comes from.
If the patient senses something under the foundation, then it is necessary for you to press your index finger onto that place.
You can feel then that something has pierced you; and if discovered, or when feeling between your finger and thumb, it indicates she is within you. If there's no bleeding when trying to cut it out, then one cannot heal it.
Yet even so, one can certainly heal some of them, but this happens very rarely.
and with the help that one provides, if one heats the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was explained before; And he holds the heated implement in the wound until it reaches beyond the base; and perform this action twice or three times, until you know that these burned things resemble a feather of a bird.
And then the salve for moist burns should be applied until that burned thing emerges, then apply the ointment to seal and fuse it.
If it is in this manner healthy, it's good. If not, nothing else can be made well;
And if it is tested inside and does not pierce up to the root which is or foundation, and in between your thumb and the tent you have a thick covering of flesh or fat, and you see the wound beneath that skin where the covering touches properly. If you intervene at the start of the abscess, hold it steady before the tentacle, and then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the tip of the tentacle;
Then release the tentacle, and it will fall off; then cleanse those hardened spots that resemble a bird's feather, and do not leave any remnants.
And if the wound does not heal, cut between you and the tissue, then apply fire or medicinal alcohol to it.
For the fire cauterizations gather two things: these are to know, the scorching of these joined parts, and the suction of blood and the drying out of moisture;
Then the treatment of wet bandages or in ground ashes, until his limbs sweat out, and the heat goes into the sweat.
Then treat the wound with the application of hard charcoal poultices, and let the dry medicines work.
For when it is healed, if it heals completely and does not recur.
And if a sinus comes up just to the full depth of the foundation, and is distant from the body, you should plug its root or foundation, and inquire about it.
If you feel the tent, and there are two in the mesh or the liver or heart, or it is almost ready to pierce, but only has a way of fear and hope, by administering one of three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you remove up to the root, or if you can reach with a probe and a cure like at first;
and don't go too deep into it, so you don't remove the holding piece which supports the base, and let the evacuations come out willingly through there; then treat it as we have said;
then treat it as we have said; By chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and clean it since it has been cut from the base, either by trial or with another instrument pointed towards it; Then cleanse the flesh in the wound as much as you can;
Then try to heal the wound, and to keep the pus in the lower part of the base: if it's easier for the patient.
And always perform pus discharges in this manner: and when you puncture the pus pocket, and it's located under the skin above the base. if you take a tent piercing through the head according to this form: And tie two twisted threads together, and place the tent at both ends of the thread within the tube until it reaches the head.
If it is foreign matter at the edge of the base inside, then extract the thread from this twisted one, in such a way that you are holding your tool or foundation.
and pull the head of the thread, and assemble the two pieces together, and tie one to the other, and leave them an inch or two;
And hold it no time, until the threads meet those cords that are between them, and intertwine;
Then treat the wound until it is healed and sanitized.
If the fistula does not puncture, make an incision in all possible ways that you can, as long as it is not too deep.
Indeed, it is not fitting to puncture through the placement so deeply, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is sanitized.
The form of the thin prickly tube through which one makes a fistula is quite small and consists mainly of; And on another hand no, because one should not handle what one should not be handling, as you see here:
Bleeding wounds occur in two ways: when they are inside the wound bed, like a piece of resin, and there may be small or large ones, and blood collects underneath them. And if there is one or more of them, they are removed from the base and at the head of the base; but those that are removed have little moisture.
And sometimes even a little bit of yellow water or a little blood, and they have the color of a corpse.
And for the treatment of those who have them within the base, you instruct the patient to expel it through grooves until the bases come out and the threads are visible; If you hurry, you pinch it with tweezers, or hold it with your nail, then scrape at its roots.
And if they cannot hold them due to their moisture, take them in two strips of cloth, or with cotton, or from a camel leather piece; And pull them with your fingers, then pinch them, and dust them with some hot powders that are like fire cauterization; Or you can burn them as it is said or explained in the chapter about cauterization, and then treat them with other remedies until they heal.
And if the foundation cannot come out, you should burn the patient with the application of a blister-producing substance that is sharp to wash the one that is or has a foundation, so that it can come out completely;
If the organs fail to function, and if their tendons are strong at their foundation, then the treatment is light; And you should take them with your fingernail or tongs, and cut them, then treat them in the way we have described, while they are still whole, fearing the metal cut by incision.
It is necessary that you sew it in this manner: take a single twisted thread, and insert it into a needle, and then pull the thread through from above and make the needle pierce from another side, and loop the two ends of the thread over the needle together. and if it is wide; and tighten the thread properly, then tie the thread into a knot, and remove the needle, and do this with all others, and leave one for bleeding off excess blood;
Then place on the foundation one piece of moist cloth in oil with rose or as a poultice, and place on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave it until it cools down, and when they are settled, if you treat with ointment and other treatments, as long as they have cooled off.
do the drying slowly in the ashes or on the ground. Many times, there has been drying in the intestines, and due to the nature's constraint, and when the illness is old and medication no longer helps.
If it is necessary for you to set at the tip of a thorn or on your nail the bark above, which should not be left damp; then treat it until it becomes hard as it should;
and if it does not become hard, then start scraping again with more force than before, until some healing begins, and it becomes scoured; then treat it until it is healed.
The tremble Antennae are a small false appearance on the body, they extend forward;
And when you touch it moves coldly, and one feels it like a death tremble, spreading throughout the body, particularly more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment involves taking a stick from a goose feather or a strong vulture feather and placing this stick on the tremble until the purple ring completely surrounds it. Then turn your hand all along the cane until you grasp it completely by its trembling, and place it down fully, and eliminate its trembling from its roots.
And if you see it, do this with an arachnid or iron cane in the form as described, and make it slender everywhere and smooth above and below:
nor should it be pierced, for you must hold onto both ends and squeeze. And if you see any trembling, cauterize the tremor, just as it is shown in the section on cautery.
in the form of a bladder No silver or hot iron, or molten spider or lead should ever be used. And these small and large instruments should not be employed according to who they are intended for.
Therefore, when treating children and those who are weak and painful, use small tools.
The shape of the tool being small and large as described above, or how you tie the belly according to this manner:
and there should be an opening where you tie the belly in such a way that you see it, and so that the head is pierced inside; and on one side of this have two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And let it be for the belly, where one places medicines of a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierce thoroughly with small pieces.
And place one inch of space between each piece, then insert a strong thread made from raw wool yarn in these pieces for an inch or about halfway through, and join the belly as if it were a goat. And when the medication is inside, bind it with a strong thread in front of the tool, then seal it; and this forms a circle:
And ensure the medication is neither too hot nor too cold, apply a layer of oil or yolk butter around the seal, or something similar, then gently place it.
Then the surgeon directs his two hands together on it while it's fully visible, then removes the cyst, and lifts the patient's legs at the sides.
And if the medicine is meant to emerge, let it come out as much as possible; and if it sleeps for a whole night, then more help will be greater.
And if you use the enema in a case of belly discomfort, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it as long as he feels well.
And if there's bleeding from the anus or its root, or from a wound, then use the enema as thin as for a child of one year;
And this is the shape of a subtle knot beneath which the skin might be strained:
of wounds
We have discussed the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will discuss treatments for hands and medicine, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and depending on where the wounds are located, and for what reason they were caused.
The things which cause wounds are produced by the breaking of bone, and the slicing of a sword or knife, or from a lance or staff or axe, or from similar actions.
or those which are made according to the body's parts, such as a wound that affects the neck, or head, or belly, or liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and start with wounds of the head that are simple, because the memory will come to its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes or to the head and the bone is not broken, be careful if it's due to the breaking of stone or similar actions, and even though the skin has been torn completely, the wound is large, And if you slightly doubt about the abscess: if it produces a little blood from the wound immediately after treatment of the scalp in the same manner, and is treated oppositely to the retracted part;
And if you have excess malaise from drinking wine and eating heavy meats.
And if he does not wish to be treated, then reduce his food intake and do not give him wine or meat.
And apply it to the wound, if abscesses appear and come out, use moist cotton in oil rose only, or in astringent wine.
And if there is no pus present, then place on the wound, while it's fresh with all its blood, and it isn't disturbed by air, powder, which I will mention shortly;
And if the wound has been disturbed, then apply some remedies until it heals.
And if the wound is large like that of a sword or similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then join them through suture, as I will explain for wounds on the belly, from the suture.
If the wound is exposed bone and flesh, and it only holds together with a little pressure, if you apply it. Then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard tissue instead of skin, And instruct the patient to consume large meats, such as brains and cooked wheat, also like chickens, and similar items.
And if you find rotten skin or it doesn't reach the bone, and it smells to the bone, then cut out the rot completely, and remove pus, then treat;
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut out the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. And if this does not help, burn it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should put on this powder which sticks together in such a way that when the heat of the fire has applied it.
And the way of the powder is thus: take part of incense; blood from a dragon two parts; live charcoal three parts, and finely ground, and apply it to the wound, and press it firmly until it is well ventilated and joins with all its blood;
and then properly cover it, and leave it to heal naturally if it doesn't swell; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
And one does not do this using charcoal alone, when one lacks the incense or the blood of dragon, but only when the surgeon has cleansed the wound.
And if the surgeon has cleaned the wound, indeed in that state, one does not add this powder;
but apply some prepared dressings, or dough made from oat flour mixed with water and honey, as long as it is flowing. then continue with other treatments until the wound has healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then use delicate probes to extract it;
and I will tell you about fractures of the head later.
from the wound on the neck
This wound occurs in the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and those of the head, but if it affects the collarbone or the artery, then it is different.
If it's the nose, if there is no other tool, leave the treatment alone, and don't put anything restraining, because it harms the nose and makes them recede. and do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of the nose is cold, and its connection to the brain is with the head which is the highest part of the body.
but use medicine that is under (of the body), such as water in which rose oil has been washed and mixed with water used for washing cucumbers, and other minerals in this manner, and moist applications.
And if the wound is large, then treat it by binding with cloths.
And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, then puncture them or even further down.
And if the artery is cut and blood begins to flow, then uncover it, and bandage it, and apply heat ( cautery ) if necessary.
And if the windpipe or lungs are cut, or the passage is disrupted by which food goes, if you heat the knife above the gullet's notch, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then set the protrusion, and leave it for several days, then treat with dry ointments until it heals;
and if the wound has made an impression into the bone, you should remove it; and if there are pieces of bone, try to extract them thoroughly, and if you cannot remove them all, let the wound heal until it fleshes over; And when it is drained and bound up is its treatment;
And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I've mentioned on it. And if there are bones and an opening in the wound, treat it as described in my chapter.
from the wound of a spear or a knife
If it's blood from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, then look at whether wind blows out of the wound: if this happens to the patient alone, you'll realize that the wound is mortal.
And if it's not deep and its blood is flowing freely, then don't put any powder on it or bind it immediately for the fear that the blood would not stop flowing. Let him rest at his heart, and make him lie down; but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;.
And if you don't have ointment, place old cotton into the wound to absorb moisture.
And make the patient rest on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more; if no convulsions occur, nor severe heart tremors, nor sudden movements; and when you see the good signs, you will know that the wound is saved. Then treat with various remedies until the blood is cleansed;
and if it cannot be healed and operated on, know that there will be a fistula; treat it as one should for such cases.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or worse or on the back, follow the treatment of the one who was injured.
And if it is large, stitch it up; and if it is small, use powder, and if it is embedded in the bone, or has pieces inside, identify the wound and remove any cleanable foreign objects. And if they are not drained, leave the wound to fester, facilitating the extractions;
And for other wounds on other limbs, the judgments are like what we have said.
about the rupture of the abdomen
The ruptures of the abdomen come in large, medium, and small sizes;
From a large wound spring forth once again the intestines, or parts of the intestines, due to their introduction.
And the stitches are more troublesome, and nothing beats a small cut compared to a large one,
Because then we put the intestines back in less times, if we don't replace them little by little; For when the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, if they are put back in less times,
And because this heals the half-dead wound, because we move the intestines to their place where the others are.
Know that there are four ways of a belly rupture:
the two common stitches occur in the abdominal seam,
and the stitches for other wounds in the body and the two other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
And yet they are more accurate with the stitch along the belly, and I will say each one and clarify them.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine has escaped, And if there are injuries to be treated, this can be done in one of two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when he's cold, warm him up in this manner: dampen a sponge or use one part of clove oil in water only. or cook with boiling water that includes soap and pepper. And let the intestines grow until their swelling is cut out;
And once this is done, make him drink so that he relaxes in order to relieve the swelling.
And when you see the swelling departing, moisten the intestines with water or broth that has been well cooked, because this makes the entry able to accept little things;
And if it cannot enter, they make a small incision with the tool used to remove blood clots;
And the first treatment is to rub until the wound heals, which we should not cut without great necessity or if it is not needed;
and these are the tools for splitting them:
If you cut inside the bend and not outward, and see this shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, if you place it back according to its natural shape in its proper location, If you have the ability to do so, because this is valuable practice.
When the wound is wide, and it's located in the abdominal area, If you need to allow the patient to heal on their back, and place his legs higher than his head; And if it's in the belly region,
and similarly, if there is a tear in the belly region at one of these two places, then ensure that the torn part is higher than the other.
And so, one must administer what I say about large and medium wounds.
For small wounds, use what is suited to you.
Then have at your disposal surgeons who can heal the entire wound with their hands, And gather the lips; And this is the common method of stitches,
And this is the common method of stitches, and you should use one needle or more, according to the width of the wound, then start sewing from the edge of the wound about an inch away, and place one needle through the thread about half an inch thick; and pierce both sides of the skin with both needles through the flesh,
then stretch out one double thread around the needle from two sides, and join the two edges of the wound with an addition,
And then leave one inch of space, and place another needle; then weave the thread in the same way you did with the first needle, and continue doing this according to your skill with needles, until all the wound is held in place;
And let them be of moderate size, between fine and thick ones, because the very fine needles cut all the flesh, and the too thick ones do not enter well at all: for this reason they should be of moderate size;
and needles should not be placed too far out from the flesh and skin,
For they do not cut and bleed the wound before the stitch;
and then remove the stitches, so that the patient does not become inflamed at night, and cover the stitches with bandages or cloths to keep them clean and secure. and leave them until the wound is healed;
And this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires a needle or two.
The second type of stitching is common, And it involves sewing together the two layers of leather and two layers of flesh on one needle using a strong thread in the middle; And when you have pierced all four shoulders together,
And when you have pierced all four shoulders together, then pull the needle to the place where you started piercing, in the way that one stitches cloth;
and leave a space between each stitch as big as a small coin;
these stitches should bind the fabric,
And I had a wound where someone had stabbed or punctured, it was deep within the abdomen.
which had been made by a knife. and the wound was over a palm in size, and contained well two palms of intestines,
And there was a wound in the middle of the belly. I returned his intestine, and it remained like that for twenty-one hours.
And the wound was healed up to fifteen days, and I treated it, and it became healthy.
And they had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
And I would not cure it with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; And I would put new clean cloths on the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it was cleansed.
I will tell you the two proper ways of sewing:
Take the needle and insert it from the outside part until it goes inside;
When it has pierced the artery straight on, if it has hit the head of the siphon or the costal bone where you have stuck the needle,
and makes it pierce from the other side through the inner part up to that depth.
And as for understanding this stitch, you do it in the same way as the leathersmiths sew leather, And as you leave the stitch on one side and then pick it up again from another, until the whole seam is completed.
The second method of sewing, as Galen himself explained,
It is just like what everyone does, where they naturally join the two parts together, and they press one of the ends of the thread onto the other end in such a manner:
stitch a needle or one of the thread ends close to the skin, and pierce only that side. And let both shoulders grow smooth; Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part down to inside. for both shoulders are smooth;
Then pierce both from the outer part down to inside, using two other smooth shoulders that are on the opposite side;
And this is the surgical method of stitches and the most common one.
Galien said these words, and none of them testify to it,
One must stitch the belly with two needles, or if there is thread in each;
And one should place one needle on one side and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew joints;
and know that when the rupture is within the belly, then the sewing is more painful than in other parts of their belly.
The judgement of the wound is like that of the judgement of other wounds:
and it is when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, just as the art has made it. if you place it back inside the intestine, and the cut; then apply a stimulating powder on top.
if you place it back inside the intestine, and the cut; then apply a stimulating powder on top. and if the wound is swollen, apply no ointment until the injury subsides; and sew the thread, and stitch up the cut, and bind it. then treat the wound as usual until it heals.
And if you don't have medicine, just place it above, as soon as it starts to drip honey, old cotton, and stir it twice a day until it is thoroughly cleaned.
For you do not need other medicines in various preparations if the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound might affect the principal limbs, If it is necessary for you to moisten with a light oil of tempered heat, or in rose oil, and place it inside the joints, and over the elbows;
and if there is pain or gangrene in the bowels, and this happens many times, if you use black wine enemas, and similarly if the gangrene reaches up to the intestine;
And pierce within it, and know that when it's large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small ones.
The intestine called 'young' cannot be healed if it is injured, And that's because of the placement of the veins and due to the subtlety of the whole body, and its proximity to the nerves in relation to its nature.
And if the scab jumps over the wound, you should put it back just like an intestine while it is still fresh;
And if it is old and turned towards red or black, then you should bind the one that is black, so that no blood spreads there. for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the band; and place both shoulder blades above the wound up to beyond it on each side to ease the extraction when the ribs are removed, and for the wound to heal.
from the rupture of the bladder
When the intestines are involved, and the wound is small, If it can be restored in any way,
because I have seen that a person was pierced by a lance or through the belly;
And the wound was located on the right side of the stomach, And it became inflamed and formed a fistula, causing malnutrition and discomfort;
I applied the treatment according to what I could do, and didn't stop refining until it was healed, and bound up the wounds.
And when I saw that they had stuck together, I feared that there might be discomfort in their stomach; And there was no harm, but remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
And it is said by some experimenters that when there is a small injury inside the intestine, it must be treated in this manner: take large seeds of garlic, then join the lips of the wound, and when the garlic has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips,
then places another restraint in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely treated;
and heals the wound. Those who get too hot in their intestines, and do not cause any harm to the patient,
and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from an animal's intestine,
in such a manner: take the end of this intestine thread so that most of it is dried, And then to the head of this thread .1. a fine linen thread twisted, then knot the thread at the needle, sew it through the intestine, and set the dislocation in its passage;
and this way of sewing the ruptured intestines is not to be done without considering the path of faith and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it's in one of the intestinal loops, if there is no injury or sickness, you must use subtlety.
Of a fistula, or if it be one Know that every wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called "fistula", and similarly when it is pierced and bled.
And a fistula is according to the truth of a hard and whitish concretion, where one does not feel pain, it is also as hairy as a bird's feather;
and sometimes it is clear and thin, and at other times thick; sometimes it is insufficient, and at other times enough.
and I have spoken about the classification of wounds, that every wound that is not healed and contains no flesh, This comes from none of the seven causes:
It is to say, by the diminution of blood or pus; or through its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh within and on the lips that does not allow new flesh to grow; where there's too much blood; or when the limbs are swollen, and the material is of poor quality; or when the medicine isn't good in the treatment; or because it's like a plague due to corruption; For because of its position in the area is late the digestion, and delayed the healing, and flees naturally; For there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicine in this section.
Or it is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of fistulas which is done by manual work.
You know that fistulas occur in all body parts; for there are fistulas that originate from the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the stomach, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs, or in the spinal column of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this manner are difficult to heal, and there is nothing else but labor, and lack of knowledge;
and if there is any fistula that does not reach up to what I have said, and you have taken the treatment for it, and you should recognize them. If you take a spider's web or iron rod, if the fistula is straight, you will see it;
And if the fistula is twisted, then seek with a subtle probe to straighten it, for the twists will bend and move along with the curvature;
and if the fistula has turns that are hard to follow even with attempts to probe it, if you try to use a catheter through one of those turns,
for moisture moves from one part to another, and cleanses;
then carefully inquire with your power, so you know if there's bone or nerve, and feel it completely,
and ask the patient about the pain they feel when your hand presses on them, and specify where they feel it;
and once you truly know the location of the pain, and whether it's far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, In none of the limbs that I have mentioned, if the cut is made as I have instructed,
In none of the limbs that I have mentioned, if the cut is made as I have instructed, and for the scabbard and the rotten shafts that are inside; and then the treatment until it is healed,
and if the sinus tract goes down to its proper depth straight, you should follow it up as far as possible, no matter how deep. Then I place moistened wicks in the astringent medicine, and fill them up to the opening of the ulcer.
Then I place moistened wicks in the astringent medicine, and fill them up to the opening of the ulcer. Until the medicine eats away the excess that has remained at the bottom;
And then I place bandages made of healthy flesh until it is sound;
and if it doesn't become sound through this means, then cauterize it as we have described,
And if the bone has rotted from the ulcer, then it is treated. If a vein or nerves are damaged or affect main limbs, as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed, and there's decay and darkness, then remove it until all decay has been excised. Then clean the area around the affected bone as long as it remains healthy;
And if there's no strength, and returns back just as before, you know that you have not gone all the way to the end:
search and seek until you reach the bottom, and remove all decay, then return it to its proper place;
And if he is so healthy, this is well. But if not, know that corruption has spread too far, and you cannot bring it back; if there is no other option but to leave it to natural processes;
and if there's just a small infected bone, and you can extract it using forceps, if you extract with an instrument suitable for this purpose,
and if there are many bones, treat them all, do not leave any out;
and if moisture causes it to go against you, and there is no doubt or fear, and if it cuts and moistens and burns, and frees the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place something stench-inducing on the wound. and let it be until the bones are rotted inside the flesh.
and then they will have the bones with less resistance;
and if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, if you are to rule for as long as the decay lasts, until all of the blackness is entirely removed. then restore the wound;
and if there is a large portion of corruption, and it reaches up to the flesh around the bone; if it suits, you should sear and cover until it reaches the point of corruption, and then treat until it is healed.
And I will tell you of a case involving a fistula that occurred in one's leg. so that you may take an example and help yourself in your work.
There was once a young person around thirty years old, who experienced pain in their leg due to an issue that came from within the body.
The matter traveled to the leg and there formed a large abscess; no external reason could be found for opening it.
yet the surgeons due to their enthusiasm opened them so far that they reached the abscesses, and they corroded very little material, and created a fistula, and much of the damage caused all to weep blood and bodily fluids from their wounds;
and many patients took treatment for about two years, and there was no wise person in the art of surgery,
as long as I have been called upon, and I saw his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated, And what grows through the narrow passages with great force; And became red on the cheeks like youth's flush, and had a yellowish hue.
I made a tent in one of these narrow passages, and then searched all the passages,
and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I quickly did so, and cut on one of the rough edges until I revealed a part of the bone, and found it decayed and pierced through, with the decay extending up to the inner bone;
I was the one who appeared before me from the decayed bone, and I thought that there was no other decay, only what I had taken away;
and began to restore the wound with medicines for a long time, but could not heal it;
and then began again, and revealed the bone as before,
I found that the decay continued within the bone, and the soreness, and then I removed it, and bent to join up the head.
but I did not go as far as to match within a palm of the bone, and I took it all the way back to its original location. then I set it with medicine; and he was healed and joined quickly.
And it can no longer start over with the procedure except due to the weakness of the illness, which cannot bear it. And because of the fear of death that I have for him. For the blood loss often occurs, but it was completely healed,
For the blood loss often occurs, but it was completely healed, and there formed within the bone a tough flesh, and it was well arranged and had no harm or opposite effect at all in every way, neither inward nor outward.
And stretch the head, so that you draw out corrupted flesh from within. Then expose the flesh on the bone where you see sinew, making sure the sinew doesn't tear the flesh; And place one piece of charcoal or a board under the bone to cover the rotten flesh; And it must happen just as one can see and feel the decay, and decay again.
And if the bone is rotted, and doesn't open, and the decay is in the middle or in a part, if you find the flesh has decomposed completely; then place a single coal over it;
and then apply the decay from one part to another, and let the heat of the cloth last as long as the decay lasts, just as we have said;
And if corruption is within the joint, then treat the corrupted joint, and be it bone or contains something on the other side;
And if corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then treat it if there's no other way to correct it;
And if corruption is at the base of the hand or foot, or very strong in that matter, Nevertheless, it must be asked how this corrosion opens to you; And make it clean in all ways that you can, but that the vein or the nerve do not hinder you;
Know that the knife and the saw are many for cutting these bones, depending on their position and the appearance of the bones, and their size and their fineness, and their strength and their weakness. And it is necessary to equip oneself with each type of work according to the tool for its operation;
And know that the book will show you the tool you need, according to the knowledge of this craft. and the evidence of the ways of diseases; if you consider the tool you need according to what is appropriate.
by fire The shoulder gets dislocated either due to an internal cause, or due to an external one;
And when you have treated that corrosion with the cure of medicines, and they do not benefit from it, So one must cover that limb up to the joint where the corrosion comes. If the patient dies through this cause of death, or through the evil, which is greater, due to the fault of the limb;
If the patient dies through this cause of death, or through the evil, which is greater, due to the fault of the limb; And the signs show when the limb turns black, as if it has been scorched by fire. And after the darkness, then comes that member-corrosion part by part, and spreads throughout the body; if you hurry with copper treatment,
and it is by the impact of certain venomous beasts, such as sea spiders and vipers and similar creatures,
If the corrosion is at the head of the second finger, if you cut it, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, if you cut at the joint, so that the corrosion does not extend up to the arm;
And if it goes up to the arm, if you cut where the hand meets the arm; and if it passes the elbow mark, this is where death comes. It's not worth any remedy beyond its quantity of virtue;
And do this until the corrosion or rust comes or occurs: if it comes at the first joint, you clean up after the other joint;
and if it comes or sticks, you cleanse all of the stick; and if it ascends into the leg, you cleanse at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other way except for causing death to the patient.
And the method for covering or bandaging a limb is such that you bind it above and below, and spread a strip of cloth under one of the straps and another strip above the other strap. then you should cut away the flesh that lies between the two straps to form a one-inch wide opening, until the bone is exposed;
then cover it with bandages or cloth, making sure that neither of them touches the healthy skin, And to the patient brings about another injury and pus-laden wound.
And when bleeding occurs during your work, if you quickly cauterize the area, or put some constraining powders on it; then return to your medicine until its completion,
then bind the limb with a reliable bandage, and treat it until it is healed;
And I will tell you what happened at one household concerning it:
he had a blackness that seemed like the mark of fire,
and this burn came first on his thigh, spreading until it consumed all the thigh;
and when the wound became visible, he would cover his thigh, and he became healthy;
And long after, there was the healing of the cut or burn from the hand, and it came to me,
and I placed things that rebounded after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosion;
and he wished for me to touch his hand, but I would not, that I might have hope of rebounding the substance; and I doubted also that if I cut off his hand, he would die. Because the powers of the earth were weak; and he despaired altogether, and returned to his land. and held up his hand in defense, and was cured.
And I have only recounted this story for anyone who needs to do it differently, if necessary.
No abscess ever comes in the inner part of meat, and stays so long that it causes a large assembly of worms; And then they will drill and puncture, and the arrow jumps, and the arm remains within you, like some vessels; And the skin above is also as thin as a single layer of fabric. And they do not go all the way to the bone or nerve, and such diseases are called "safe".
However, if it's so long that it comes up to the bone completely, then it is called a "fistula";
and in cooking if you cover that skin entirely, and similarly when it's delicate as with a piece of fabric; and doesn't rot due to its corruption.
And if you have heated the skin so that it cooks through, and corruption hasn't reached fully, And the skin is thick with flesh, if the treatment for catarrh is like this:
Look if his breasts are large, and the belly under them has a rank smell, Then use an Egyptian cathartic medicine as described below: Take saffron, oil, and litharge, equally, and cook them in a pot on the fire for one hour, While the medicine remains red, and thickens similarly to honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and prepare it in water and honey, and give an enema to the abdomen, and restrain the convulsions; let the medicine stand for two hours, then strain it out;
Make this cut so many times, until you have freed both breasts, and removed all milk;
and do not let any time be washed with water of ashes, when this medicine is absent, and if you use vine wood ash and pour water over it,
then drain it, and administer as a suppository, until you know that both breasts are thoroughly empty;
And if the patient cannot endure it, neither Egyptian medicine nor ash water can help. if he uses a suppository of water and honey or has a bit of lard. or you irrigate with honey and mixed wine, where the honey has properties to cleanse and wash. and the wine makes the healthful (or sound) part expand.
And when you have done this, and ensured that the breasts are well cleaned, if it is of those who bring forth by force within them,
and you need to apply plaster of an appropriate thickness, and do this with rose oil and wine; or you can administer medication or ointments through enemas, about which I have discussed their properties or treated with ointments;
And if their breasts are small and the neck cannot enter the groin, if it is widened slightly like a metal rod, and then applies an Egyptian ointment, or if it is widened like basilikon ointment;
and if the wound is too wide, then let it be left only so that both its width or the groin can enter.
And if the heart is too high above where it's supposed to be, you might need to adjust or move it up or down until it reaches its correct position. For when the heart is in perfect place, do not let it roam or wander; and if you can't cover over its chest as you see, so arrange it in such a way that the heart is at the lowest possible position above;
And if you cannot cover the chest sufficiently as you see fit, so assemble in such a manner: that the bow moves smoothly downwards, and do not leave anything of the bow hanging. and take restorative medicines to place inside the chest,
And they are placed on a piece of linen fabric that covers the entire breast; then place it at the narrowest point of the breast, specifically where it is about an inch wider than its widest point. Then apply lard on a piece of fabric according to the width of the part. And put it on the breast area to relieve the pain, but don't remove the large fabric except after many days once.
And the one who is on the edge of the breast bone, often gets cut to remove the organ. Know what comes from the organ, whether it's venom or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and be vigilant if the patient feels pain or no pain, and check if there is an abscess or not.
And when your medicine has spread in this manner and you see the nature that jumps up to the edge of the breast bone, If you find out that the breast is becoming hardened, approach the health.
And then liberate it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound, if you need to change another bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast secretes undigested matter after several days, you'll know that the breast is not healing. And if venomous snakes bite after a long time, do not despair of recovery,
And health approaches. For there are men whose delay in removing pus from their wounds causes harm,
And if one experiences undigested food lingering in their stomach for many days, know that their stomach does not heal;
And if his breaths become slow and distant, should his responses be delayed, then prepare and apply dry substances infused with moisture as remedies. likewise like anointing that clears, for there is a large portion of vitriol involved, and it's the final remedy;
take an anointing of diafinit, and mix it with rose oil, then apply old equal wine in substance;
then cook it and use it; and similarly make honey stewed and thickened; When antivenoms are not present,
or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, then mix the powder with honey when it is heated; and then in one drachm of gum, and place it on the breast, and every time administer to an Aristologist for a long period, and roots of celestial lily, which is also like flour of times and centuary;
and roots of celestial lily, which is also like flour of times and centuary; And when using simple or compounded remedies: grind them, make a powder from it, and apply the honey that I have mentioned, and use it. And if the treatment lasts long, and is not treated with this cure,
And if the treatment lasts long, and is not treated with this cure, Then know that corruption has spread inwardly, it appears within the bone, or in hard parts of the body, or in injuries. if the treatment for the pus-filled lesion is as we have explained before.
From the abscess of the nail
Panarice is an abscess that forms under the nail bed of the hand, or on the foot, or by chance forms in other toes;
and when it has aged, and one does not take care of it, so comes one shoe abscess, And they run and pour out blood as long as they reach the root of the nail, and by chance they may reach it all;
And they lead to corrosion up to the bone, as long as there is piercing pain, and it affects limbs of double size, and results in a fugitive color.
When you treat it as we have instructed in the section, and the treatment does not help at all, Then it is necessary that you remove all the excess that has remained of the nail, Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The fire cautery is quite effective if the bone is sound and the joint is healthy;
and if the joint is close to the flesh and begins to penetrate, and it inflames, If it's necessary, you should put the lead under the nail so it can pierce the flesh, And at the top of the bottle, and scoop out this subtle thing lightly, and place on the base of the meat medicaments hot and corrosive to remove everything;
And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it out, and vigorously cleanse, for as much of the bone that is corrupted cannot heal;
And if you see the knee to deteriorate, treat it with one dose of this remedy as we have said before, then continue the treatment until it starts to heal;
and if it is hardened and swollen, and it feels a great pain, you must first make it heal; then cut the nail across from above with sharp scissors,
And ensure that the cut does not extend up to the flesh beneath the nail, for patients would experience too much pain.
And if it happens, place something above that which soothes.
The fatigue must be adjusted that is born in the hands of some men by chance and are very fatty, And by chance there is a part where there are bones, and no time there is an angle,
And none of them occur at the root of the joint, or birth happens in some parts that we do not know. Those who are born without any movement from the two. And those that are born at the joint of the two can by chance move;
The size of one who is muscular is light, in such a manner: Cut it at its root from a broad spatula.
This one that grows at the root of the joint is hard to cure: hold onto copper with you.
In the one that grows in or should be at the back end, it is necessary for you to handle with copper up until the bone. Then scrape the bone with a suitable tool, then clean it until it is sound.
The joints that come together are born like this, or by the healing of wounds, or through fire welding, or through similar things.
If it is necessary that you fix that welding, so that the thing should be repaired according to its natural forms; Then place between two wet tents or pieces of cloth in oil, so they do not weld together. You place between two pieces of fine plaster, until the necks are joined together, as is appropriate.
If when joining occurs with either hand and palm, then make that welding just like it should be done.
Of the mean or lowly born.
Their veins are thick-walled and filled with various excesses of melancholy, extending to multiple members of the body;
And more happens to legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry than to others.
Therefore, you must administer one purgative dose for him, and then heal him with the basilica's remedy.
The iron treatment follows two methods: one involves bleeding, where black blood is extracted; And the other method consists in opening the vein and letting it bleed completely.
The size is done like this: first raise the hot water leg very strongly, until the thick hair becomes fine, then stretch the leg from the hair up to just below the knee; then cut the vein in one, two, or three parts, depending on its width,
Then lift and drain the black blood from your hand, from one end to the other, as long as as much blood comes out as the virtues of the medicine can bear;
and then remove it, and instruct them to coat that black part with roasting meat juices;
and repeat the evacuation and cleaning whenever the veins are full, harming the patient.
The method for applying leavening is as follows: place the leg of the affected side, if there are hairs on it, Then put them in a warm bath, and let her leg soak in hot water until it turns red, and the veins will swell;
And if you don't have a bath, heat it over the fire, and then apply it directly to the vein along its entire length from thigh to ankle, or in the part below at the ankle;
Then scrape the skin with an awl, and scorch each side of the vein until it appears when touched;
And you see it reddish-black, and when she enters or the skin seems as white string;
Then bend her back until she is raised above the skin, and then move it to the waist lightly.
Then make another cut three fingers apart above three fingers; then burn the skin over the vein until it appears. Then lift her back again in the same manner, and move it to another inch, in the same way you did first;
Then make another size or sizes if needed, then lift her back and move it to two inches from the feet.
Then you pull and lift until it reaches the second size; then stretch it from size to size, until all strength comes out, then cut;
and if you can't pull and lift it, tie a pin with one and a half thick strong thread, then tie and pull it, then attach two pins, and turn your hand from side to side, until it comes out; and make sure it doesn't cut, for if it cuts, one can neither pull nor lift it, and it causes harm to the patient;
And when you have treated it thoroughly, put moist wool in the wound with wine and rose oil; and cleanse as long as it remains clean.
And if the limb is contracted and twisted all together, and it is not straight, just like we have said, So you must sever it bit by bit, but do not cover it; treat it as we have previously explained.
So you must sever it bit by bit, but do not cover it; treat it as we have previously explained. The form of the iron used to cut the limb is curved, and does not slice, so as not to cut the vein;
And it's due to a large curve, for if it was slender, it would constrict the vein, but being large as we have said, and this is its shape:
From the common vein
This vein is found in the legs, on warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil without moisture;
And it may emerge from another place besides the legs, and this happens due to corruption that comes from under the skin,
As if it comes within the body like snakes and worms, bind between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein show such that there's a very great inflammation coming in the leg, Then change the limb, and begin the vein to come out, like the root of a plant.
When the shoulder joint is opened, it's necessary to wrap internally with a piece of linen about three and a half by two thirds, and secure it in place.
and leave the wax on the leg, and every time when there's a spot outwardly, if the skin envelops around the wax, and the new; and if it's too long, snip off a part of it, and encase the rest, then return it, without cutting its root, until all of it has come out; but if you snip it, it will enter the flesh, and bring pus and decay or infection to the site, causing a harmful illness;
because of that thing, it must be treated little by little until the end, and nothing should be left behind or overdone;
And it is not once this vein when it's treated of five long palms or of ten, and one arm has come to me, from ten long palms it's set, and when you grasp her, if you pull out one or two, and pierce until the bottom,
so that all comes out; and empty any substance inside her, and apply remedies for inflammation for a day, then treat it as abscesses.
And never touch this vein with your hands, and similarly when it opens at the heel joint, or under the foot. And much comes from errors, and which go astray; therefore treat it accordingly as we said before.
Worms that are born between the skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "cattle disease", because it often affects cattle,
and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body up and down, And one feels it well across each limb by limb, until they reach the skin where it was, and jumps forth;
And it is infested with putrefaction from some body fluids, if they approach and twist like snakes and worms or roundworms in the abdomen;
And there is doubt about its nature, for when it travels through the body, and ascends to the head, and comes to the eye, By chance it enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being treated and bled, one can only say when it begins:
so then it is necessary that you bind the shoulder above and below with a strong bandage tightly.
then cut and bleed it, and if its wound is properly inside the flesh, you will not find it. if you apply a fire cautery there, until it heals;
And the greatest harms it causes are when they go to the eye, as we have said;
And if you see it coming close to the eye or head, then restrain it with your fingers near its root, then cut upwards, and pull forcefully;
It is necessary to use the herb for cleansing body fluids from medicinal solutions for those ailments caused by bodily humours,
And if it involves meat that causes putrefaction.
The pain coming from wind This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it's a pain that comes to any parts of the body, And it spreads from limb to limb; and I saw what I told you.
I was summoned to tend an ill woman, and she showed me her arm, revealing a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
And one hour after, the wound would rise as if an animal had bitten at his shoulder, more quickly than anything else, like freshly cut silver when it's taken from its place to another;
the pain left that side, and entered the shoulder,
and then a little later spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm;
Then it began to turn within my body, just as I saw.
I marveled greatly at how she moved member by member within my body, for I had never witnessed this disease in such a manner. However, I have seen many instances where the pain of the affected area moves to another place, but I did not experience it myself, as I see it in the woman;
And I thought it was because of this that the woman had smooth skin, and her veins exposed, And from this, one can see the constriction caused by the wind;
Yet, those who are in good health and have moist skin and covered veins do not show this according to this reason.
And when you see the treatment of this illness, and if the patient feels pain as we have said, If the treatment begins quickly above and below it, then apply heat until that wind-strength is constrained within them; and treat the area with a cautery; and if you don't see it at your eyes,
if there is treatment for someone suffering from wind disturbances, such as stinking pills, pills made of the rattlesnake, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are various depending on their shapes and according to where they pierce or hit the body.
The variety of these things is that some have large points, and others are small, and some are barbed, and some are soldered; and there are those that have two edges, and those with tongues, and those where pieces are attached; and she who pierces any member does so in two ways: or piercing the main body,
Like brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar body parts. When it concerns that part of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you later, you'll see: So it is necessary that you prepare for the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in various conditions; And when that bad sign does not appear and the arrow is not fully removed, you should pull it out and treat the wound.
And the symptom of a brain injury when an arrow pierces the bone, and jumps over the structure that is above the brain, It is characterized by blindness and numbness and inversion in vision, and redness of the eyes, and inflammation and reddening of the tongue, and seizures and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; And perhaps there is loss of smell or hearing; and sometimes loss of speech and voice. It might have a white moist wound appearing like pimples, and in that case it also resembles burnt flesh;
And if you notice this sign, keep with your treatment, and pull out the arrow if it's still there.
The sign of the arrow when it bleeds or stings indicates that it is close to the left breast, and also feels as if it is stuck in something hard, not empty; And by chance the arrow also stops moving like the hair, and in black blood comes out, and brings coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: So you can have no doubt that death is approaching.
And the sign of the arrow that one should not ignore is when foam does not come out from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns red, and they sigh loudly with a quivering cold.
And if the arrow is found in the covering over the buttocks, it is located below the small ribs; and produces great pain and sighing; and all the limbs move.
And if the arrow is in the stomach by chance, then there would be nothing of undigested meat coming out from the wound.
And if the arrow is found in the belly or abdomen, and there's no passage of bile through the intestines, then there's no hope for treatment or extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrow is stuck in the bladder, causing urine to spurt and escape, and patients feel intense pain: know that this wound is fatal.
The other limbs, including the arms and shoulders, neck, throat, collarbone, shoulder blades, spine of the back, ribs, chest, and legs, as well as seeming members, are safe according to several different positions. When an arrow is in the body's nerve or artery and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because when you do that treatment.
It happened to one person where an arrow struck or entered the back of the neck at the base of the nose: I tried it, and from the other side removed along with the ear's fat, causing no significant discomfort.
And tried to extract an arrow that had penetrated the oil's fat from under the paper. The arrow was embedded, and I could only reach its tip towards the shaft. The arrow was of great length compared to an Ottoman bow, about 1 inch thick without feathers; the extraction went well, and no harm befell it.
And remove an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and was the Arabic arrow in his ear:
I cut the barbells, and sharpened until I pulled it out, and freed the Christian.
And remove an arrow from one's body, where it was stuck in the back or belly, and I feared that he would die;
and after having passed thirty days, if his condition did not change; I cut into the arrow, and removed it, and forced it out, and there was no bad incident.
And if you have an arrow that has fallen or stuck in a person's back, and the wound is healed at the site;
and keeps the arrow inside, and does not alter its natural position, nor finds any harm in any of its natural works.
And to another man, who was hit by an arrow in his face, and the wound was closed;
and remained like this enduring great pain; and many others similarly.
And he shot an arrow at one of the king's two sons, who had it stuck in his neck, and was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was fully inserted.
I was called for treatment after she had been bleeding for three days. I found the wound to be very narrow.
I tried it with all my subtlety and did not feel it at all; And there was no feeling or pain throughout her right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow.
I place on his head absorbent and digesting plaster, because his head does not swell; and I saw the head of the arrow.
and I saw the head of the arrow. I put on the plaster for several days and quickly healed the wound, then let the patient rest long.
Until he felt the arrow within his nose for one day; and he told me this. I apply a corrosive medicament to the wound for as long as it is open,
and I tried it, and felt the head of the arrow that was moving towards his shoulder; then I adjusted it by applying that corrosive medicine to the wound through the opening, until the head of the arrow became clearly visible;
And pierce well the ends within four months,
Then spread the wound if it allows to grip with the pincers, and move my force on both sides, and cannot escape;
So I continued refining and devising ways to use tools, until I had it for one day with well-made pincers, According to how its shape will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I treat it, and heal the wound.
And they judge that the cartilage at the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it then, and once it is sewn up, it will be healed completely.
I told you about the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your attention on what I do not say, because books cannot understand everything;
but the wise doctors compare on quite small matters, and on what is current and lacking, in true number work, and nine instruments, for the removal of foreign matters which occur in this craft.
I say that arrows are stuck in limbs according to two ways: By the elbow where they enter, or from another side;
And that which jumps in through the wound or enters it is an arrow entering into its flesh, and for no other time now.
And if it does not jump in now, let it grow until the body is hardened inside, and let it be released from that point.
And likewise if it is embedded in the bone and cannot be released, let her stay like that for some days, and remove her every day;
And then it jumps, and if it doesn't jump, should penetrate through all one slender hole, as long as the inside of the leg is widened, and then guide it.
And if the arrow has been returned inside the body so that one cannot see it, then seek it thoroughly with all effort; And if you feel it, guide it with any suitable tool;
and if you cannot by the tightness of the wound, and by the depth of the arrow, and there is neither bone nor nerve or vein, cut it as long as the wound becomes large; and remove the arrow if you can, and if there are ears attached to where the arrow is held,
and remove the arrow if you can, and if there are ears attached to where the arrow is held, if there's bone that is stuck inside of you for two parts at the joint where you can feel, and then break or bend the arrow's ears until you can draw it out;
and then break or bend the arrow's ears until you can draw it out; And do it skillfully so as not to break the arrow, making its extraction more painful.
And if you can't do it in one go, leave it until the shaft is completely rotten up to the elbow, then try again, for its extraction is easy. And if bleeding against you runs contrary, then apply what we have instructed about treatment according to our chapter.
And beware of incisions near nerves and veins, and apply as you can carefully extract the arrow without risk.
Either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and treat the patient according to how they were before the arrow fell. This is the greatest help for you, and if you cannot do it, then follow what the sign tells you.
The arrow that comes from another side, or if it opens any part of him, or if the skin is swollen in some place where you see it or feel it differently:
Therefore cut there, as long as the tongs can take hold, and then press: if jump now.
And if it is held in the bone, twist your hand around as long as she enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull her.
And if it cannot come out, leave her still, and then start extracting again until she comes out;
And if he has an arrow wound, then he holds the entire shaft;
And if it's in the stomach, and you see to apply surgery, so I administer one instrument made of hair; so that the tip of the arrow penetrates into the hair of the tool; and then apply force,
And if the arrow is covered in hair, I use one instrument with a pointed end to assist in extraction.
And if the arrow is touching, then it must be that you grasp all the meat inwardly where I enter or exit, if you can, then treat the wound as appropriate.
And if the arrow hits or pierces the head or stomach or bladder or side, and it is close to vital organs, then you can cover it up if you can;
and be careful not to cover the artery and the nerve, then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if that is your skill. And the treatment as long as it's healed.
The form of the tongs used for arrows resembles an eye, and here is its form:
And in various ways: large, medium-sized, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Of veins from common causes From veins through which we drain blood are thirty-one, of which there is an average of sixteen.
This means: Two small ones that are behind the ears, they are called the 'two herbechs'; And the two arteries that are in the two visible temples; And two veins that are in the two eyelids of the two eyes, they are called 'aspires'; And the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the nose part of the head; and the two jugulars which are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins which are called "aeugherich"; and two veins that are underneath the tongue.
The veins which are commonly treated are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic vein, and it runs along the left ribs, and they call it the laymen's "vein of the head"; And the middle one is called 'fast', and it consists of the cephalic vein and the basilic vein, And they call it 'the vein of the heart' by laymen; and the basilic either runs along the right or left side. And they call this medical procedure "the opening of the belly's vein", and it is performed on the back. and this is the one about which they heal, which becomes evident when it opens upon the sack.
And the salvation is the vein that's located between the index finger and the ring finger, and if it's two inches in length;
And on the leg and at the ankle there are three veins: one is below the bend of the calf near the left side of the body, And the second sentence that is at the ankle bone on the right side; and the vein which is called "nurse", that is located in the ankle of the other side;
And on the other leg are three veins beneath them.
The health of the veins that are behind the ears so aids in earache and migraines; And the qualities of a healthy person, as I tell you, are such that you need to allow the hair to grow long and evenly; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And the qualities of a healthy person, as I tell you, are such that you need to allow the hair to grow long and evenly; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. And rub or scrub the area where the veins are with a coarse cloth; then pinch the lump of the diseased area tightly with a pin. Until the two veins appear behind the ears at the level of the shoulder: Place your hand here, and when you feel the pulse near your neck, listen carefully to this advice;
Then take the scalpel and guide the needle through the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all the way above the vein. And cut and skin and the vein properly, so that two inches thick will be pierced, and let out blood as long as you see it;
Then tighten and hold until it heals.
And I have already spoken of the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it goes to old embrocation, and earache, and familiar eye condition, and at the body of cold tears;
And that is the quality of the surgeon just as I describe: And it is when the patient's body strains its neck, until both of the veins are clearly visible; and feels the hair under their fingers, and then begins to pull;
then lifts the knee above the vein at your second finger tip, and holds the scalpel against it. then lift the vein upwards, and clamp it, just like you did with other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
Then release the patient, place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put it on cotton;
and then make the dislocation again, and keep it until it heals; and we have spoken about this as well as its treatment and removal, or beginning of the book.
The treatment for the vein in the forehead is equally effective as that for the frontal artery when dealing with diseases of the face like migraine and fever.
And its quality is such that the patient twists her/his neck, until the vein appears. Then take the tool which is called 'cautery', whose shape is as follows:
And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another thing, and let blood flow according to the amount you see; Then release the neck of the patient, and tie the vein as long as it is healthy and there are no times when blood comes out from a wide flame.
Always, it must not be that the flames are too much; and heal across because the bone is close, and by chance break the flames when they are delicate.
The healing of the two veins that are in these two eyes aids with the eyes, at the nose, and at the jaw, and in the ear canal in the ear, and for diseases of the cheek;
And the quality of their healing is such that the patient twists their neck by tightening a certain ligament, as before;
Then heal it, and let the healing pass through, a bit long like a flame a bit wide, for there is no flesh.
And if the flames are subtle, by chance they break; then do a correction with blood, as much as you need, and then bind it with cotton, and bind it well.
The surgery for bleeding near the nose involves the use of an instrument, and it is performed separately from uncanniness, and in diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that occur around the face, and similarly when it's old;
And the quality of this surgery is such that the patient narrows their throat, then strains their nose with your left hand; And take a slender flame, and insert it into the lip in the space that is between the two nostrils, For the vein does not open properly when it is being done, and the wound will now start to heal.
and don't push it too hard at first, and do the cut according to your need, then leave it for a night, because it will be quickly restored.
The health of the two kidneys helps with constriction of the artery and beginning of mixing processes, and is associated with many diseases, and pus formation, corrosion, and herpes infections, and tumors;
And the quality of health is such that when it moves its neck from side to side, as we have said; and let the master stand over the patient's head, and the patient sit up at one point,.
then open the vein as long but a little more wide, then drain off blood moderately, or as much as is required;
then make another incision in the other vein, then untie the tie, and constrict the veins moderately. That the sick person does not strangle themselves; and let them stay until morning, so that the wound heals.
Regarding the treatment of wounds The treatment of veins in the mouth aids in closing wounds and helps with gum decay, lip cracks, nosebleeds and internal injuries.
And the quality of this treatment involves having the sick person stay in front of you, restraining their neck as I have described; Then turn the lip and look between the two veins, one being on the right lip and the other on the left. And recognize them by their blackness, and because within them there are small black veins: Tie both of them then, and if you do not know which one it is and you're in doubt,
Tie both of them then, and if you do not know which one it is and you're in doubt, If the larger one of each side, and do the same for both veins above and below, because it is the same method.
Of the treatment concerning the tongue The treatment of veins that are located on the tongue should assist after the treatment of the head, and it is at the narrowing of the throat, and concerning eye diseases, and concerning mouth ailments;
And the quality of a surgeon is that when the patient's body responds under your hands in front of the sun, and you lift the tongue, and look underneath on each side there is a black vein:
Then it's healthy for both, but not too far inside either, because just below are the arteries.
The veins of the arm which are commonly treated, are treated according to two methods:
they apply either with a very wide iron flame or a thin olive one if the veins are deep and narrow, and they are called 'aneils'; and are large and fine according to the width and narrowing of the veins. The shape of the mirthin flame is very well known, and it is quite wide as you can see:
And it requires to open veins filled with large visible blood, and those containing large blood and disturbance; and this is the form of olive oil:
and it is more penetrating, and used to cleanse delicate veins, or it has fine yellow blood.
The cleansing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat and neck, and the chest, and the stomach;
And it is necessary for the surgeon to heal wisely, and he must beware of the artery that is nearby. And if he cuts into the artery, and a flow of blood ensues, it behooves him to staunch the bleeding, as I have said; and there should not be any tugging on the flame, but cutting in such a way as with rabbits.
And if the basilica does not open clearly, it is necessary to extract it and change another one; If you do not want any blood from him, or you open his vein at his arm: it clearly opens. And apply the flame to the spot again as we said.
And if you know how to perform the operation, it is thus that you should straighten the arm, touching the place until you feel the pulse; Then mark the site of insertion, and then fix the arm, and apply the flame to that spot again.
And make sure you do not cut into the artery when you see the limb inflates, for it is from the artery: listen to this then.
And if you see it protruding upwards like the urine of a child, and the veins are red and delicate, know that it is blood from an artery: be aware of this. So hurry up then, and place your finger for a while, then remove your finger when the bleeding stops, as has often happened;
Fasten his arm, and leave it like that, do not move the patient; be cautious, and do not move until they are healed.
And if the wound is not cleaned, and you need it, and the medicine is not present, if you open the artery when it opens, because the head of the body retreats; and clean the wound.
And take a bark of the horse chestnut, and cut it, and take one of its halves and bind it tightly until the other day.
If the wound is cleaned, that's good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that clean blood.
And the wound's cleaning isn't troubled by various positions for the small area of the wound, and the strength of the arm connection.
The treatment of the vein involves assistance through bloodletting from the head up to the neck, and downwards towards the chest, Because it consists of the basilic vein and the head vein, just as we have said;
And it's important for the surgeon to be cautious when it comes to the nerve that is nearby, and if he doesn't go far enough, and should find the nerve, And it inflates and harms the health, and by chance cannot heal;
And this nerve opens many times, and if it doesn't open in any humans due to its subtlety, you should cut off the healthy part of the instrument; and listen for the nerve with your power.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make the incision long.
The treatment for headache helps, as it drains blood from the head, and aids in relieving pain;
And it is advisable to treat with oil of the olive or oil of the myrtle, for this is the safest of all veins, because there is no obstruction from either nerve or artery.
In every way, it's important to seek the gentlest approach, and one shouldn't be dismayed if it needs to be done multiple times, instead just retry. And by chance, the limb may swell at certain points during the first attempt, but one shouldn't find it painful; rather, just retry. The quality of health is according to your thought.
The first thing you need to know about surgery is that medicine is managed with force only to preserve health,
And to avoid future illnesses; and let the healing be done in one of the three veins that are or cut: this means, the cephalic vein, the femoral vein, and the basilic vein; and let healing begin in the beginning of prayers on one's knees, and in autumn and after meals in winter, when the sign of fullness is seen;
and healing should be done on the first or third day, after two hours or three days.
The treatment of diseases that is administered does not have a set time, but rather when need arises for day or nourishment, at all hours and in every situation;
And it is not proper to treat children until they are twelve and a half years old, nor for pregnant women only during the first quarter of their pregnancy up to seven months. Neither should doctors treat the elderly who have surpassed sixty years old.
And when anyone wants to be treated, in whatever way, it is necessary that they cleanse their intestines with a gentle cathartic. If there are some fats retained, so that the veins draw off the unnecessary stuff from the intestines harmful to the main body parts;
None recovers who is too full of meat, or drunk, as long as he is strong, or dropsical;
And if someone is healthier after colic pain, and vomiting, and abdominal discomfort, and frequent urination, and laboring work, staying awake and being anxious, and that which quickly loses its strength, or due to something from the arm or injury to the body;
Then refine the fluids, if they are excessive, through meat and drinks and medicines, if you have the power;
Then in or through a bath, if there's no resistance or obstruction, to thin out the blood.
and heal from the wound down towards the buttocks for three quarters of their length, as we have said;
and keep that day free of work, and pain, and lust, and similar matters.
and bind and rest, and have the healers higher than those being healed, and rub the arm twice or three times.
Then adjust it halfway above the link, because when it is either too tight or too loose, you cannot correct it without;
And then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and one can feel them.
Then moisten the wick of the lamp with a little old oil, then place your left thumb on that vein above the area a bit where he wants to cauterize. so that the vein does not burn and rupture upon contact with the iron. For there are veins that flow like strings under the skin, and some have such qualities of being full of windiness, so that when one places them over the flame, they retract towards the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus one is among those;
and if it opens the vein, the wound becomes too narrow, for in these matters one must be aware of what surgeons are regarding such things.
And if the vein opens on the first try, that's good; but if not, it should be tried again slightly over where you were or quickly, depending on whether his arm is swollen.
And if your arms are swollen, and the veins stand out, let it be for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: By chance some pus will come out; don't enter water baths, then restart washing if it pleases her;
And if the wound is small, or if it bleeds slightly and you doubt that not enough blood escapes as you see, so fix this in the very same wound to all the flame straightly;
And let it heal a bit quickly, in such a way that your arm is swollen; because this happens many times, when the wound is small.
If you see the limb is inflamed, do not restart the healing process again, and place a little bit of olive oil on it, for she lightens the body from blood, and heals in that area where the oil is placed.
and thus administer the olive oil in each healing you do to the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
And similarly make vinegar and wine, when you apply it to the limb; if the veins are too large, their fluid escapes.
And if there comes an abscess that is large, which happens often, even when it has not been treated before because the opening of the vein was small, If you're in a hurry, place a damp sponge on your head and leave it for half an hour in water and wine that has been gently heated.
It is necessary that you do this after the blood issue from the vein, and if it remains in place for several days with no signs of blackness or greenness, then it does not harm it. And if you notice this, place on any substance made from aloes or myrrh in a solution of comfrey, mustard, or something alike.
Many times abscesses and signs of healing were seen in the region of the basilica: so place your hand there, and if you find the area soft upon pressing with your hand, then that is an ill sign. Hence you should not put on any thing of what we have said, for perhaps by accident without the artery; but let it be one plastered with oil to harden the place, then treat it with another cure until it heals.
And give each person blood according to the amount of its strength and the color of the blood.
But if his veins are black, let him bleed until the blood turns red; and if you see a lot of it, let him bleed until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let him cool down.
And it should be for the one who is full and hollowed out, needing blood extraction; make him have a larger incision and let the flames be wide.
And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits to treat him gently yet often, and you must treat him by cutting across, not straight.
And this method of treatment saves from bleeding and constriction of nerves, and it's more beneficial than the old long-standing method.
And for the one whose body requires treatment, it is necessary to give him a potion made from juice of dried apples; if he has been heated up, treat him with bleeding three or four times.
And if they have a cold constitution, they should prepare for treatment with a moistened apple juice before bleeding, or in a syrup made from honey flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, ensuring the syrup has a pleasant scent.
And if it loses during surgery, after some blood discharge, it is necessary that it inhales broth of lamb, and a subtle, fragrant syrup,
and employs the other things that we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if it wishes to bleed its arm, and be able to heal again, when it is weakened by extensive surgery, it should bleed gradually and little by little, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
And if someone wants to bleed their arm after the first surgery, and they have strong veins, they should bleed seven hours after the first surgery, or even after the new hour.
And if one wishes to heal differently, they should begin healing on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood inside the body that has been heated, causing a fever; if one needs to drain large quantities, and widen the incision until pus comes out. Once all healing conditions are met, and you place your hand on the pulse when it begins to heal, ensure that death does not occur instead of pus. This occurs many times, especially when healing is neglected;
And it is not suitable when you see that the arm has been dislocated, and there is blood coming out a second time, and if the wound is closed, that you press forcefully on; If it's bent, extend the arm quickly, because doing so would be badly.
but let it until the second healing occurs; or you light at the tip of the flame until the blood that is frozen in the wound comes out. and place half an inch of salt that has been dissolved in water, and press gently.
And if the vein is ruptured, let it alone and do not tighten it, until the abscess subsides.
And if the need is to drain blood for a second time, let it out where the healthy person is himself, or in another vein, or on the other arm.
The vein is located under the neck from the vein of the arm because it is composed that way.
And the method of the treatment involves having the patient immerse his hand in hot water, until the veins turn red.
Then tie it moderately, so that you can clearly see the wound, then heal it now from underneath, not too wide nor too long.
Then cut it wide, and heal very close to the hand's joint, and if you can't see anything coming out, immerse your hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the water until you have enough.
And if it's in ice, do not immerse your hand in hot water, for you put them more in winter than in ice;
And the healing of this vein is safer from all other veins, it has no artery or nerve.
The treatment for saving the right hand from all diseases of the liver is as follows:
Stretch the arm and immerse it in hot water until the vein is full, if one can see it; and if the treatment goes across, but do it completely through to completion, so that no discomfort occurs;
and do not go too far in the application because all nerves are completely without flesh,
And then immerse your hand in hot water, since it was frozen in the wound, and couldn't escape.
And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, place a cauterizing agent over the vein and seal it quickly, and do this for each case.
The health of his left hand is against the disease of the mouse [a type of poisoning], and do everything similarly as I have told you for the right side.
The strength of wisdom saves from all diseases that are within the body, If diseases of the liver, and retention of flowers (likely referring to blood or plant parts), and disease of kidneys, and old illnesses of hips and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its health is such that the patient bathes in hot water and rubs it on the vein as long as it persists, and above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot it goes through much of the kidney.
So in health or even more so in larger kidneys, or at the ankle, than if one considers.
And if you heal it on the bone, take care of the nerves that are around, and heal through it as well as cutting; let the flames ascend.
And if you can't get rid of it, reset the bone in water and allow good evacuation of the vein.
And if the treatment is needed for the first time, then try it again a little higher for the second time because the limbs are salty; Do not doubt about nerves as we have said before and do the same for the other bone.
The nerves of the sciatic vein are at the knee joint, and their health corresponds to the pain in the hip, when it's due to blood congestion.
And concerning its quality, if the veins are congested and swollen inside or around the knee joint, they should be relieved by twisting three inches inwards.
otherwise the vein does not open; and if it does open, heal it in every way you can, and by piercing across it. and remember to hold it while doing this, for the veins are slippery, and they respond very well to manual work.
and remember to hold it while doing this, for the veins are slippery, and they respond very well to manual work. And if you cannot find it, if there's no opening or wound on his back or foot, and toward the small spine, and beware of the nerves;
And make sure to drain the blood as you see fit, and then release the knot, and place cotton and tighten it; she is now healed.
Regarding suction healings
Ventouses are made of horns, or spiders, or glass; and suction treatment is done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
And this kind of suction which can cause injury is done in two ways: either immediately with heat, or without heat;
and two others are on both sides of the neck; and the suction cup under the chin. And the suction for both shoulders; and the suction over the hives; And the cups on both arms; and the cups on both legs; And the suction on both ankles; and cupping does not target blood, but only small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
and because of this it did not weaken me at all, as one would do for the health of veins; And it should not be administered, nor with any fire or by any means, in any disease that comes from overfullness, until all the organs have been emptied.
And if it is necessary due to the disease to use suction or as a routine practice, we should apply it each hour at the start of menstruation, or at the end, and throughout and in every period;
because there are those who, when they need to use suction, weigh themselves first;
and for those who find congestion and redness in their face, head, neck, and eyes;
And those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and cough up blood; And if there are any such people who fear, and see through the nose blood, bones and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially around the end of the month, we instruct to suck after three hours each day.
The health of the throat helps with the pain in the head... that comes from the eyes, and it is not right for it to be after the elimination of everything from the body;
This suction therapy is used for the health of the head,
And it should not be used by those who have a cold constitution, or who are having purging symptoms, for it causes much harm in these cases;
And nor should they use this who have ear problems, nor those with cold head diseases.
And those who often use this, become forgetful, and because of that, it's advisable to place the suction cup slightly further down due to the risk of forgetfulness.
Ventilation of the chest is located under the healthful part of the head and the basilica, and because of this it matches well with compression of the base. and in making cuts down to the heart's channel, and immediately, and in recovery;
And it should not be pressed too much, for if she holds too tightly, she may cause obstruction or stomach and heart.
Ventilation at two points under the chest relieves head pain, eye diseases and toothaches, as well as choking, and pain in the roots of teeth.
And it is in the area of the healing of the basilica; and you should instruct the healer to extend their hand during the operation, not to touch the artery, and not let blood flow repeatedly.
The ventilation under the chin contributes to mouth diseases and gum decay, as well as similar illnesses occurring in the mouth; it is within the field of healing for the two lips.
The ventilation under the shoulders leads to illness that comes from heat and congestion.
Ventilation under the elbows is equivalent to three veins of the arms, for it has blood from these large veins;
and instructs the warrior not to cut too deep, for his fingers are bare of flesh, and can bleed from nerves and arteries.
The suction cup on the buttocks is good for drawing out dampness from deep within and various diseases from below. It's necessary that the suction cup be large and made of spider material; otherwise, if it were too fine, it might break and cause significant injuries.
Leg suction cups should be used without hesitation, as they draw blood from the entire body and are beneficial for old pain in the legs, joints, bladder, and kidneys, as well as eliminating toxins; they are placed on both ankles and calves, and eventually weaken the body after prolonged use, leading to emaciation.
The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you should place it first when empty, and apply sucking steadily, then quickly, equally moving it, without stopping this action until you see the color red and swelling appear. Then stop for a moment, and replace the suction cups, taking care with positioning since there are those who have tough flesh and clear pores: they require only one strike and large wounds that go slightly deep should be made; and sucking should be done lightly.
And if the spot is large, then it's necessary to strike twice: the first time to delicately clear the way for thicker blood.
And if the spot is very thick, then it's necessary to strike three times; and when we wish to draw out blood gradually, then we should only do so once.
And if we wish to remove much blood, we often continue; and if the wound is deep, we pierce it thoroughly, and the ends are such that the wounds are pierced suddenly.
And it is necessary for that person who has thick skin and is firm, who has hardened veins, that you apply the limbs to the suction cups where they are pitted and corrosive: if it is in the purple oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of pumpkin seeds;
or if it's yellow, with spinach oil, or lily oil, or chamomile, or any other similar.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of wormwood, or balsam, or anise oil, and similar remedies.
And if the skin needs tightening and large pores are present, it should not be rubbed with oil,
but it should be washed after cupping with pink water, or cold water, or water from a rose, or water from a cucumber, or water from porcelain, or other similar substances.
And for those who have much moisture, if it is lifted with willow water, or myrtle water, and sumac, and other similar things.
And those who have large excesses can be treated by drinking old wine, or water from sulfur, or a decoction of nettle or chamomile, or others like these;
and it is not suitable for a wet nurse to use suction cups before the bath or during bathing, but rather after the bath one hour or two; and do not let them sleep after suction treatment.
and it is necessary to warn him when he should be suctioned and when he has been suctioned. And watch over those who are being treated and are hot-tempered, and if they become too heated and inflamed; If it requires cold things, such as apples, endive leaves, lettuce leaves in the stomach, and similar items;
and kid kidneys, and cow's flesh, and moist meats.
And for those with cold complexions, they should consume honey syrup and a half-mixed aromatic wine, somewhere between old and new wines, and small portions of kidney stew, lamb kidneys, young birds and chicks;
And on the day he starts vomiting, if he needs to drink more than eat;
And it is necessary to give some men neither treacle nor muscat wine before or after bloodletting, for the comfort of their main limbs; And sharpen your knives, but it is not good that those who are hot should drink them.
The suction cups that are put to prick are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagra, and on the belly and intestines and kidneys and hip, for this limb does not tolerate being pricked in wounds,
and it is done only to draw blood from limb to limb, As when we apply treatments on the nipples when a child is born healthy; to remove the viscosity that's within the member, as we attach suction cups onto the belly and onto the buttocks for reduction of the member.
And alleviate the pain when there's concretion or stone, if it alleviates by its attractive force by chance, or empties the stone from its place;
And thus does she when placed upon the liver and lungs if there's retained suction,
And these suction cups are administered empty to suck only; and they are not administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with water.
As for the remedies of such weeping diseases, and in this manner one should fill the wet sponge with hot water, or with water that has cooked the useful herbs necessary for it.
The shape of the suction tool used at fire is as follows:
And it has two and a half inches in length from the bottom, and at its midpoint on each side there is one small protrusion, just like to pierce a needle,
and it should be made of iron or wood so that it does not blister the patient upon placing it on the limb;
And there is in the middle a pole across like an arachnid or iron, for placing a candle in hand.
And let them be large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
for the suck-pipes for children are different from those for adults, and those that are thin compared to those that are fat.
And one must place this suck-pipe on the limb like this:
Take a candle wax plug or one line segment, and place it inside the suction cup on top of the penis that is inside the suction cup, so that the heat is at the bottom of the suction cup and does not burn the foreskin;
and then place it on the member, and you should do so at the part that we have said, so that when you want to, if it goes off as vapor, and removes the suction cup;
and apply the line segment as before, and repeat this often, if you need to.
In the suction cup method which is used in pleurisy illness, during all stages of fever, there should be neither a lack nor an excess; it should only be administered when it's full with water and placed on the body only.
and it is the form:
Tongue sucking should only be performed when limbs cannot have suction cups due to their small size such as lips and gums, or similar cases; And on the underside of the horse's muzzle, such as hooves or noses, or other similar cases;
And concerning the quality of the user, if you find veins that are in sweet waters without clotting when clean, then you take them;
And place a nut in sweet water until they become familiar and have nothing in the stomachs; Then proceed to bleed and use suction cups, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place them on the veins;
And when they are full and gape open, if you can place suction cups there, then do so, for this works quite well.
If not, raise the limb with warmth and water well, then rub it.
And if the skin becomes too hot after the course of the arrows, moisten it with one.1 cloth dipped in cold water and place it there until the arrows are extinguished;
And if there are multiple arrows, apply ground vitriol or garlic and similar substances until they are extinguished;
Or you place half of peeled beans on the wound, and let them dry on the wound, which will stop bleeding now;
And if you need more knowledge, take other ways.
And if the veins don't want to be taken, rub the site with fresh blood, or you insert a needle there until blood comes out. Then place them, and as soon as they sense the blood, they will start to move;
And when you see that they are bleeding, sprinkle a little aloes and ground meal on them, or ash; now they will start to heal.
This begins the book of fractures
These chapters are many times necessary in the art of medicine and the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know this, dear son, that the leaves of these chapters contain things unseen in any old books; no one has ever seen them or read about them from letters.
And because of this reason, the knowledge has been estranged in our land, for I have never found anyone who knew well;
And I know nothing of this, ascribed to the knowledge of ancient books or from studying them so much that I dealt with this art, through experience, and through familiarity with my life's routine;
And I have described in this chapter what is contained, and summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in these two chapters previously.
So it follows that we should outline the preface of this book, which covers the essence of speech and chapters where one's intelligence is engaged. We must remain truthful, so those who have experienced this know and learn this noble art, and also teach it to others.
I say that if any fracture, dislocation, twist or sprain occurs in any body part, it is necessary to immediately treat the patient from both sides simultaneously and separately, without causing him discomfort, whether due to frailty of the body, young age, or old age;
If the cautery is too tight or too cold; and eating cold jousts, meaning cold meats, and liver and venison, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill your body with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have doubt about an abscess becoming hot, or spreading of matter in the limb; so improve the patient's health to their former state as they used it.
And when the broken bones start to heal, it is necessary that one cooks the meat that causes excessive cooking or has viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and chestnuts, and peas, and cow's stomach, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For this kind of cooking leads to more movement and heals the breakage faster.
And know that bones broken in old or feeble people do not return to their natural state of being well attached or fused, due to the dryness of the limbs, nor are those also too tender, such as children's bones.
but do not abandon its cure, reset the broken bone. On large pegs that fit and join the limb together, as long as it is pushed just like before; and do not hurry in its work, for this requires fattening with large meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures come in various ways.
But the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you all about fractures in this chapter. For there is damage heading towards harvest, and another when sharpening, such as the cut of a feather for writing.
For there is damage heading towards harvest, and another when sharpening, such as the cut of a feather for writing. And if in damage with injury, and breakage with a small crack.
And each way has its tool, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings to its place;
and it is known by the breakage of the bone through where the limb twists and opens well outward, and is compressed under the hand;
And when there is no twisting or misalignment of the joint, and the body does not feel great pain, if there is no break;
but it can well have twisting, or a crack, or a small break. If it is not suitable for you to move it by hand, but apply the following remedies, and then gently tighten it now.
And know that when the break occurs internally and the two parts are disjointed, you should now put them at an equal point, so that the abscess is in line with the wound.
And if pus is present, if he leaves it for no day, until the pus is relieved; Then place it evenly as you can lightly and carefully, knowing that the restoration of this is easier than when there are pieces involved. Then extract it, according to this later instruction.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it's divided into two parts, whether it involves hands or feet, or at your hand if it's a small limb, or divided by two strings, or one string and your hand;
And place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the injured member are removed, you reset it by all means into its original position as you can, and be sure to avoid causing any further injury or pain through your work.
And correctly align the ends of the two bones according to the best forms.
And feel well with your hand if you think it is not quite right: if the dressing is beautiful and do not strain too much; do not squeeze as those who bring about pus discharge and muscle contraction in their work, as we have desired many times.
And when the limb is to your satisfaction, restrain well the patient so that they do not move it, whether awake or asleep, while turning or in any other manner; and see to it that the limb is secured so that the patient does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, if it's not at all to his liking, then you should put him in a state of rest so that he doesn't feel any pain;
For when he feels no pain, if it's not at all to his liking, then you should put him in a state of rest so that he doesn't feel any pain; and see to it that he is placed properly straightened, making sure there's no twisting when he is restored;
the quality of the broken limb should be according to what I am telling you.
Know that broken limbs vary in size, degree, and shape.
For there are small limbs such as arms and legs, and similar things; so it is necessary to wrap them with soft and fine linen cloths.
And those that are larger, such as the buttocks and calves: it is necessary to wrap them with a broad and firm bandage, for the wide bands embrace the entire large limb and restrict it equally from all sides, so there is no unevenness;
Then wrap with lighter bandages around three times or four according to the member, and press your hand slightly along the entire bandage, then go above the breakage and restrain less, so that the breakage moves away a little from the breakage;
And soften the bandage gradually and gradually, until you have covered a large part of the healthy area, then apply another bandage, and wrap it around again near the broken area;
Then return to the site of the fracture, and apply pressure moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the previous chapter.
Then place between the tied threads of linen or cloths as long as they are equal in length, then bind it all over with a bandage, and then put your well-made stars on top; if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place on something that soothes the abscess and removes the swelling, and leaves it like that for a few days;
Then apply pressure over the stars, and they should be of half the width of a thick cane, or from the wood used for making fishing nets, or from palm leaves, and they should follow this shape:
But it is necessary that the iron which one places above the burn be a little larger and wider than the others;
and also as long as it fits the size of the limb whether small or large.
then fix it on the irons in the same way you did at the first application, then tie an additional piece of thread above it, just as you tied it above the burn at the first application;
make sure there is less tightness than before; and it should be that the thread be of medium size, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as in works of wool that make their loops out of twisted linen cords, and this is great error, because the loop cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it does not suit for there to be less than half a dou (a unit of length) between each element.
And if the wounds are irritated by the pins after pressing them in their healthy places, put patches of linen or wool on them, so they do not blister.
When the wound is swollen and the joints are broken, I will tell you the treatment below.
Know that it is not fitting to restrain all broken limbs for the whole first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not fitting to put stays on them for their entire first five days or ten, or more depending on your confidence in each particular case occurring.
And here is the way of the ancient plaster methods for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour that stays on the mill walls and mix it with plenty of egg. Make this concoction neither too thin nor too thick, and use it; this is the common method of using plaster to restore fractures in various ways, as well as for women and small children because it isn't too harsh or too cold.
Another method of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations: take 3 barley grains and garlic and mint and asafetida and gum arabic and myrrh, each in .x. 3 grams; and incense and aloes, each in .v. 3 grams; vinegar is also needed, .viiij. 8 grams; grind these into powder, then mix with plenty of egg; if the mixture is warm, use this plaster, for it has a good composition, restoring broken bones quickly, and is suitable for many people.
Another way to plaster for twisting: take mugwort and myrrh, each of .xiii.3; frankincense and aloes, each of .viii.3; achillea vi.3; boric acid .x.3, grind well together, mix with vinegar or enough egg yolk, then apply.
Another way to apply a plaster for broken bones and exposed joints, and to soothe the arising pain, and the use of bone cutting and bruising: take new wool, and its fat in broth and oil cooked, and put it on the wound. This plaster does not heal completely, but it is better for soothing abscesses and properly relieving pains.
Another method of plastering that heals broken bones: take dried fig leaves and terrestrial oak leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method for dressing when restoring bone fracture and easing the removal of pus. Take root of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, ground ivy, one part from each; grind it all together with wine, then apply this mixture to any heated limbs. If not hot, mix with damp coriander water or plain water, and use it accordingly.
Another more vigorous method than the first when pus is being restored from the limb. Take roots of valerian, and flaxseed, borage, alfalfa, and sorrel, as well as violet and chamomile flowers, one part each; grind it all together with salt water, or sweetened water, or wine, depending on the heat of the limb and its rest.
In his book, Hippocrates instructs that to restore strength in the fractured limb, one should apply a balm made from beeswax and oil, and nothing else, more. He states it should be of neither too soft nor too hard texture.
And it seems Galen that we should place on the broken limb to restore it, things dry but slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, just as we have said.
Another way of plastering that is useful for injury and pain: take mutton and feathers from cooked sheep or bird feathers, and mustard, and equal salt, and grind them together, and make a plaster with it and use it.
And then after a while, take care not to let the patient feel any pain, nor does their bone move in its place; if it is done without hands working.
And if pain or itching comes to the limb, or there is no rest or swelling, then hurry up and remove it, and apply the plaster now; take a lightweight cloth and a wet sea sponge, dip it in water, and immerse the limb until the itching stops and the pain is relieved. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool, moistened in water or oil rose, and bind it with a bandage until you are sure of removing the cautery completely;
And let the inflammation settle on the limb, and relieve the pain, then continue with the treatment subtly, and a little plaster, and don't strain it as strongly as before; and treat it delicately until it's healed.
And if you notice that pus and redness, pain, and swelling are present everywhere on the wound, and you need plastering and bandaging, then start again, just as you did initially.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb and if it was not released until after three days or four, or five, or seven; and each time leave it for twenty days, according to this, as long as the healing progresses and brings closer the adjustment of flesh.
Therefore hold the restraint more than at first, and make him fatten his flesh, as I said earlier; and if you see that the left side dries too much than necessary is, know that no remedies can come. Then use hot water baths every time you reset it, and do this once every three days, and drain a bit of the joint fluid;
Through this procedure then cut off the remedies from the limb, and hasten what the foolish people do, that bend the member wrongly: it is bad, and there are many dangerous outcomes, and I see no other thing than to rest and have it done straightly.
Regarding the various methods of crushing. Many ways of breaks exist, and various shapes occur, and their causes are categorized;
For there are breaks caused by the impact of a sword, and in the neck bone, it breaks up to the symphysis which is below the vertebrae, like when a mallet hits or a staff is thrust; this method of breaking is called "hatchet break".
When the sword penetrates through the bone from above to below, it is called this method of breaking "absolute"; and these are the large or small injuries from these two types of breaks.
And if there is sequential impact, or crack in the stone, or through stone, or other similar injuries.
And if there is a break close to the membrane beneath the bone or on the bone itself, and this wound can be large or small.
And if there is a wound that penetrates the bone as finely as a hair, and this crack is small, thus such breaks are called "hairline" fractures;
And if the wound is made by striking with stone or falling or from any other cause, and a piece of bone enters the cavity beneath it, causing the bones to rub against each other like when blacksmiths hammer on their anvils; and the stone enters the inside.
And this happens more in those who have wet bones below, such as in an adult's skull;
And applies to all these methods of breaking down where small fragments are removed, such as seeds; and I will discuss this in its proper place.
And let us know all the ways of breaking through by removing them from above, and the inquiry into tests, and through corruption in the flesh that is upon it.
The appearance of hair is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed it in, if the black break appears.
In treating the breakage, be careful of adverse events due to the disease, and if you see no bad adverse event, such as vomiting bile, loss of appetite, expansion, fever, and other similar symptoms in various conditions, do not hesitate in diagnosis.
And if you do not see an alarming mishap, yet you hope for salvation, then start the treatment.
And when winter comes first to you and it is in winter, then you should remove the bone before the fifteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is in summer, you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the pus around the bone becomes putrid, and the accidents that we have said occur.
And if the bone break reaches just beneath the membrane covering the brain, you should split the broken part like this: and then take the head from the patient, expose it on the bone in all the ways that you can, and under the shape of the wound as much as you can.
And if blood flow is necessary to uncover the bone, or when an abscess cavity opens up, you should use whatever aids are appropriate, and here it's recommended that you fill the area with wet cloths infused in rose oil; And let the wound rest until the abscess pain subsides and blood flow is assured; then begin by incising through to the bone. This can be done in two ways as prescribed: One method involves cutting directly in front with a narrow incision, which results in this shape:
And make another cut slightly larger than the first one.
And the second method is that you should have several different-sized cuts: some narrow and others wide, with each being sharp-pointed and made of iron; and when working on them lightly, ensure that you do not injure the head.
And if the bone is too hard and doesn't penetrate, you must puncture it internally in such a way that you administer cuts with needles, not too deeply so they do not pierce beyond the bone's thickness, and there should be a margin of about one circle above the point, ensuring that the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have more than one, so that each goes to its place within the width of the bone, for you need needles for all sides; this is how three kinds of needle formations are:
The quality for piercing internally through the broken bone is to place one needle on the bone, and turn with your thumbs until you know that the bone has pierced. Then replace the needle a little further elsewhere, and do this all around, then cut in between the perforations of the bone which is located between the teeth, and do it more subtly than possible and gently as we have said, continuously until you pull out the bone to your hand or with no tool that you have such as forceps; and make sure not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
And when you have pierced and cut the bone, it is appropriate that you scrape away the bone remnant attached to the bone with an instrument similar to a tooth, but it must be more robust and finer than another tooth.
And if it stays in place with no small bones or scales, if you gently manipulate them with two instruments; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And the other way of doing it is what Galien stated, which is more prudent; and he uses a lot of force, and this is his word. Firstly, you should expose a part of the bone, at or near where the break appears to move, so that once you have exposed this part, you will place underneath the tip of this lens-shaped incision, with which we are dealing here:
And do not cut from one side only, and make the incision halfway between two ribs, so that you are cutting towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer from above, gently breaking the entire bone, and be careful not to damage the membrane beneath.
If it's pressing against the bone, gently pull the bone, because there is good sensation of discomfort and fear.
And if the bone breaks without piercing through the membrane, and the bone is cut only above, and there are small fragments, then you should proceed after that roughness, and remove the scales using a fine razor. You must have different quantities of this tool to apply in each area most appropriately, according to the work and the appearance of the breakage.
If you are facing large razors, and then finer ones, and keep doing this until it is done well.
For each of the other delicate haircutting and breakage procedures, you should adjust your approach according to their orientation; this is something that cannot be adequately addressed by someone who has devoted themselves to this craft.
And if the affected area is exposed, it should be covered with one or more linen cloths according to the size of the wound, and then treated with oil, poured over the injury. Then take one or two linen cloths that are doubled over, and soak them in wine and oil, then place them on the first linen cloth; do this as gently as possible so as not to burden the affected area. Then apply another bandage above, without pulling it too tightly, just enough to moisten the wound.
Leave it like this for one or two days until the abscess has subsided. Then remove the bandage and administer remedies such as thyme roots, flour of myrrh, incense powder, and similar substances; from these prepare a powder, apply it to the wound, then continue with further medications without causing irritation.
And ensure that the wound is clean immediately, do not leave any pus, nor allow it to coagulate in the bowe, for when pus assembles at the site of the brain's meshwork, it will flow and spread, causing great harm to the patient; because if you place something sharp on it, it will cut through from above.
Therefore, take care that no accidents befall the patient, as we have said, where there is doubt, let it not cause fear.
And if fear only comes from the medicine that has been applied, should it have this effect, then you must take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and one spoonful in a spoon, and place it on the affected area; Then follows the treatment of various methods for healing until it is sound.
Know that neither of the two parts above the nose are ever broken, or only one by itself, as these are two bones; and here below is cartilaginous tissue, which does not break, nor can it be bent or twisted, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must bend your little finger or ring finger at the nose, and place the break evenly inside your index finger, and through the tip outward, until the nose revives according to its natural shape. And do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the break is in the area above the nose and cannot reach the nostril opening, it must be that you place him level with the tip of a knife slightly thicker than that.
And if the break is in two parts, redo the operation, and strive to restore it on the first day, if you can;
If not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the abscess has subsided and is dressed, then apply a poultice to the bridge of the nose made of linen strips, if the break is in one part.
Or you apply another one from the other side, if the break is on that side too; and let them be as thick as they fill in the hollows of the nose.
And they say that every restorer should moisten the tents with butter and change them each day. I do not think it is correct, but they should be moistened during the preparation of an egg broth, and with powder from the mill; then leave the tent until the bone has hardened and the cartilage is tough.
And instead of tents one uses goose feathers or no feathers at all, and if you have a half-cooked egg spread around them, and let the wound be open, and blow on the patient's lungs; or do whatever you see fit.
And if abscesses come to the nose in such a way that you are working on them, then place a wad of moistened cerotta or cotton in olive oil or in a drop of eardrop.
And if the pus does not come out, then apply a plaster from outside, made of sawdust flour and incense powder mixed with yolk oil. Then place it on light bandages, but do not bind them too tightly.
And if the fracture is small and broken into many pieces, if it can be extracted with suitable instruments for that, then cut along the crack, and clean out anything that sticks or gets stuck inside, and solder together, as long as you use plasters and ointments suitable for this task;
And if there is no wound inside the nose, then heal with trepanation, and place pine needles until it heals.
On the rupture of the jawbone
When the jawbone is ruptured from within, and there's no wound outwardly visible, only the breakage is outwardly visible. It doesn't split into two parts externally, rather it fractures internally; one can detect this by gently assessing it.
It is necessary: if the breakage occurs in the right part, you should push your index finger into the mouth towards the side. And if the breakage is in the left mandible, you should use your right hand's index finger to push from outside and gently apply pressure on the inside of the breakage, then move it outward with the other hand evenly.
And if there is an internal fracture of the jaw in two parts, then it is necessary that you apply extension to both halves until they are even.
And if the movements of the teeth occur, or a rupture, hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk. Then place wax on the broken mandible and put two strips of cloth above it; and place one large candlestick well made, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the mandible, above the cloth strip, and bind it as tight as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you notice that the figure changes, allow it to settle for three days, and then adjust what has become unfastened; apply plaster on top, mixing with powder from the mill with enough egg or flour of almond after removing the wax. And place wool lightly on top of the plaster. If the plaster hardens and the patient's position does not change, let it be until it heals; many times heal in three weeks.
And if abscesses come out, apply what we have instructed repeatedly.
And if there is a break and wound together, reward nothing of the bone when it is removed; so skillful are the tools for extracting such substances that they suffice.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains nothing, if the wound is wide, apply two poultices suitable for it to hasten flesh growth until it is healed.
by the power The forces break many times before, towards the shoulder, and the breaking happens in three ways: where it is broken and torn into two parts, and there are pieces, and it is the more light to restore; or there is breaking with an injury.
And the operations are when the breaking is with an injury, that you have two ministers, so one marks the shoulder where the force breaks; and the other extends to the neck towards the body part. Then make the break even on your fingers, so that the shape becomes as it should, and there be no appearance or movement.
And if you need to extend more, then place a round sponge of cloth or wool over the shoulder down to the elbow; and make it as large according to your need; and stretch out and lift the broken limb, holding the sponge in your hand so that you can make the break even, as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head from the strength at the front, because it comes forward, then the patient should lay on his back with his head elevated, and place a half pillow under the shoulder, and press the minister to the shoulder from below, until the bone of the strength is raised.
And then position your hands for breaking and if you find bones, it's necessary that you cut through them; and gently pull the pieces apart, and if the bone cannot join by any pushing, then make a cut on one of these incisions that you have made. But when using this tool on the strength, place something under it to prevent slipping:
And make it resemble a spoon, but do not place it inside, and be as wide as it should be according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two teeth, as you see fit, and let one tooth be broad and the other narrow, just like the wound you made when treating the bones.
And when you are assured of the presence of pus under it, if you cut open the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt the presence of pus under it, if you treat the wound with bandages and tents, according to its quantity.
And when pus comes out, if moisture is present, use oil, rose water and saffron, and place it on top.
The refinement of bone, when it is near wounds and in the area of surgery, involves placing a plaster made from powdered mill substance and egg yolk on the bone, then putting light weights on top. If necessary, add more soil to stabilize it. Then take a very large band about the size of a palm in width, then place two layers of cloth on top of the weights and plaster. Next, take a slender rod that is three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around this band so that the ends hang down. Place the cautery on the wound, turn the bandage around the neck, and move both clean and diseased flanks; and adjust from each part, and when you see that the wound has begun to heal by union, and clearly see that the cautery does not move above the broken bone, then reward him daily, and when he removes the stitches, keep him restrained;
Let the disease heal on his back, and apply it when he sleeps; use a small pad under the wound to lift the shoulder up; this will alleviate the pressure from the force on the bone through the alignment of the shoulder blade. If you secure his arm around the neck instead of allowing movement, until twenty days, avoid harmful accidents.
Then restart the plastering if you see that it's necessary, and keep it tight but not too tight until he recovers; and by this time, the shoulder should be healed in twenty-eight days at most, or earlier for some people.
Of the breaking of the shoulder
Sometimes the shoulder breaks at its edge or in the middle, and it doesn't move from that point; if you handle it according to the shape of the break and reset it according to its natural form, in all possible ways. Then apply some mill-ground powder with plenty of eggs, using gentle taps, and place a double layer cloth over it. Next, position a large but fine stick slightly larger than the shoulder, such that there's no movement anywhere on the shoulder, fill this space with linen wads, ensuring the stick is evenly placed; then firmly bind it into one large firm bandage, making sure the stick doesn't move from its place and check each day; and every time when it starts to loosen, tighten it again until the stick stays in its place, and places the patient on their side. The shoulder will be restored within 20 days or 25 days. And when this number is completed, if you release them, then they are safe, for it isn't bone that takes light pressure easily to set.
And if a piece of the bone sticks out and does not come back to its place, then take it up from there, and do so with care. Follow what we have instructed in treating abscesses caused by force.
From the fracture of the foot
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it happens more often at the edge. And when it's broken internally, it swells downwards, causing great pain for the patient, loss of consciousness, and vomiting blood, and there opens up in the broken bone, and one feels this well.
And for the restoration: if the patient feels better lying on their back and both sides, then you should place them on their back with their shoulders elevated. Then press their shoulders down, and join their ribs together from both sides using your hands, carefully making sure everything is in a way that suits your skills as long as the shape of the bone is what it should be; then apply plaster and bandages over the subtle salt mold or another light structure, wrapping it all up with one cloth, tie it firmly to the broken bone so it doesn't move. Then bend their back roundly and tighten it, strain every hour for the patient, if they become better relieve them of the strain; and if they should need to remove bandages due to corrosion or itching that comes from the wound, or pain or pus, act quickly, remove them, clean off the plaster, and treat as best you can in all manners. Then reapply the plaster firmly until it heals.
Concerning the fracture of ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs only occurs in those large beams behind the back and within the chest, and it is due to them being brittle; one feels this well during examination at the heart's location.
And if the healing requires making the break even, as it should be. Then apply the plaster and compress with a strip, if you need to.
And if the breaking of the ribs is deep within, then the patient feels intense pain and piercing, as if from weeping, because the bone pierces the tissue; there are also swellings, immediate vomiting and a large amount of bleeding, and this is an indication of severe illness, for which the elderly would try to use drastic remedies.
And if someone says that it is appropriate to give meat which inflates the belly, in order to expel nausea outward.
We do not follow this advice; for we do not apply pus or ointment where it has not come. And if it has come, then heal it.
And let no one among us apply suction cups to the body in order to suck out shape, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the suction cup draws away excesses to the body due to weakness.
And it is said that in any place where one should cover the body with wet wool in oil heated hot, and we insert cloths between the ribs to make equal the warmth inside, then apply the treatment for the coldness of the body, meat and medicine.
And if the patient experiences great pain that they cannot endure through the bone piercing the tissue, and there is doubt for the patient, whether to cut in the area of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place one or two tools under him to keep his chest; then you must cut into the bone, lightly drain, and then stitch the two edges of the wound if it's large, and treat with plasters until it heals. And if abscesses occur, place wet cloths in oil rose inside, and place over his body; and treat while keeping to what is suitable for the abscess, and always keep your attention on the rib area where it should be done, until it heals.
Of the breaking of the neck
No break occurs at the neck's bones, and it doesn't bend; similarly with the spine of the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you need to determine if they will recover or not, take heed: if you see that their hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot be moved or extended; and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that the poisoning is fatal in multiple ways, and if the hands remain unaffected and well when held, know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and the patient's illness will recover if treated properly.
And when such a condition comes upon the spine of the back, and you wish to know if they will recover or not, be aware that if its joints are softened, and if there is an accident similar to one in hands, and wind expulsion without willing it on their back and at their chest; and when one has expelled it onto their belly, it still does so without willing. And when it is expelled onto the back and they wish to sit up, they cannot. Know that this is fatal: if no labor is done in its cure.
And if this misfortune does not happen to him, then it is a matter of lesser concern.
And the treatment is that you should apply it if there's pus coming out, if you place on the spine or on the yolk of an egg, until it calms down; then put on one of the soothing plasters and let it dry, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until they recover. And if any bone is broken, cover it on the inside of your knee; and remove the bone, then join the two wound edges together, if they are large, with stitches, then treat with an ointment that binds cartilage until you recover; and if the piece of bone is bruised, which is called the "knob of the knee", if you hold your left hand pouch in your left hand, place it evenly against the other hand at your power, then put on the plaster and support above, should you need to; then compress it, and if any broken bone comes out, treat it there, and remove the bone, and heal the wound until it is cured.
From the breaking of the bone at the hip
It happens that the bone at the hip is broken, and if it happens, there may be a slight loss of strength in the thigh; and it runs long, and descends to the knees, and comes to pain in the leg, and stings, and swells what is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand upwards as long as you are on the breakage; and know where the breakage and its shape are; and if the breakage is only at the thigh, then put an equal breakage there, as long as it has a natural shape.
And if the breakage runs along or it descends towards the inside, then guide the patient so that their body is on their stomach, until you become accustomed to restoring this breakage. And when you have placed it evenly, put it on the splint, then place a log of wood or charcoal on top, and hold the fire steady, so that it does not move; and apply heat along the back area until the wound is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their side or on their back.
And if the abscesses rupture and begin to drain, do not touch them until they are calm, and place something as we have previously mentioned; then return to wound care, apply pressure in accordance with need, should there be no adverse incident; this is how it's done.
The process of breaking the splint.
The assistants are those that are between the knife and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two ways: of which one is that you take one solid stick of medium thickness, according to this shape:
And tie two heads with two pieces of rope, and put them up top, securing the patient on one spot; then place the patient's broken arm on the stick until it reaches the elbow, maintaining a bend in the stick equal to half its length, then position this at any heavy object or where helpers can pull down; then set the broken arm so that the injury is level with both hands together, until the broken limb returns as it should.
And the other way is that one secures the patient on their stretcher, and ties their hand to their neck, then instruct two helpers: one to cut where it's injured at their hands, and the other to cut down from both ends of each piece of rope and extend each person to their part.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, hold one band over the wound and another above it. Extend each of the assistants to their part. And if the wound lies near the head of the shoulder, it should be that you place half of a band under the socket, and the other towards the knife, under the wound; and similarly if the wound is close to the knife, it should be that you place a light band without effort until the wound matches up with the middle and the knife; then match the incision evenly as it suits, hold tightly. If there are no pus discharges when removing them, do not make them come out.
And if pus comes out, do not immediately tighten until after seven days, and apply grease-soaked wool in a gentle manner and with rose oil, until the pus coming out is relieved; then apply tightening, and how to apply this tightening is that you place the plaster over the wound, then join the arm under the shoulder support, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; apply the cloth, tighten it on the shoulder support, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its usual position, without anything preventing it, or if the bone isn't broken.
And if you suspect that the bone doesn't move, use braces, and place an extra large and strong brace over the wound, with one inch of space between each brace. Make sure that each brace is as wide as it can pass through the wound by three inches from each side; then apply tightening on these braces, just like I explained at the beginning of this chapter about wounds, more forcefully but without pulling away too much.
And if you see the seat of the arrows and the constriction, as we have said, in the time that you restore the broken limb, and doubt about the removal of the arrowhead, if you leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then check each three days the knot, to ensure no itch begins or swells around the wound, or the pus cannot reach the limb because it is too constricted. If there's difficulty, as we have said.
And if no such events occur, or if the removal is only done after three days or more, and the wound lies on his back, with his hands on his stomach; and place under the shoulder one thick cloth full of equal wool, and watch each hour of the day or night, that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or that the stitches become soft; if there is difficulty due to medicine's virtue, and give it meat as we have placed before, in such a way that the meat should be at first subtle; and when it starts to recover, let it swell. And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be recovered within forty days altogether; and then one must remove and apply baths and medicines to the wound for its healing. And if the constriction looks bad and is congested, you must leave removing until three or four months.
From the breaking of the arm
The arm is made of two bones which are called the 'foscile' pair. One bone is small, and it covers the pocket; the other is large, and this one lies underneath towards the small head. Sometimes only the large foscile breaks or even both bones break together.
When the small fosciles are broken, restoration is light and healing; and when the large ones are broken, healing is poor, and more troublesome than if they were broken together. If only the small foscile breaks, then it suffices to gently extend it, making it even.
And if it's the large foscile that breaks, you should strain it more forcefully; place one cushion under it and lift the elbow higher than the other, and position the small finger lower than the others. And ensure the patient holds their own hand in a crossed position with an additional cushion slightly above them to prevent discomfort. Then have two attendants extend your arm up to its joint with respect to your hand or at an inch below it, and another attendant at the same level on the other side. Lastly, adjust their positions so that the hands are parallel to each other according to their best form.
And if during the break into pieces, you place each one in its place, and if there is none that sticks to the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make on it and on the bone, as we said previously.
And if during the break into wounds, I have spoken about this in another chapter; take care of the treatment.
And if during the beginning of the restoration there appears pus, apply this: take a piece of cloth dipped in a mixture made from rose oil and white beeswax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; then attach two pieces of cloth together carefully, until the pus has subsided. Afterward, remove the beeswax, and place on it the plaster made from powder ground by the mill with plenty of egg yolk, put in the splints, and ensure that the splint is set higher than the breakage point, and slightly wider than the others; and be aware that there should be seven or eight splints arranged in various positions: when the breakage is within an os, or between two, place it more over the breakage than elsewhere, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and ensure that the cloths covering the breakage are moist but not wet, and neither hard nor rough; and use threads made from linen, not too thick or too thin, as we have said. And treat the limb and the joints for several days. And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itchiness appearing on it, you should immerse the limb in hot water until that itch is relieved; and let the limb not be made to rest. And then begin tightening again, and when the tie is undone and bone is uncovered, and similar occurrences, properly adjust it.
And if care is taken so that no injuries can occur on the limb because it is too tightly bound, you should soften it a bit with a poultice, and let it rest like this for several days until the injuries heal, then tighten again.
And if none of these things we have said happen to the patient, or if the loosening lasts for up to twenty days. Or once it reaches that point, then place their hands on their throat, making sure their necks are even, and be cautious about movement and excitement, and sleep on their back; know that this swelling has been healed in thirty days or thirty-five days, and perhaps in twenty days, depending on the compositions and the nature of the virtues.
Of the breaking of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and in our fingers there are few injuries, and they only bend many times.
And when the heel of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary for the patient to lie flat on his back and stretch out his hands in front of him equally; then place his hand on an extended surface and extend the broken fingers, putting them evenly together until they are properly aligned; and put the bandage and splints, if there are no abscesses, then he should place a splint according to the size of his hand; and wrap it up in one piece of linen.
And if the injury is at the base of the fingers near the belly of the hand's sole, make a frame with linen and instruct the patient to press it onto their broken toe; then stretch out this long piece of linen, and place the splint in such a way that its length matches the width of the hand's sole, and tighten it as it should be tightened.
And if the break is outside, it must be that you place one splint above and another under at the foot, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind both completely within the hand, and seal off the connection between the fingers.
And if the break occurs in any of the fingers at all, when it's a sprain, just apply evenly; and compress with the palm, and if you see that applying a small straight splint helps lift the sprain, and prevents movement; and if the break is on other fingers like in the index or one of the others, apply evenly, and bind with the healthy one which follows; or you bind all together until movement occurs, or place on a splint like when you wrap; take care in restoring and arranging each dressing separately, and treat those who come with it, as I have said.
Of the broken knee
The bone of the knee is often broken, and one can see it many times as it turns in front and behind; and the restoration happens when one ties above the breakage .1., with a band around the fracture, and .1. other underneath. And the wounds lie on this face, then each minister extends his link to his equal part; and it is when the break is within the bone.
And if the break is close to the knee's root, one of the bands should be towards the foot and the other around the breakage. Similarly, if it's close to the elbow, then place the bands in front of the elbow, and the extension downwards; then place the sights on the bone equally with its two hands, as long as it follows its natural shape, and then apply plaster and bandage, so that if pus comes out from them there will be no leakage.
And if there is pus present, let it settle then return to your work and your treatment; the wound has been treated in that manner. It is necessary that you wrap around the wound. Use a bandage double thick in two or three layers, and discard any excess. Then bend the leg until the heel reaches the knee, and insert one long thread between the thigh and leg, underneath from the knee upwards, and guide the thread's tip through the loops above; then continue wrapping around the leg and thigh with the bandage, place a pin on top of the wound and another on the bone in the leg. Then place eight inches of silk fabric between the leg and thigh as padding to evenly distribute pressure, then begin to wrap in three or four turns around the wound. When you move above the wound, do so with less pressure; then secure two more threads that you inserted between the leg and thigh, wrapping them together at this height under the knee area, guiding their thread's tip downwards until it touches the floor; then tighten, ensuring it does not move from its place, leaving it like this, until no pus or swelling appears.
And if it happens that it dislocates, reposition it in the way we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone involved that are caught, it is proper to remove them if possible; and if it's not possible, then it is fitting to cut through the muscle, to draw out force; and treat it as we have said, until it heals.
And no time is the egg broken thus when these rods are placed inside, as in the shoulder and arm; yet still, upon making such repairs there's no harm to the patient.
Know that the egg is restored in one day, or perhaps a little less or a little more, depending on the diversity of temperaments.
from the garden alley
Know that in the garden alley there is little breaking, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, usually it's just a crack, or two small pieces, and occurs with or without injury, and one feels well about it.
And for the restoration, it is this: to place them even with what is round at their ends, until they are assembled and moved as one can; then put on plaster, and add a round wick if needed, and tighten it according to how it should be done. Next, reestablish all the arrangements we have discussed for other injuries, such as abscesses and similar occurrences; when faced with each situation, apply what is suitable until they are healed.
Of the breaking of the leg
Know that in the leg are two bones, from which one is called by right "mistletoe" and the other is called "fossil"; and there occurs any injury or breakage as it happens to the arm, and for this reason the restoration process is the same as with the arm, identically, and the procedures are all the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, then turn the leg in every direction.
And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn them forward.
And if the thick bones are broken, then you will feel and see great pain; turn them downwards. So apply extension, make them equal, and tie the bandages equally; but nevertheless, it is necessary that when there's a bad break and multiple pieces, that the extension be smaller and lighter. And lift them according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two sticks of horse hair that will cover the leg on both sides and be as long as the leg from the knee to below. Then wrap them with two bandages each above and below, and tie them in the middle; so that the leg cannot bend either to the right or to the left, and thus it is well done; and none should administer a single stick as long as the leg, made of horsehair, and place this on the leg to prevent movement. This must be done in the break where there's a wound; and move the leg each day to see if there is an abscess or any other complication; so treat it until it heals properly; and check the leg every day to ensure no further complications arise.
From bone fracture due to impact
At the ankle it does not come from fracture, but whenever there is a fracture and with bones, only stiffness occurs in various positions, and there is no force involved.
And if it happens to the bones in the foot fracture, and you see these bones stack on top of each other, place such foot mallets under the ground, like it wanted to go, and then put your foot under his where the bones are raised, press it as much as they come back to their heels; then apply plaster and bandages over it, and place a small table underneath the belly of the foot with two handbreadths filled, then tighten it towards the ankle, then wrap you in blankets around, and other things you need.
And when three or four days have passed, you should release the bandage because you will find that the bones are even, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the fingers are broken, then restore them, just as we said about the fingers of the hand; then put a splint on each broken finger according to its length, and make it slightly wider than that, then place under the splint the board I mentioned, and hold it in place; and if there are two or three or more, break them, then put one splint on each finger according to its size, wrapped in a single linen bandage, and hold the board under the point. And being at the front of the table above the belly of the patient, so that you can apply it well.
And you should not forget the other things that I said about other injuries, as we have said; and treat each incident according to how it should be done.
regarding the breaking of the bone in the hand
When the natural bone is broken in a woman's body, if it makes her appear swollen, then lean her towards the backside of her spine, and hold her by the buttocks. Then fill the natural gap with cotton, also placing it as roughly half an inch thick; then let the woman stand up, lift her back gradually, after which have her jump with the cotton filling until it reaches the opening of nature, and return the bone along with her breath; and when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has urinated, have her resume the process for seven days or a bit more: thus will the break be healed. If you see fit, take a goat bladder, tie it onto the knot with string, and stuff the entire bladder into nature; then blow forcefully through the string until the bladder is inflated internally; nature will return the break. Then fill it with cotton, leave her in this state for a few days, till she is healed.
And when the bone of the hand is broken, or if it happens to a woman, you should restore it in this manner as we have described for the hip bone; and these breaks do not go unnoticed by those who apply their effort and use to them, and heed my book. For, break signifies more than just various positions of the right path of restoration: thus understand it therefore.
In the case of a broken penis, take an oyster shell and fill it with the penis; then wrap it tightly with bandages, and leave it for three days or somewhat longer; it will heal quickly.
Of breaking with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a break with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the leg or shoulder or similar, that they are now treated with bleeding, so that the bleedings we have mentioned bear witness.
And if the wound is healed, you should reapply vitriol, or if you don't have anything else, then restart the process of healing at the same time or on that day, or in case there are no pus discharges.
And if there are no pus discharges, let the healing continue up to the next day, until the pus is reduced. And don't touch it on the third or fourth day either, for you would be causing harmful accidents.
And if you see bone broken out on the cheekbone exposed surface, it is necessary to place it gently with your hands, in a small extension.
And if the extensions are not suitable to place evenly with your hands, you should use this iron tool that is made of metal, which has seven inches or six inches in length, and its width suits the size of the wound; for this, it's necessary for the molder to take three or four pieces, according to what they need for each treatment of broken bones; and make sure it's round but a bit thick so that it doesn't bend when you compress it on your limb during work, and be sharp in front and large at the middle forward part like this:
And it is called "palainche", because the curved bones should be placed on the top of the visible bone; and strike once until you regain your place, and they must be even against each other. And if the breakage is delicate, and the tools cannot well grasp the bone, then you must cover the tip of the bone as long as the tool can hold it.
And if you cannot return the bone back as we said before, if you have an instrument suitable for this purpose or like a scalpel or a surgeon's knife at your power; then cut that which is stuck in the hard part of the bone and small scales.
And when the bone has been returned and if there is great pain from the patient afterward, know that it's not in its natural place. If you make it to be in its proper place, then moisten with one part of a tincture of vinegar for two days, and especially if it has healed externally; do not put any ointment or other thing on the wound that would cause infection or corruption; and instead allow the healing process without causing disturbance. Once you have restored the bone, apply these measures and leave the wound open to air, covering it entirely according to its size, and take great care so that the wound is not disturbed by pressure; and many times people have done this incorrectly, resulting in either death or corrosion at some point; and let your efforts be gentle and firm compared to other injuries.
And if the wound is small or large and you doubt that harmful events might occur there as we said before, and you find pain in the limb, then it's not suitable to apply these measures; but cover externally instead of them, with hard cloths, and bind them together. And when after one day or two days you see improvement in the wound, remove whatever you have put on with vinegar, and apply a healing ointment for wounds, like the ointment tetrafarmaon and similar ones.
And you must dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at vespers, until it is healed and sound.
And the limb should be positioned so that the bone comes into contact with a slight ease.
And if the days continue and it can't heal properly at its place, be aware that there are small bone fragments causing this issue, so it is necessary for you to work on the wound with tension, and remove all these broken parts that cause pain.
And if a fistula occurs at the site or any other form of corruption, it must be treated according to what was explained in his previous chapter. And when bone is broken and exposed within the limb, such as the bones of the wrist or shoulder, or others like major limbs' bones, do not try to heal it immediately because many times this leads to death; instead let it heal naturally by itself for about 20 days or 30 days, then treat the wound if possible; and if you cannot, leave it untreated.
The burns that come from sweat
The burns often come after the healing of the wound, especially when it's close to the joint. There is much to observe in the figure of the limb; and by chance, one cannot do the natural actions with the limbs.
Take caution therefore when it comes to these fresh burns: if you administer any of the restrictive medicines such as aloes, frankincense, myrrh, sycamore bark, carob, and similar others, do so either individually or in combination with each other. Mix them with stoptive wine or enough egg or oil; then apply them in poultices on the affected area and hold them tightly but don't remove them daily. Remove it only when the nodules are gone. Or you can place it under a well-made piece of plaster because the property of plaster is such that it clears all swellings above limbs. If the nodulation turns into hardness like stone, requiring extraction, do so after applying a dressing until healed.
When the breaking of the bone is restored, and after that the limbs are weak and subtle, this happens for many reasons: due to which it was bound too tight, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and could not reach the member's necessities; or due to excessive bleeding; or due to excess movements, not in its time; or due to having little blood in his body, if it is weak.
And the treatment involves making the patient eat their medicine and make their body tender until the pus multiplies within them; then they provide baths and give them joy and rest. Then apply wax to the limb so that the wax attracts to the large pus, and rinse it frequently with warm water until the pus corresponds to the limb. And restore its natural figure.
The limb is bent after the injury.
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and if the bone was broken apart, then the form of the member becomes ugly. Nonetheless, it does not lose its natural function: nor should one believe those who say that we must break the whole limb anew; many people have done this in our land; these operations are criticized, and lead to great harms, even death. Still, if the fractures and injuries are fresh, then they should be soothed with hot water or medicines that soften tissues such as leaves of vismalve, roots, and mallow flowers and similar things. Then apply a moistening plaster made in this way; or take greased figs, grind them with corn meal, and other remedies that diminish the heat, and make a moistening plaster from these substances. Alternatively, you may use well-prepared yarrow, mix it with fat from geese liver or oil of sesame, and apply this as a plaster. Or take greasy figs, grind them with bran, and similar medicines to decrease the heat, and prepare a moistening plaster using these ingredients.
And always rub the dislocation with wet hands continuously and for a long time. And administer movements to the limb every hour.
And if the twisting is old and hardened, like bone, and requires being treated with metal tools, then up to the bone if it's necessary, you should make incisions delicately; and consider and apply study in the treatment.
This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
When dislocation happens to none, if it fits now to bring back without hesitation.
For if you delay, they swell the limbs, and by chance one might try to return it at its original place; for this does not suit that you move them in their swollen state: many times brought about pus and other pains.
If this happens, have the patient see a surgeon, then let them stay until all the pus has subsided; afterwards immerse the limb in hot water and oil, then gently manipulate it, and treat each limb as their treatment would occur naturally in its place.
And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder dislocations up to this point.
of the jaw
It happens that the jaws are dislocated downward, and the dislocations of both jaws occur in two ways: either they are somewhat ossified at their locations, and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the feet, causing saliva from the mouth to spill out, unable to hold it, nor close his mouth, and wrap his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it can return through various dispositions.
And if it's whole and completed, you should reset it quickly without hesitation;
And in such a way that the ministers cut on the chief of the patient, and they push one of their fingers into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth; if the dislocation is from 2 parts; and the other hand should be outside, to keep it even; and command the patient to soften his jaws, and move them in all directions.
And the fingers should remain evenly placed, until they reattach in its place.
And if they return to be sore, just as when the two jaws are together, should you use hot water and oil, so long as lightly moving them; do not overly force their movement back in place, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the disease closes well to be softened, then place wet cloths as wads in a poultice made from rose oil and beeswax, then bind it lightly with moist threads;
And let the disease rest on its back, and keep its head between two cushions, so that it does not move to either side or strain itself, but please have light food given until the pains subside, and secure the jaws.
And then let him chew lightly, and does not struggle with opening the mouth for eating and drinking, until the mandible is well set and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be correctly placed within an hour and are not turning back to their original position, it leads to fevers and habitual swelling, and sometimes stomach upset, and occasionally vomiting of pure liquid.
And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times, it has caused death in eight days for the one who experienced it.
from the forcible act or action
The forces cannot relieve from within the middle of the ribcage and down to the backside; it is dislocated only once outward, and one feels this well indeed.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; then press onto the back as if with your palm, and it will return; then place them on the platter and cover with a cloth, and support them;
And the shoulder that is toward the knife cannot be reset; if not, and if it is reset only once, then you must set it back to its place as we have said; then place them on the platter and with the bolster, and support them, and instruct the patient to rest until they are sane.
And similarly, the shoulder of the back is returned when it has been removed from its place.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: of which one is that it dislocates at the part of the elbow towards the back; and the second is at the part below the knee; and by chance dislocates at the part above, and this happens rarely;
And it does not dislocate behind in the shoulder, nor inside through the nerves; and many times dislocates from below towards the elbow, especially for those who have little flesh, because with these jumps happens quickly; for those who have enough flesh, it jumps to points, and returns to points.
And by chance happens to some men a blow or fracture, and inflames the shoulder with an abscess, and fears that it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore, you must experiment on it as long as you are certain; then begin the treatment.
And once recognized the dislocation when it is pushed towards the shoulder blade, and you'll notice a clear distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their obvious diversity among them; And you will find a hollow at the shoulder blade's head, and from the shoulder to the neck, as if it were an eye; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move it with any motions;
And similarly, if it is dislocated upwards but not hidden, because you find it clearly at the neck;
In this manner of dislocation, it can only be corrected when it is new or if the child is small.
The method is for the ministers to lift their hand from the malady above, then place their hands on the shoulder blade, and lift the joint up strongly towards its natural position; and the ministers lift their hand, extend it upwards, then put it beneath; if it comes quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the attendant should apply soothing and relaxing treatments, such as decoction of fennel and fenugreek and marjoram in hot water, and it should be applied.
Then cover the patient's back with a cloth, and place on the shoulder blade a pad of even thickness, neither too soft nor too hard. Then put the heel under the pad, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and pull the hand towards the malady.
And there are other operations that require the surgeon to keep the patient's head still so it doesn't move downwards. The shoulder is now moving back into place naturally, and if you observe while doing this task in the way I describe:
And ensure the place is as spacious as possible than that of the patient's body; and have them facing towards their side, and push the shoulder down near to the ribcage, and lift up the ribcage, so that the back leans backwards into an 'A' shape, making sure the muscles hang downwards. And there are other operations that require pulling the hand towards the back of the body moving downwards towards the belly. And if the muscles are too light, place something heavy on them and let the dislocation return now.
And there is also another way to do this: and you should put .i. long stick in the ground, so that the shoulder is positioned as such as .i. pistol, and it shouldn't be too big or too round; Then place over the wound, but with a cloth under it, and let the wound stay as long as the length of the stick; then extend your hand down from the other side in formation, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if she does not wish to return with all these things that we have said, then perform this cure: take two forearms of strong ones and four large ribs, which have the head round so it can enter halfway onto the base, according to this shape:
Then tie the stick where the stick is covered with cloth underneath, so that the stick does not bruise the wound, then place it on the base under the wound; and extend your arm along the stick from its length, and tie the support on the stick, and the arm at the hand's head, then place the arm on one of a pitchfork's prongs of as wide width, and keep your hands down, and leave the body hanging from another side: the joint will return now.
And when it is like this, in any manner, if you need to place an equal wool stick on the shoulder socket, then put the plaster covered with powdered mill grinding on top of this, along with incense and egg yolk butter spread all over the shoulder and around it. Then hold the addition from under the shoulder joint, tie the link onto the plaster, wrap your hands around its neck, and let the hands remain like this.
It is necessary that he chew little at first, until the limbs are strengthened, for it will heal more quickly; and then chew more after five days or seven, and move it; and if it is firm and not made soft, it is healed.
And if the joint is loose due to moisture that has caused it, or for some other reason, you should apply fire cautery three times, as was detailed in the chapter about cauteries previously.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not stay, and cannot lift your arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut, stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be placed in its place.
The dislocation that is near the buttocks, and breasts, or behind, if it is caused by pushing, stretching of hands, and administration in another place; and treat as long as it's clean.
And if after the healing comes swelling in the limb, and prolonged movements, then use hot baths many times, until that swelling is relieved, and it returns to its first natural state.
From the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated by points and comes back by points; it has been dislocated from all sides, even in front and behind; such a dislocation cannot be fully restored because one can clearly see and feel its extent; and it's dislocated according to every figure. And when you join the shoulder bone with the healthy part, you can see it clearly. Because the joint is rough, and the arm cannot bend or touch its shoulder in any way.
It is necessary to reset it this way that the abscess is opened and heals, for if it were left closed after incision, it would be painful to try and reposition; and by chance it cannot be fully returned in all ways, even when it's behind; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and by chance death comes from it.
And this restoration is as follows: when you can bring it back to its position, extend his/her hand with both of your hands; and the arms should be spread out, and the hands guided towards the elbow from front to back, backwards and forwards, and push the joint towards its socket or at the base of the palm until it returns to its place.
And if there's a dislocation in front, it returns when they double their hand onto the other hand, and push with the blade at the base of the palm where the dislocation occurs.
And if it doesn't return to its place, apply strong extension; and have both of you extend the arm and press with your hands, so that it does not move during extension. Then turn the arm from each side, then when you have covered it with a long and wide double sheet;
And when the eyes apply to join the joint with their hand, if they smear some oil to soften the joint, then force the joint back into place until it heals;
And when it's at the shoulder, if she places dry plaster with egg white on top, holds it in place firmly, and allows the arm to hang down by the side of the body for some days, then releases the joint.
And if the joint is firmly in its place, then release the ligament and leave it as is; and if you see that the joint is not properly fixed, reapply the plaster and the ligament, leaving it like this for a few more days until it's firmly set; then release it.
And if it feels swollen after the reset of the joint, and it moves again, then bathe and rub well, pressing until it is relieved; or you put a layer of fatty lamb's wool on the joint, leave it for one day and night, then apply heat, and let it soak in water. And when they sweat, rub the joint gently, then place the limb on ice, and then in water; and thus do this two times or three times until it heals; and if you see fit, apply moistened calf's milk heated with butter to it, and leave it there; if it returns to its position.
The dislocation of the hand
The hand joint is dislocated, and the return is lighter than with other joints. Whenever this happens, it is necessary to restore it quickly in the same way that it was dislocated, so that the limb swells or an abscess forms.
And the process is as follows: you place your hand on the ailing part of the body onto a table, extend your assistant's hand, and align their view with it, so that they can place their palm at the appearance of the joint, and hold it until it resets.
Always ensure that you are checking if it is correctly in place; then have the patient place the back of their hand on a table during extension and repositioning. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then have the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and align your view with that part of the joint. If it returns to its position now, it is correctly done.
If not so, if one strains with plaster soothing remedies until an abscess is released, then they should leave it there without beginning anew.
And if one cannot bear it, and you are unable to place it back in its rightful position after some days, if the dislocated joint remains deformed;
And it does no harm to the patient so long as their hands are in a state of rest, and they cannot strain anything at all: thus you will know that a nerve is cut or an artery; if there is no other reason than to apply a cautery when possible in such cases, and by chance this brings about no other remedy.
And when the hands are in place, apply the plaster that we have mentioned, then strain and leave it for five days, then release and leave it as such.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no soreness, with hot water, and rub until it becomes warm.
of the dislocation of the fingers
Neither are the fingers of the hand dislocated from each other, nor on the back of the palm or the belly;
Therefore keep the fingers together and prevent the dislocation from occurring in your pockets until it heals. Then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is separated.
And let it be for two days, and then equalize it on the third day; and fasten him if needed, as we have said, and release him by the evening, make him move and re-fasten him in the morning; and repeat this process until it is snug.
And do this likewise, if it dislocates in the back of the hand, and do so as you did before, until it is properly aligned; and do this likewise, when it dislocates on the other side.
Doing the realignment of the ankle and back.
When the ankle or back is dislocated, or if there are multiple dislocations, without any treatment, as time hastens the disease of the patient.
And the symptoms are such that the expulsions jump out of their own will, not being able to hold them in, and many times they soften any member, or both cheeks, or the two arms or one.
And it often happens that the buttocks become four parts; that which becomes stiff at the back is called "gibbousness".
The treatment is that you should address the issue if it originated in childhood: if there is no remedy or healing at all.
And the one that comes from childbirth, impacts or similar situations, according to old ways of treatment with big words, it doesn't bring any substantial benefit;
However, I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the groin area which comes before the belly, none has any health or benefit;
And also that which goes straight to the two ribs, and one cannot cure anything except what is properly coming to the back, as I say;
And it is that the wound should extend on its face in one length evenly, and have tension over him, so it does not blister;
Then place one ember at the head on earth and one other at the feet, then tie a band around all the armpits under the disease, and another one at the hips, knees, and ankles.
and two men must handle the bands, one to each head and the others at the feet, amidst the two embers;
and they should be well closed, the ember as we have said, and the doctor puts her palms on the earth mound, until she regains consciousness.
And if she doesn't recover from this treatment, take a plank of three arms long and place it under the neck, and make sure the patient's body is on the side, then rest the head of the plank under the neck, then put the center of the board on the earth mound; And place his eyes on the other end of the table's edge, and press firmly until he regains consciousness at its spot; and if possible, do it at the wrist which turns in the hand.
And place two needles at the point of your hand on one side of the patient's eye, and between their feet, with each needle spaced by an arm's length in front and behind them.
And place one inch of charcoal in each needle, or the part that turns at the wrist, and make sure the needles are firmly planted in the ground so they don't move; and between each pair of two needles, place a turning needle, according to where the joints turn, and place two smaller turning needles of an arm's length apart, for turning the wrist.
Then tie the ligature that is between the wrists at the wrist towards the elbow, and the other ligature towards their feet on the opposite wrist, and each servant turns his wrist along the entire ligature, and the master makes the spine equal as we have said.
And when they are even, place a desiccating plaster on it with abundance of egg, and then coat it, and apply the essence from a tablet of 1.5 inches long, that purges the swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a bandage as we have said, and the patient uses the healing process subtly until they are sound;
And if nothing comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the essence that we have said previously; and every time one is administered, a piece of flax is given.
And if it happens that the appearance comes at the end of the spine in the back, and you must be careful that it is dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, so there should not be any assumption about it: by chance it would bring death.
Regarding hip dislocations,
Know that the joints of the hip and those of the shoulder only admit dislocations, not fractures like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, in front and behind; and more inside than outside, with less dislocation forward and backward.
And the knowledge of its dislocation from inside is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and displays more bend in the diseased knee than the healthy one, and cannot make the diseased knee bend backward. And it is true that the limbs become swollen below due to abscesses, because the shoulder of the thigh comes into contact there.
And the sign of him who approaches the fire, so this event is contrary to what came before.
And the signs of him who comes to face it, so these events are well with his leg according to its completion; nonetheless, he does not double bend the knee without pain, and if you try to make him walk, he cannot do so beforehand, and retains his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, he passes on his heel.
And the signs of him who comes to face it from behind, so he cannot spread his knee or bend double, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the shoulder blades are sore on the back above the hips.
The remedies for this sign of dislocation are that if it is an old dislocation and remains in its position without any treatment, then there should be no assumption about it; and it must not have the appearance of self-correction.
And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, there are four ways to perform a dislocation: if you rush and return the joint, stretch it both inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, no further treatment is needed.
And if it does not return in this manner, you should apply one strong remedy and firmly hold the leg with both hands, or at a ligature placed above the knee; And another remedy should extend your hand over in such a way that he pushes his hands beyond his knees, then pulls it with a strong force at the thigh; and one else holds the head of the ligature;
And stretch both up and down at once until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and stays hanging.
This method of extension applies to four similar situations, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is correct.
But if not, it's necessary to apply treatment according to its appearance. If the dislocation is in the chest cavity, you should lift the body part onto a healthy side, then place the bandage at the root of the arm, and above the ribs, then secure the bandage towards the corner near the heart and against the muscle;
Then take hold of another assistant with your arms and embrace the large part of the injured arm, stretching it upwards in this manner: if it returns to its place now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this way as we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two legs of the patient together with a strong bandage around both heels and both knees, and so that the diseased leg extends two feet longer than the others;
Then have it suspended from the top of a staff, and two feet above the ground; then instruct one minister to hold the head of the leg, and let other ministers hang with the patient, who will hold firmly around the leg, as the joint is now returning quickly.
And when dislocation is at the front, if you place the patient down as we said for those with good elasticity, and apply a bandage to the diseased leg properly, and around the foot as well.
Then place two iron points, one on the head and one elsewhere on the body. Then insert an iron point between his thighs at the patient's groin in the form; And apply damp cloths around him, so that he doesn't blister the patient, then extend each physician towards him, and place his face level with his hand at the site of dislocation.
If it comes back, that's good. If not, place him on a table and press him in this way as we have said in the case of gastritis, and let the patient lie on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it must be extended immediately with the affected leg, as I have said; and place his face towards his pain being on the side of the affected arm, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards to the knee.
And if the dislocations are at the back, it does not suit to extend the patient's body downwards or raise them up from the ground, but they should be positioned as when their buttocks were dislocated backwards, just like we said about lying on the two buttocks. And if it's at their face, and they are extended in the way we have said previously, and one should apply pressure to the joint on the table;
And it's right when the patient stretches their legs and they are equal; then adjust the hips, and place the plaster, and apply a bind with a gaiter, so that the buttocks do not move.
And let them rest for three days or four, then release them and place the plaster; and if you see that they are equal, apply pressure as before, and leave them for another three days; then release them and allow them to walk properly, until the limb is strengthened.
Regarding shoulder dislocation due to joint displacement,
The knee can be dislocated in three ways: to understand this, it is within and without, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
And the signs for this are to instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee. If they cannot straighten it at the knee, you can tell that they have dislocated their knee.
And the restoration of all this is to get the patient to sit up straight and extend their leg if they can. Place your back against their buttocks and place their foot on yours.
Then take his thigh with your hands and pull it between your fingers, then bend the two ribs of the thigh. And some other assistants spread his foot out until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he has easily straightened his leg at his knee;
and place the plaster there, and warm his knee with the leg, and bind them together tightly for one or two days, then release him; and don't disturb the patient's limbs until they are strengthened.
And if the limbs are not yet well, apply strong extension therapy, as we have said in treating the hip, until they recover.
Of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are never fully set and always partially dislocated, both inside and outside.
And the signs of this are that the ankle swells, and tends forward to the part where it is dislocated:
The retraction happens quickly, and one should gently extend its hand to feel it only when it's set properly.
And when it is released completely, it should be that you make the patient stand straight, and hold them by two assistants from the feet, above the ankle;
then pull their leg towards you with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then straighten them up, and firmly hold their foot at the top;
and do this twice, as we have said, by holding and pulling their foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, start the procedure again because it will return.
and if it cannot return like that, then have them lie on their back facing the ground, and stick one stake firmly into the earth between their buttocks, and tie a cloth around them so they don't hurt themselves.
Then the surgeons cleanse his foot, and some other surgeons extend his legs to his hands or to one elbow, so that he ties them around the neck of the leg. Then extend each surgeon equally, and make the passes so they remain between the thighs of the patient for retaining the patient when they are extended.
Then fix the mirrors equally to his hands, and some other surgeons operate on the healthy leg at the knee joint, and the dislocated limb will return promptly.
And when it is at the right point, place the dressing and bandage on top, then firmly tighten them, and bind the leg to the body, and guard the nerves that are behind the ankle, so the bandages are not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the joints loosen, force them back in; then release it on the third day or after a quarter of the duration, and keep it moving to inform the patient for four days; And if it goes beyond this period, it does not mean that the dislocation will not occur again.
And if abscesses are put on and they come out, it is necessary that you soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, while they are sound.
This line seems to be incomplete or improperly formatted in the provided text. In context of a medieval medical treatise, "des dois" might potentially translate to something like "of the duties" if it's part of a larger sentence discussing responsibilities or obligations related to healing and care. However, without more context or additional lines surrounding this fragment, its exact meaning is unclear. The full sentence would provide better insight into its precise content and translation.
When both shoulders are dislocated, if they can be beautifully extended through laborious effort, it is a simple matter.
And if the shoulders are dislocated in any chest or back joint, you should make the patient lie on his full length or on a table completely straightened outwards, and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly until he regains it.
And when they are level and there is nothing opening, you should place under the sole of your foot a board for the shoulders, then press with force and leave him alone for three days, then reset him; and let him rest until he feels well.
regarding injuries and dislocations together
When injury comes with dislocation, and one seeks to restore it, many times it occurs that the patient dies.
if you are not presumptuous in treatment, if you do not possess knowledge of the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, do not be reckless.
and begin with soothing things for abscess drainage, and let the patient's fate be in God's hands, if you do not see hope of recovery; and when you see hope, immediately reset the limb to its place, so that the abscesses drain and heal.
And when limbs are in their place, administer soothing treatments for abscesses and incisions, and properly treat the wound, according to what should be done, with dried ointments.
And if there's fracture accompanying the dislocation, and small bones are broken, set them back in place, and do what we've advised for simple illnesses.
And refrain from entering into the path of fear, according to what I've said, for you must act according to your creator and with knowledge of your weapon and body. Amen.
