For you, dear children, I have completed this book which is the conclusion of the art of medicine, and have ended it through its explanations and by making its statements. And I was shown in my vision that I would complete it with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is practiced in our region and has been removed everywhere, it has lost its science and has been stripped down, and nothing remains from what was outside except for the small descriptions in books by ancient times that the hands have moved. And thus error and vanity have arisen, and minds are closed, and the science has been distanced away.
It seems to me that I should revive this treatise together with the order of this medical text according to the way of exposition and disclosure and abbreviation; and will come together with the forms of iron cautery tools, and other working instruments along with the adjustment of their declaration and preparation, exactly as it is necessary.
And because there are no skilled doctors to be found in our time, the art of medicine has become lost. And it is necessary for the one who intervenes to master anatomy science as Galen says, so long as they know how to judge the members, their forms and connections, separations of tendons, and have knowledge about bones, nerves and sinews, including the number of bones, their arrangement and movement, as well as the veins that move and those that are stationary, and understand where their outlets are.
And it was stated by Hippocrates that not with nothing but with something is much, and not with one but with many in the art of hands.
We will tell you at the beginning of this book that if someone does not understand what has been said before, they might make mistakes and deceive people; just as I have seen many times in those who interfere with this knowledge and abandon their studies.
For I saw a fool who cauterized one of the lymph nodes or neck of a woman, and burned the blood vessels in her neck; because so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another barber who treated a stone in an old man's kidney, and the stone was large; so he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died after three days.
And I have already been called to draw out this, and see the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and indeed if it was cut for him he would die.
And I saw another case where I treated a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and along with the breaking there was an injury. And these doctors full of ignorance allowed the breaking to occur over the injury as though it were healed by strong luck, and did not drain at all from the injury; and left him like that for one month; and commanded him not to disturb it again; and waited thus until his leg was completely swollen and his toes and suffered destruction.
I have been called to come to him, and I hurried to come to relieve his leg; and when I heard that it was relieved so smoothly and did not feel any pain.
But every pathway of corruption had already been confirmed or within the body and could not be cured; and the process of decay continued throughout the body as long as the limbs were completely lost.
And see one other place where an abscess was flattened out, and then it swelled up due to the wickedness of its lordess.
For a boil, when it is filled with melancholic humor, it should not be touched by iron if it isn't in such a position that one can remove all the corrupted parts.
And for this reason, dear children, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: meaning, the task where there is danger in multiple conditions; and I will show you within each part of this book where it has risk and danger.
Because it is necessary for you to remember this, so that others do not speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in caution, and treat your illnesses lightly yet firmly, and use the best path so that through the grace of God you come to salvation and become fortunate; and leave the terrifying diseases without complaint for healing; and remove from yourself those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can come from this world to glory on the other side.
Galen states in some of his admonishments: "Do not take any illness as bad, lest you be called a foolish one by others."
I have written this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and the chapters are arranged from head to stone; and about the forms of instruments, and the metals of cautery, and all that is necessary for the operation.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are arranged and discuss the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is arranged from head to stone, and discusses the forms of instruments.
Just as we recall our work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of each remedy and its harm for each constitution.
I state that the qualities of aid, and harm, are the longest word and most subtle science and secrets they respond to. And many wise people spoke about this, agreeing with it; and they barely allow me to understand them because I fear their lengthiness.
I say that the fire cautery is universally applicable to all constitutions where there is matter, for there are two constitutions: namely, a warm constitution with matter, and a dry constitution with matter.
In the warm and dry combined constitutions with matter, they devised something and said that the fire cautery is great help; and another group said the opposite: that the fire cautery only works for diseases originating from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot and should not be treated with hot diseases by heat or drying. And this man who says otherwise, that the cautery provides great help to hot and dry illnesses that come into bodies. For when you compare the body of the person and their moisture to the constitution of fire, you find that the body is cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it true on every occasion through experimentation.
And every way, do not interfere with it except the one who has proven it, and who knows through long usage the art of cautery, and the variety of human complexion, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and space during treatment; we have no fear from other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all these things gathered together and agreed with the cautery.
And know, children, that a combined fire cautery has secrets of healing and offers greater benefit than a burning medicine cautery.
For fire is simple, and does not come forth from any other member except the one being cooked, and it harms no other limb if you do not name it.
The burning medicines spread from one member to another by removing, and bring diseases of injury healing; and by chance the patient gets the ailment.
Fire due to its height and due to the goodness of its substance does not cause this unless there is excess.
And I have found this through experience and the length of service and study that I've put into the art, which aligns with the truth of things; and because of this, I apologize for the length of my words, as I do not wish to withhold the secret of fire or the quality of its work, how it relieves diseases from the body, just as the philosopher explains in demonstrating. May you receive it in your thoughts.
And know, child, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be performed, and studied prayers.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, for the nuisances occurring are reduced by the aid of the fire cautery; and also if the cauterizations are for necessary pains that cannot wait until a greater evil befalls the limb.
And never think, foolish child, like those who misunderstand; for a disease cured by cauterization has no return. And they say it this way: but it is not as they believe, because cauterizations are merely medicine that alters the complexion and dries up fluids which cause pain, and is worth more than medicine due to its speed in enhancing strength, and due to the virtue of its work and its sovereignty.
And know that disease can come at any time according to the constitution of the body and the nature of the illness and its virtue; and they are gathered in him the superfluities due to the intake of food and similar things, unless cauterization is given when there is little excess and moisture, such as with cauterizations for pain, and similar matters, so that this kind of pain does not recur; but it happens rarely.
And very few people understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it's clear to see; but they don't believe that cauterization can be effective after medicine. But their understanding is false, as cauterization is the last resort in medicine because when our methods for cures do not work in any disease, then we administer our cauterizer, and it works. Therefore, it's true that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of others who misunderstand.
The old ones said that gold cauterizing tools are better than those made of iron, and they mentioned this only because of the quality of gold and the high status of its substance; and they stated that gold cautery blades do not cause infection, but that is not visible since I have experienced it myself, and found out that it can indeed cause infection in some individuals; and gold cauterizing tools are better than iron ones, as they declared.
And still, when you heat the gold instrument, you do not realize it by the color of the gold, and it gets instantly cooled off; and if it is heated too much; then put it in fire; and thus there should be enough prevention.
And for this, we use our metal cautery that we have adapted to our work.
So you should order this chapter about the shoulder until it reaches the elbow, for the sake of making it easier to find.
The olive cauterizer
A cautery is useful against moisture and cold near the head. There are two of these that we perform due to the cause of an illness called 'soda', and through the influence of many humors descending from the eyes, ears, and through a multitude of dreams, toothache, throat pain, and especially for all diseases coming from cold such as paralysis, soda poisoning, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The shape of this cautery is such that the patient's body is purged by dissolving medicine, modifying the head three times or four times, depending on how the virtues and heat and custom to which the patient can withstand it; then wash the head with the dissolved medicine.
Then place their hands together between your palms and place your hands on the tip of his nose. After placing the root of your palm against the root of his nose between his two nostrils; and when your middle fingers reach, if it bleeds through, then warm the cautery called "olivare", which has this form:
And place it in its original location with ink, and as you lower and adjust your hand little by little while turning it around; then lift your hand alone, and check the bone if you see a small dot of .i. sol; and if you don't see it, continue using the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take .i. poc of flour, and place damp cotton inside, and apply it to the site, and leave it there for .iij. days; after that put on a moist cream in butter; and leave it on until the scab is removed; afterwards treat the wound with ointment called 'tetrafarmaçon', until it heals.
And if someone said that when a wound remains open longer, the more it purges out pus; and for this reason, movement is advised.
And they said that one should leave the cautery for so long that part of the bone is burned, and then restart with what has been burned by the bone, and treat it.
And it says that for the fire cautery, one should let it remain there and press so hard that you lift as wide as two small cones like those women place in their bellies because fluids are forced out; and should one leave the wound open for a long time; after this, one must clean and bind it.
And these two ways of cauterization do not seem to me to be good for everything, except when there is a flow of fear; and I think that I should leave them. For the limbs are weakened by continuous discharge from nature as we have shown in other members; and even when the limb of disease is weak by nature, and my first sign of cauterization is more saved and healed to me, and I use this method generally thus assemble health.
of the old pain in the head
When throughout the whole head comes chronic pain and lasts long, then one should use the patient's herbs and pills that are called "cochie", and treatments for clearing the head and ears and bandages; and if one applies to them the cautery as we have said before, and it proves beneficial.
Take care that the patient's head is of strong nature and not too cold; then apply the cautery over the spot where we have spoken above for a moment.
After make the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and do one more cautery at the place that is called "vasselz"; and use two leu's in which you put suction cups; and ease your hand so that you don't touch until the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery compared to others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it should be known that the cauteries on the horns are more delicate than those done for half the middle of the head, and this is their shape.
Of the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hair grow long and even; and if they pierce at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow. When sudden pain occurs in part of the head, and the disease extends up to the eye, and the head is cleansed by purifying medicines, and various other treatments that I mentioned in the division of diseases were performed, but none helped: then he should apply cautery according to two methods, namely using an ague medicine and fire.
The application of the ague medicine cautery involves taking one spoonful of oil and applying it with a bandage to two parts of each head, in such a way that you can place the spoonful of oil on the skin; then press and hold well for about 12 hours, and then release and remove the garlic. Leave the wound like this for 2 days or 3. Then apply a poultice with butter until pain disappears.
After the oil treatment as long as it's clean; and if you see that you should use some of those burning medicines I have written or in the tenth treatise on burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done like this way. Heat up the form of the iron that is as follows:
And call it "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a bell where it has .i. point of curvature, and in the middle there's a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and gently move the iron for a bit, until half of the thickness of the wound is burned; then lift your hand to prevent the artery from burning, allowing blood flow, and apply an abundance of bleeding.
After that, put cotton in the wound as a bandage and keep it on for three days; then replace with damp cotton soaked in butter, and continue treating the wound with oil until it is clean. If you wish to cauterize this headache with the iron cautery which is called 'cultellare', do so at its entire point, but beware not to cover the artery in this headache as it is not old.
Of migraine
When you treat migraine as we have discussed in the divisions of diseases before, and if there is no improvement, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine do not suit it, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and do this by placing it along the limb where a line halfway between half an inch and one inch long, and hold your hand steady once, and pull gently so as not to cut the artery and stop when reaching the bone; and watch out for the jaw that closes when eating, make sure only the mouth moves and no spasms affect the patient, and be cautious of bleeding from the artery if it is cut, or cutting too much and similarly for those who are inexperienced and untested; leave the work halfway done, but I will tell you how to stop bleeding once the artery has been cut, and show you its proper place in this book.
And if you see that these cauteries do not suit the illness and the patient is suffering, apply them to the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and when you notice this, administer the cauterizing instrument that we've mentioned in the chapter on extraction of arteries with a two-edged cauterizer; and these are better than others and more helpful.
of the pain of the ear from cold
When pain from cold comes to the ear, and there have been operations with dissolving medicines and other treatments we mentioned in this division, if the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called 'pints', as shown here:
After applying the cautery to all around the ear, or around both of them where the pain is held in, remove it slightly from the root of the ear after you have indicated its place. Place ten pints around each ear; treat the area until it becomes healthy.
of the torment of the mouth
Pain that should be treated with a cautery does not include those that move by flemmings, as we have stated in the divisions of diseases; and no cautery should be done on symptoms that come from dryness and pus of nerves.
When you treat this instance of pain that moves by flemmings from water and the purging of head and gargling, and when it fails, then it should be that you apply the heat of .iij. cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little further on the temple, and the third in fitting the .ij. lips; and put the cautery where health opens up, and make it cauterize the area above the ear near a bit under the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as an inch; and let the cautery burn there until half of the flesh is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
And there is the appearance of surgical pain as we placed before, but it's a bit more subtle; you should have the knife slightly larger; after treating the limb as I said previously, until it becomes healthy.
When dealing with an old apoplexy and treating it as we have said, if the patient does not benefit, and the sick has fever, then do this: four cauterizations: two on each of the two horns above the head, and one underneath the head, and one in the region known as 'vasselz' as previously mentioned. Lastly, perform a cautery near the mouth of the stomach; and treat it similarly to how we have said before.
of liturgy
For this illness, you should give the patient large pills and medicines that facilitate the brain's function; after that, let the doctor remove everything on top of the patient's head, and then apply the sulfur plaster to the back part of the head. And here is how to perform a cautery: do it as I have said.
If it's healed like this, that's good; and if not, do the following: three times apply a heat on descending from the head to the collarbone, leaving an interval of about two fingers between each application; treat as with others. If you see the need for adjustment after doing so and there is pain in the flesh, apply one heat in the middle. If further treatment is needed, do it twice more on both sides until it's healed; and use the heats known as "olive-shaped", as I've mentioned before.
from cold of the head It is necessary that the head be cleaned of old scabs and what we have previously mentioned. After rubbing the head with a warm compress, then apply heat to the flesh, and on each horn of the head, and twice behind and three times on the spine below the collarbone; if you need more treatment and the area is moist and there's pain, and the illness persists, then apply four heats on the spine of the back. Let it sit until the most tender part is well dried, then lift your hand; after this, treat it until healed, and use the heat method known as "olive-shaped", as we have mentioned before.
Of the cautery
The epileptics should only use a cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with years of other treatments that we have mentioned in the section where the sick body is large and suffers from lack of medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot endure this treatment, make them gargle and chew often with good meats; after that they take their head in the middle, and I do as I have said for one dose of cautery, and another on the vein, and on each horn; and if the body is large and suffering, make them receive cauterizations like what I have told about those who are paralyzed and have softening of limbs, on the spinal column in back and neck, and let the olive wood cauterization be as I have said.
And if the body is a child, make one delicate cautery according to this manner:
When due to the cause of melancholy are excesses or fluids corrupted and large phlegm, then apply the partial cautery we have described to those who suffer from paralysis.
And if due to the cause of melancholy are the excesses declining into melancholy and is there moisture in the body that affects the skin, then let him drink something so that the brain may be cleansed, as was described before in the division.
After obtaining the lymph from the body; afterwards make one and a half lin thread well made, as one circle, place it inside the lymph; and if there are any irregularities in the lymph, ensure they settle down and maintain proper support from all sides; after that present the liniment, mix it with old burberry butter; and heat it over fire until it can be tolerated by those who might be susceptible to heat; afterwards remove the circle through its opening while inside the body, and let it cool down; and do this once every week for a lymph each time with another good administration, until they are well.
If you see that the person is being cauterized by making several points across the whole area of the cautery. This method moistens the brain greatly; and then place wet cotton, butter, and gelatin fat on it.
of the fear of the eyes When fear comes first for the eyes due to the symptoms I have mentioned in the division, then begin and continue to make the patient consume something that purifies the head, keeps him away from all moisture, and makes him sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
After he commands about his head and makes him cauterize it, and makes two cauterizations on the two temples where his fear begins to descend along with the fear of both eyes together, or when his fear descends in one eye; and treat all the cauterizations for all the veins and arteries that are around the brain, and make them cauterize long according to the width of the temple; and beware of blood clotting, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with a piece as you can.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions using the cautery, how to apply it; and one should never perform a cautery or cauterize between the two bones behind.
of the two paths of tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed, and located on the veins, or beneath the arteries that are visible underneath the surface at the forehead; and one sees that they result from excesses of cold humors, then apply the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this discussion: .i. on the forehead, and .ij. cauterizations above the two temples, and .ij. cauterizations or cauterize below the two bones; and if more is needed, carefully cauterize just above the eyebrows with every .i small cautery.
of the inner paths of tears through the eyes
When you apply the medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it doesn't benefit, then give the patient three nuts to drink; after this, put your hand on their head and apply a cautery or an olive oil-based balm; and do two more applications of the same cautery known as 'clavilis' on the two ears, a little over the hair. And guard yourself not to cover the artery. And this is the form of the cautery which is called 'clavilis':
When the paper of the oil is softened due to illness and moisture, then apply this type of cautery which is called 'olivare'. Here's its form:
And if you see to do two cauterizations on the two nostrils as long as they are together; and don't let your hand rest until a third part of the paper is burnt, following the method I have described.
of hair that touches the eye None of the times has it happened that the hair of the nostrils turns into the gum and touches the eye, in which case one performs cauterization according to two methods: namely by fire, or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and evenly long, then instruct the patient to be in good health; afterward depict on paper a figure that resembles a leaf of myrtle, with the beginning of the sign below the hairs. Then place moistened cotton in egg white glaze and cloves beneath the eye, then apply heat from this fire which has been shaped accordingly:
Afterwards cauterize on the figure you have drawn little by little a few times, until the burns are located in that place; and the signs of health from the work is that you see the paper pulled back, and the hairs raised to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave like this for three days, then place moistened cotton in butter until the scorching is removed; afterwards apply ointment until it heals properly.
And if after this the hairs come out, and the paper becomes soft, then restart the cautery on that same place as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and evenly so, and does not pinch the eye.
The hot medical cautery requires that the patient allow their hairs to grow long and evenly; then make a form of the bay leaf out of parchment. Then take French soap and fresh garlic from each, one unit each, grind them together finely; and do it quickly so it doesn't cool down, then spread it on the form like a bay leaf and place it on paper under the eyes. If the illness lasts only in one oil, you must open just that one, and if also in both; and put moistened cotton next to the oil as in an egg; and the patient's head be under your healthy hand with your thumb showing over the medicine, press once every time the patient senses the medicine's bite because they sense the bite similarly to fire. When you have done this for a while, then apply the medicine to your finger. And when the biting has passed, then lift your finger away from it. If you see the paper lifted as if it had been lifted by fire or incision; and if so is the case, then it's well. Should this not be the case, reapply the medicine to your finger until all of your actions are equal and your eyes set right; then place moistened cotton in butter until your knuckles are burnt, after that treat your finger with the ointment called "dyafenis" and another, until it becomes healthy.
And if it is necessary that you protect yourself well in your work by great caution so that no part of the medicine affects this. And if the paper becomes damp after, and the hair pinches into the eye, then repeat the medicine on that area which has been softened by the proper paper; just as you did before; after that it is cured until it is sane; and this is the form of the leaf of mire:
And know that the hair of men is diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints; and do not let the right way answer to him who studies this art.
of the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you are treating a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you apply the cautery method like this.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your healthy position; and hold the eyes of the head between your hands so that it doesn't move or remove its head; afterwards put moistened cotton inside an egg or garlic juice on the eye; after heat up the cautery which is divided: and over the head make like a formation of a quill pen, gather them as you are holding the cautery; if you see, should be pointed from one side to another, and if you see, it should also be like a tent; but in any case, whatever is held there serves your work.
After pressing the fistula if it has opened, and treat the putrefaction, and dry it; and if it is closed, do work on it, and remove it from the body; afterwards place a form over the cautery, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nose above the eye so that your hand doesn't make a mess; and place the cautery in the grease of the oil, and let it fester.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be good. If not, restart the cautery one more time and again as needed, and leave it for three days; afterwards place moist cotton in butter, and apply the desiccating ointment until it's healed. If forty days have passed and it isn't healed yet, then apply a corrosive water medicine until the bone is exposed; and follow this prescription according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a method for cautering fistulas that none of the old ones spoke about. Understand by fistula and open it; afterwards place inside the incision one thin camel's horn as you see fit: and I make it in quantity of three grains; and keep your hand or camel firm, so don't move the patient's body, making sure the melted wax doesn't run into their eye; then we should apply damp cotton in egg white or oil to the affected area: the wax will then heal the fistula and brings wonderful healing.
And if the fistula is healed through the cautery as we have said, that's good. If not, then it is necessary to administer pertus to the child, and bring the fistula back inside the body near the nose according to what should be done in its own proper place.
gashes on the lips Occasionally, gashes occur on the lips which are called 'whiskers', and similarly on the lips of children.
When you treat these gashes using what we have discussed in divisions, and the treatment does not help, then apply this: use a small surgical knife to shape as follows:
And place him immediately into those wounds until they open; after that, clean the wound from wax while it is still sound.
from the abscess of the throat
When an abscess appears in the root of the throat or in the lymph node, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it will first become gangrenous and inflamed, then form a fistula. You should treat it as we have instructed before regarding divisions, but if it doesn't improve, you must use the method that fits your situation.
movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and if you cure it through medicines but it doesn't work, then apply the head of the patient to your healthy position; afterwards ignite the cautery in such a manner that after its form comes back in this way, that you put one stick under the tooth; and place the cautery over the heated area, and hold your hand firmly so that the disease feels heat approaching to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and continue with the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the diseased mouth with salt water, and keep it in for an hour and then remove it.
And by this manner the moving teeth are made stable again, and the softened gum is restrained, and the moisture that had caused corruption is dried.
from toothache
When toothache comes from coldness, or there is coldness or a fever, and medical treatments do not work, then it requires the use of cautery according to these two methods: and wax cautery and fire cautery.
Wax cautery if it's like this that you take cow butter and at the tip of a iron or snail spoon; after that take cotton and wrap it on the point of a needle, then soak the butter until it melts, and place it on the painful tooth quickly and hold it until it cools down; and do this often until its powers reach the root of the tooth, and if you see wet hair and cotton in cold butter, put them on the painful tooth again, and apply hot iron for as long as the fire reaches the tooth's pain.
Fire cautery if it's like this that you take a piece of iron or snail, and make it big so that the fire doesn't reach to the edge of the wound; after heating the cautery, then the shape will come out afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the heat of the cautery cools down; do this often, because the pain will be relieved either that day or the next. And ensure that the patient fills their mouth with good butter during the process of applying the hot cautery, then quickly pull it out; and this is the form of the fire cautery:
When the scrophules are due to cold blood and moisture, and do not respond to digestion by medicine, then apply the cautery as described below. And make two openings for the fumes to exit from the other side; and place the heated cautery on the abscess once or twice, depending on how many times it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, adjust the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; apply moist cotton with butter until the pus is removed; afterwards treat with ointments and poultices until it heals.
When the moisture invades the channels of the lung, especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary to first empty the body with diuretic medicines. After that, make a cautery at the base of the throat and be careful not to come all the way up to the throat but just a little bit further. Then do another cautery at the joint between the neck and head of the spine, and it is this type of cautery called 'clavile' which we have described in front of us; and treat with ointments as we explained earlier until it heals.
Of the cautery When all and the diseases of the prostate are due to cold moist, and the patients have no fever or dryness, and it's an old disease, then apply two cauterizations on their urinary system; and one other cautery under the buttocks between the two nipples; and use the cautery called "clavile" according to its shape as described previously.
And if you see fit, perform cauterization using the entire "point" cautery as it is called, whose shape is described previously in the ear diseases; and place the points up to thirty, or beyond that. Afterward, treat the area according to what was said beforehand, and use the cauterizations at three fingers wide following this form:
And for this reason, the fire cautery is lighter, because you do it with three copies.
from the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After that, bind the wounds on his back and sides; afterwards, lift the kidney which is inside the illo-humeral joint to your left hand's side; and if the joint is dislocated internally, heat the cautery which has two handles as described here:
And apply the cautery to the leg until it penetrates up to the bone, and let the shape of the cautery consist of three applications; and for this purpose one uses a cautery with three prongs because the patterns of the cauterization result in three applications; and they follow the nerves according to the delicacy of a tent and that is the form of the cautery that has three prongs:
And once attached to this one nerve because there are seven cauterizations for it.
After placing the cautery, stir with a thread; after that, let the patient rest, and do not allow the limbs to be strained for too long until it is well settled.
And if it is reset above, with little happening in that regard, then apply the cautery on the thick part of the bone, or use only a single cautery. For the joint is closed again, and the moisture is expelled, and the patient's suffering is relieved.
The weeping cautery
The old ones said that one should perform weeping cauterizations using the root of aristolochia, and do it in this way: take a long root of aristolochia, the longest you can find, make sure it's dry, and also as thick as your nose; and soak it in oil, then heat it on fire, and cauterize once between the nostrils and neck, and twice small cauterizations just below the part under the beard; and four cauterizations between the fifth rib and sixth rib, slightly behind; and one cauterization near the navel, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and four more along the ribs under the cauterization which is between the two shoulders; and don't press your hand at all, just do it wide open as if you were smelling.
And an old saying states that no man uses a fire cautery like two razors, and heats it then places it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and when the pain leaves, as we said regarding the abscess in the liver. But in this chapter there is fear or the sick died now, or a fistula came which cannot be healed.
Of the mouse
When you treat the illness of mice in those ways that we have described through the divisions of treatment, and it does not benefit, then they try three methods of cauterization, all of which are good.
In which there is a way such that you make .iij. cauterizations, or .iiij., marking along the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver as we have said previously; and do not rush your hand all over the cautery, and may the animal be always in its back;
And another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cautery which has two handles, as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the handle that is located towards the mouse side where the blade of the disease comes from the left, and let your elevation move according to the handle, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizing should be according to the width of the body.
After burning the two lit wicks until they are pierced from the other side, then remove the cautery, and thus there will be three marks. And if you see fit, cauterize completely with a three-wicked cautery across. After the treatment when it has expelled gangrene over time, and this is better than using another previously mentioned cure.
Regarding cautery with fire, command the patient to allow the hair to grow long and even; and if they pierce at their base, hold the eyes still so they do not move until they grow.
Cautery is not suitable for dropsy, except by the method known as "asclytes". When you treat it according to our methods we've discussed in divisions, and if your treatment doesn't benefit, then you should perform three cauterizations internally along the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the kidneys, four behind the back on the spine, and one place between the thighs; and have the cauterizations quite close to the skin's heat source.
After leave the cauterization in place to heal for a long time, and do not stop the treatment of the illness after the cauterization; and recovery would hasten, and both methods (the cauterization and other treatments) would be combined with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the abdomen is like the arm we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, as was explained earlier.
Of the swelling of joints When the joints of a person who is dropsical are swollen and filled with yellow bile, it is necessary that you apply the cautery on the backside of the hand between the first and second fingers; then lift your hand away with the cautery without turning. And do not penetrate too deep inward, in such a way that it would remove the yellow bile, and use the cautery according to this shape:
After doing two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the thumb; and make the cauterization along the length, one in front of the knee cap and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauterizations alone for a long time without curing them until the yellow bile comes out; afterwards treat the other treatments as we have said.
From memory
When the belly is troubled by coldness and moisture, as long as there are restorative and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines, they cannot be cured by ordinary treatments; you see the patient suffering greatly with a green appearance from these symptoms, so perform this: apply one large stomach cautery according to what was discussed earlier or the stomach's own cautery, focusing on circulating action; then make two further applications around the mouth of subtle parts. Apply one subtle clavicle cautery and four more over the hips.
And if you see the moisture in abundance and the patient suffering, then apply a cautery to the knife, and one cautery on each heel, and two small cauteries over the stomach around the large one, because the treatment benefits when there is good help.
regarding the treatment of piles (hemorrhoids)
When the hemorrhages are at their origin or in one or more locations, and they are old with large cold and moist corrupted humors, and if they do not benefit from previous treatment as we have described in divisions, then one must apply: three cauteries; on the spine of the back, that is completely removed by probing little by little diagonally, and one cautery under the buttocks. Four doses;
And if you think that the stomach is cooled down, and the food isn't cooking properly, and you see the flanks swelling up, then the flanks have: one large cautery on the stomach, as was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the intestines to cover the whole area of the cautery; and leave the cautery in place for a long time. After that, heal the wound until it is sound.
of the thickening called "thelul"
When you are working with an artery, if it seems to be 1/2 inch thick, heat the cautery until it glows red hot, and then apply the heated surface directly over that part of the artery; hold your hand steady so that the heat reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows, causing the blood to coagulate. Perform this once or twice, and if there is more artery tissue, cauterize each section as we have said; after the use of other healing methods until they are healed. And if you apply a large heated cautery, it will provide greater assistance.
from a badly treated wound
When the patient's skin cannot tolerate cutting or opening, as we will explain in its section, if such a disease occurs that can only be cured through cauterization.
When there is no hole and it's aged with putrefaction and moisture corruption, if you test the entire area thoroughly, ensure that you know how many layers that hole has. After heating the cautery to resemble a rasor, apply the stick in the fistula according to how deep the test reached and continue the cautery until that rotten and corrupted flesh is burned out; one time, or two times, or three times depending on your requirement. And be cautious not to burn nerves or major veins. If the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or intestine, you need to take care with these areas, and do not perform this outside a surgical context, and remember that it isn't always an abscess; after treating the area until it is healed, when the pus has been drained long enough, then you know that the area is completely healed; and if the contents haven’t been drained out, know that the area is still infected, with corruption of bone at its base; in this way, as one of these we will speak about in our area.
Of kidney illness When stomach pain originates in the kidneys and is accompanied by swelling, and it affects women differently, then it's necessary to apply the cautery on both sides of the kidneys and also to use the wrist cautery that we have described; and if we cauterize in the middle, one will do three lines of cauterization, and they will provide more assistance.
From the bladder When the bladder is swollen and weak from heat and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then instruct for a cautery in the lower part of the bladder, where the body hair begins near the fingers. On each hand (right and left), and let each cautery be as long as the distance of one hand; and make one cautery behind the back, or two if needed; and let the cauteries follow the outline described beforehand.
From the marrows When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers (likely referring to menstrual cycles) are corrupted and their periods delayed; and when they come in, one feels great pain: therefore, it should be that you perform three cauterizations inside the uterus, as we have said about the bladder cautery, and two cauterizations behind the back; let the cauterizations follow the outline described previously.
From the thigh
When the oily fluids descend to the socket of the thigh, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and you find the bones at their origin points visible, then you should apply a cautery on the socket of the thigh with an appearance like one half of a circle, and mark in front of the bone inside the socket as it turns, so that the socket remains within the circle; and if you make the cauterizations like those made to the stomach.
And if you don't have access to such cauterizations, make three large ones from the olive oil, and make sure each cauterization is as perfect as all the rest; and treat it until it heals.
Regarding the pain in the thigh When pain comes in the thigh bone, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and patients are treated as we have said in the division, but the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then you should cleanse the patient of the large humors using putrid pills or other beneficial similar pills.
After you perform the cautery; and the way to do the cautery is according to two ways: that being in combination with hot medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to several methods, among which one is like this: you make three triangular cauterizations according to this form on the thigh bone, and each has a good depth and size, and there is an interval between each cautery equal to the width of two thumbs, and these are olive cauterizations; no one makes a cautery in the middle on the chief of the thigh bone, for which there are four according to this form:
And if you see fit, when cauterizing with the circular cautery as we have described in the dislocation of the thigh bone; but do it this way that all the thigh is contained within the circles, and every part of the knee's skin be burned.
And this is the method for sciatica, when pain stays in the hip, and doesn't reach up to the thigh nor to the leg. And if it reaches up to the thigh and the leg, then one should make two cauterizations there where the pain says it's staying, and one on top of the ankle three inches away, at a point slightly to the left; and the cauterizations should be with surgical instruments, and burn through the thick parts of the skin; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to about knee or almost halfway there, then they should cauterize where it feels like pain .iii. spots or .iv. at the spot called "spots" in the cauterization.
And if more work is needed, then do it; and if it appears that the pain lies between the knee and thigh, then perform cauterization with a surgical or circular instrument. Be well guarded in all your cauterizations making sure not to leave them incomplete until you burn nerves and large arteries, and do not cause the patient more harm and contraction than necessary.
And I myself have seen many who performed cauterization on the ankle up to the knee, and left them so long that the leg swelled completely, and also all the toes, causing pain and corruption in all the toes. After an internal medicine treatment, they died.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cautery on each and according to this manner. // And the surgeons said concerning the fire cautery at the hip, about which this is the method: Make one piece of iron and have it as big as a small rod or slightly less than that, and have it with interstices and be from one interstice to the other in space equal to the size of a piece of wool; and have the interstices over two parts, and they should also resemble knots, and there is one handle well made; and this is the form:
And heat it until it's completely red and smokes emit, then place it on the spot of the hip disease, and twist over the healthy side; and apply one application of this cautery once and leave it for three days; and after that, apply a poultice of butter, and keep the wound open long; cure with ointment until it heals.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery for the fear of his judgment, and we rarely see it being used; nonetheless, this is a good type of cautery, which one can tolerate, and leaves where it appears.
Of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or from percussion or due to an excess of evacuation, or due to any likeness of cold matter spread out, none of these likenesses warrant cauterization, because it is something that comes from the introduction of cold matter into the body.
It is necessary to do this after the body has been emptied of fetid pills or other likenesses, by placing marks on the back at the place where the pain is felt, three lines with an 'enche' symbol in each line, and in each line more than .v. cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the body can endure; and perform the cauterization using the type of cautery called 'points'; and if you see fit, do three or four cauterizations on the middle one in this pattern:
This disease often affects young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they become faint when they stand up and fear. And you find that in the last spine at the back and on us the appearance that comes upon the other spines.
When you see this and you watch it being treated,
So that you apply the copper cautery to each part of the spine evenly. And if you notice, then apply the fire cautery inside the spine using this instrument for two or three lines, and have the points close together. Afterward treat it as long as it is healthy according to what we've explained, and be cautious not to use the cautery when there's inflammation in the place of nerves.
of the pain in joints
When joint pain is caused by moisture spreading throughout each limb, and when pain appears in the feet, which they call "gout" properly, and when it is due to cold reasons and treated with medicines that cannot cure it, then treatment involves using cautery in this manner: make the shape of the cautery around the joint of the foot, and have the olive oil cautery look like this form:
And if there's need that you grasp on the face of the foot, should it be burned with a total cautery called "point". And if pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then burn on each knee three or four of these parts, throughout the entire olive oil-coated area; and if you need more, do so more, but don't let your hand leave until as long as it takes for the heat to be fully done.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, it administers the cautery that we have spoken of in our chapter. And if the pains are on the hands, you should mark points internally along two lines; and if there remains any pain in the back, you should cauterize each joint and the hair on the hand; and if the pains come down to elbows or shoulders, you should cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and provide remedies. For if you give him good care and purge phlegm, he will be cured by God's help.
Regarding the rupture of the uterus
When division comes about in anger, and the veins descend into the intestines it is newly so, you should know that when you are curing him or her, do not eat meat for that day; and use things that lighten the stomach, so that the wind descends from his or her abdomen. After that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to cut his fat until the veins repair themselves, then take them with your fingers, and examine around the division above the bone in the hand's wrist, and at every sign it should be similar to half a circle from above the chest; then heat up the cautery which is described here:
Until it is white and emits farts. Then remove the intestines at their root; and have his or her ministers cut their hands so they don't turn back; and work well on the thighs with the patient, and place one cushion under his or her buttocks and another under the thighs, and another near his ankles that he can touch his hands; then put the cautery over the sign at every point of your hand, and keep your hand steady while you reach towards the bone, and if you don't reach it on the first attempt, you may start again until you reach up to the bone; and take care not to let the intestines spill out when applying the heat; that you do not burn them; and that through this process, no other illnesses occur.
Know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is for nothing. And it should be that children's cautery processes are subtle according to their size and likewise larger people have cauteries as large according to theirs; after three days clean the area under the cautery of butter until all scabs are removed; afterwards treat other ointments until he/she fully recovers, and let him/her rest on his back for forty days so that the wound is well healed; it should be that they must not strain themselves long enough before getting out of bed.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, let him wear a well-made bandage and do it for another forty days; with good rest, have him work a little but avoid excessive drinking or eating, as well as loud shouting. And when following this advice, he will be completely healed. And I shall later discuss the treatment of tailors in this chapter. Of the rupture of the belly
When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, if you notice that they are not growing any more, then apply a fire cautery according to the size of the rupture, using one-third of the pot's content; proceed with the treatment as we have described. And none of the old sayings suggest that one should use a three-sided fire cautery in this form:
But the first sign is that the joint has moved and you draw a line across the width of the tear above the wound, and another below it, and hold your hand with all the fire iron over the entire surface. But the initial cauterizations are lighter and wetter.
of ancient pain in no limb When pain comes to no limb, whether through falling or being struck, and this pain lasts long, and the cure of medicine does not help it, then it must be cauterized with a cautery called 'poins', and the cauterizations should follow the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, its virtue and its location in twists and its pain. If the first cauterization is fine, that's good; if this isn't so, apply another round of .i. other cauterizations on top of it, for such habits dictate that they must move to the member that is nearby, because it must be that you perform the cauterizations as long as the body is healthy.
Of cautery by fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
The cures are aided many times by cautery and also the illness that comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy. If you see a case to be treated with cautery, take care if the illness is at its beginning, and treat it according to what we have said in the division, without spreading or lingering, and doubt that corruption spreads throughout the body, then do this: five cauterizations on the head: one toward the back of the head starting from nine and the other towards the forehead at the end of hair; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the neck bone; and leave your hand so that the cautery reaches up to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the gross humors can escape; and cauterize on the cheeks according to what was mentioned above.
And if the moisture is everywhere dispersed; and it is clearly absent, then you should cauterize with these cauterizing tools that we have mentioned: one on top of the nose, and two cauterizations on the spine at the neck, and six cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one big one over the buttocks and another down below, and two on the shoulders; and two around the knees, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of hands and feet, and in the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are behind the last toe, do not burn them. And never cauterize over bone at the elbow, and one more on the bone of the stomach, and one more on the liver.
And know that when I make more cautery burns, I give more aid, and it benefits him; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, for their body is already completely corrupted. And it must be that the size of the cautery is large or small according to limbs and joints, just like you will find in descriptions of metal tools. After the treatment, powder it several times with honey and other cures until it is healed.
"De enfleure" translates to "of inflammation" in English. This term likely refers to a state of swelling or inflammation in medical contexts.
When inflammation occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and bandages, and it remains unhealed, then one must make cauterizations on the limb according to the severity of the inflammation; and so that the cauterization penetrates somewhat into the flesh. Then treat with ointments until it heals. And at each time when a cauterization is done on the hand, foot, and back, at the point where the limb's nerve becomes dormant, and thus the inflammation is removed; and nonetheless, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of moving nerves in the body.
Of cautery from fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When the disease called "albaras" is advanced, and medicine in its original form proves ineffective, then apply a small amount of cautery using a fire cautery, according to the quantity of the root being burned, until the white part emerges and changes color; then treat with flour mixed with lentils several times along with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from rooster and blood from duck, each in one part; mix all together, wrap it with a cloth, and let it be exposed on the affected area until it heals.
The treatment for gangrene by cautery
When the boil begins and you see it stop, if you are to burn it off with a cautery, do so around the entire circumference of the boil. And always let them say that one should also burn in the center of the boil; yet I do not find this good for me either, as I fear that it might cause ulceration and corruption, and I have already decided against trying it any time; and a more logical method is to cauterize around it, with the round cautery named 'circule', as we described in the manner of using many cauteries.
of the boil that cannot die
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it doesn't seem to die either due to its excessive behavior or because of the old age of the illness when it's deteriorated (meaning it is too old), with little blood, or for some time; and you see that it needs to die faster: then burn off a bit of it with several small cautery treatments at a time; leave it like this. For it will hasten its death process.
And if you see it pierced right through with all the cautery, if you heat up this form of the cautery:
And place your hand in the middle of this disease which is called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries pierce the heart, and make them like these cauteries that the patient feels being pierced outwards in such a way that the progress of corruption is alleviated. After the cure until it is completely healthy.
The cure by fire through iron
Another way of disease involves what is called "corrodens," and this refers to tissue damage in a limb. It damages the limbs just like fire burns dry wood. If you observe this disease affecting parts that can be treated with heat, then use cautery made of fire for that purpose. Make the cauteries in clavicles small and large as necessary depending on where the disease is present; after applying the cautery from all sides until you remove all corruption, leaving nothing behind so that no part of what has been corrupted remains. And then let it be for three days, apply burning with oil to the burnt areas while any scabs caused by heat are being removed and all corruption. After the treatment with ointments causing pus generation in chapter III. If after three days healthy tissue doesn't start growing, it's good; but if not, restart the cautery on what remains of the corrupted parts. This tissue damage can sometimes be cured with medicine instead of fire-cautery; however, fire-cautery is more effective help, and I have already discussed the treatment for ague medicine in section: take as needed when you have it available.
Of stones that come to stones
Many times, when stones pass through the body, an illness occurs that is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it's a large hardened lump that irritates the stone. The treatments for this kind of illness consist in two ways: fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery involves heating one cautery like a feather from a goose, made of good steel to match every size so it can be applied all around the stone, and it should have thin edges; after that, heat it up completely on top of the stone and quickly twist your hand around the stem until it reaches the bottom of the hole; then leave it like this for three days until pus starts to form; then make a poultice using ground wild marigold with oil, and let the poultice sit overnight. The hole will close up and the root of the lump will be removed. Then apply ointment treatment with purging charcoal until it heals.
And if they are turned by the sides of the body, and this happens many times in hands and elbows, then it should be that you take a hot cautery; and do so as follows: take one from an arnica or iron, or a feather of woodpecker, place them on a nail and a thorn, which means for warts; then put the stick in such a way that it touches all parts completely. Next, apply a little hot water, hold your hand well, press your hand so that the edge of the stick reaches down to the root of the nail, and then find the hot water penetrates deeply right up to the root; let the patient endure the hot water burning for a short time, an hour or more; then leave them like this, and it will remove all its roots. Do this with each other until you have cleared off all these on your body, then treat any growths that produce pus.
treatment for trembling
And when someone shakes due to cold or nerves, or malaria fever or other conditions, it should be that you do this: apply three or four hot applications on the spine of the back, one hot application between each vertebra; and one application under the fingers and one at stomach with the olive cautery. If this doesn't stop shaking, then hasten the recovery from the cold illness.
pimple sores
No sign appears outwardly from the body of a person infected with pustules or putrefactive lesions that come from large decayed matter. When these signs first appear, one should apply cautery to each head of the pustule: a fine firebrand made from fir tree bark whose tip is taken up by the flame, or from long root of aristolochia, or with a lentil-shaped cautery. And when you cauterize them, not at the beginning but following this manner, they do not grow pus and spread further; instead, what causes the excess is dissipated, making them healthy. But it should be done after blood evacuation.
when the artery is cut Many times there have been great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound, or during the incision of an abscess, or with the cautery on the limb, and similar situations; and it is very unpleasant to smell this.
And yet, when this happens to no one, if you hurry to place your index finger on the cut of the vein, hold it there until the pulse ceases under your finger and no more drop escapes; then heat several olive oil cautery tools, both small and large, until they are all red hot. Then take one, or a large one depending on the size of the wound and its location where the artery is routed, and place the cautery over that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery in contact until the pulse has been extinguished.
And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, then take one of another cautery that is heated quickly.
And continue to apply this one after the other until the pulse has been extinguished completely; and beware that you do not burn the nerve underneath it, and that no harm comes upon the patient; know that when there is no beat of the artery, you cannot properly extinguish the pulse even if the artery is large, except through four methods as we have said: by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by strong tightening of a thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to extinguish the blood; and bind it and hold it in place.
Whoever administers bandaging tightly with cloths or places burning objects upon them, or other similar things, if it does not benefit, they should not do so.
And if such an event occurs and there is no sight or medicine available, should place their finger upon the wound of the vein as we have said, and properly extend it until the coldness remains above the wound and above the vein; and they must not move it but moisten it with cool water often enough until it becomes very cold so long that the finger is frozen, swollen and remains cold; and apply cauteries and medicines where necessary.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases where it is necessary to use a fire cautery or medicine cauter, and their uses, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterization; and we placed that chapter up until the knee, and I will proceed with this chapter in the same manner for those who find them more easily understandable.
And as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first uses of a cautery instrument, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often blood evacuation when opening veins, and incising abscesses, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, among other things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to engage in foolishness. For many ways of people come into cures. Some come from those who were so tormented by their illness that they died slightly due to the distress they found in their disease, and because of the severity of their suffering; and on these one must have fear. And of these I give their meaning and say: "Wait, I am the one with knowledge"; and disease is spiteful. It should not be that you agree to those who come to you in this manner, but rather place more respect for your honor than for your greed, and do not open foolishly but wisely about those you are certain of, and those you can understand; and use prediction and guidance in the treatments of your patients where health is converted; and this will help you to gain good reputation, fame, and lasting memory. And it will assist you in acquiring a prestigious name, glory, and remembrance for a long time.
Dear child, our kings give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to inspire from the holy inspiration of their hand, so be it.
Or if I have organized this chapter by devising it in parts according to chapters, specifically regarding the sections on cauteries as I devised them from the head down to the feet, so that you will find it easier to understand what you need.
The head filled with water
Know that this disease comes about very often in infants at birth, and when the mother restrains the head of the infant too tightly; and it happens not because of any known reason.
And I never see this disease in anyone other than children, and among all those I have seen, death came quickly; and because of this, it seems to me that I should stop the work with these kinds of treatments.
And I saw an infant of whom the shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day to such a degree that it could no longer bear it; and because of this moisture, he died. This moisture is assembled over the bone near the elbow, between the bone and the skin; and the surgical procedures are such that the moisture is between the bone and the skin, and the abscesses are small, causing you to cut into the head along a broad slit; and it goes as far as two inches in length while the moisture flows. And see here the shape of the suppuration:
If there is more moisture involved, and if the abscess is bigger, then make two incisions in a cross-like manner, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and if you see that the openings near the head on both sides are widened from each part, and the sharp pain increases when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond: then it is necessary to cut through the middle of the head with three incisions according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all moisture. After restraining the cuts with bandages and powders, and I put wine and oil, and leave it like this until the fifth day; then release him, and treat the wound by turns and with applications, and let the head be restrained evenly, and once give meat to eat of dried flesh near moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look at where the opening of the abscess is large, and the assembly of the water; for it is never in front; it is never behind; neither to the right; nor to the left.
Then cut the place where the abscess opens and fill with water, make a cut according to what you are able to do; and be careful not to sever an artery; look for blood flow, so that the patient dies due to bleeding and removal of moisture.
regarding the treatment
When it happens to anyone a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or at the anus, and this illness is old, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then the last resort therapy would be the cauterization using which one severs those two arteries.
It therefore follows, if you observe them properly, that the patient should move their head; after this, rub the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries become visible, then pull out the hair's root by all means. Then look where the veins lie, and the ears of both sides are after the ears, and when they are restored. Then mark the ears with an 'X', then cut each one with an extremely sharp pair from half to three-quarters as much as the length reaches up to the bone, and this should be done by the width of their head's circumference.
And if you can see it, hold the blade near the artery and cut above it, also making a cut as deep as two inches through it.
And when the vein has been cut, make sure that the blood flows continuously outwards at the top.
And if the artery doesn't open upon feeling, you should measure the size of the space to be .3 inches. Then press and apply force until reaching the bone; and what needs to be done with the blood that needs to be removed is .75 ounces, plus or minus a little depending on how much the patient can bear and the filling of the artery. Then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone exactly like syphilis, if there's no sign of the pus at the abscess site, then press the incision tightly, apply bandages, and apply ointment until it heals.
of headache
When old age headaches and acute colds arise, due to the moisture from tears and heat in the temples and forehead area as well as similar symptoms, it is treated through various methods of medical treatment and none of these help. Therefore, we should remove the veins of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the method of their extraction is such that one should place themselves behind the hair on the temples of their patient and hear at the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well through its beating and responds only within some very cold men; and if it does respond, then restrain their neck by some cloths of theirs, then rub their head with a rough cloth, and raise their head in hot water until the artery appears clearly. Then take the spatula from which this is made:
Then gently burn the skin until you hear from the artery, then pull it upwards with clamps, and remove well all the threads that are off each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it at the tip of the hook, then hollow out that part according to the number of two heads. For if it is not hollowed out, it will not cut everything thoroughly everywhere.
And drain out six and seven times up to ten times; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it with two thick silk threads for double strength so that decay does not occur before the welding of the wound, and it does not recur with bleeding; then remove the excess matter between those two threads at that time itself, and then, if you see fit, gently cauterize up to the bone with a small cautery tool until the heads are hollowed out; this is the completed work, if the patient does not have fever and has hot complexion.
For the cauterizations are aid to finish off the wetnesses: because it is more great aid for the wetnesses. For it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that we fill the entire area with old cotton and place good tents on top; and when they are released, if you apply dry medicine-making substances that produce pus, as well as tents, until they become clean; and if there's a lack of a copper piece in the artery, you must do it like what you perform, hurry by cauterizing or use the area filled with vitriol and hold it tightly with your hand so the wound becomes dry; and if you don't have that tool at hand, insert a small amount into the cotton until the wound is frozen, and rinse the cotton in cold water until pus stops coming out, then hold it properly. And the one who is slower and lighter during the extraction of the artery should cauterize the skin of this cauterization trenching for two parts, but make sure the trenchings are well separated to last longer with heat. For when the tools are too tight, it retains less of its heat. And there should be between the two knives an inch of space, and then when you mark to close the two ends, and you place the hot iron up until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in both places; and they must be separated by about one inch because this cautery does not stick throughout completely; and this is the shape of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears from the eyes are draining through veins above the neck bone at the head's back, and no benefit is received from the medicine being applied there, you'll see the skin turn red in response to it, and feel your forehead pulsate as if with a fever; and wherever they are damp and moist so that paper hairs fall off, and the papers heat up due to this, and are burned by the heat of the tears, then this treatment must be used.
And they named the old 'treatment for burns', and you should instruct the patient suffering from this illness to have hairs on their head or forehead, then make him three cuts evenly across the forehead according to its length; let one of these cuts be as long as two doves laid end-to-end on the front, and the others two cuts are each above ribs, and avoid cutting into arteries that lie above ribs; keep your hand away from connecting points of the two jawbones, and ensure each wound area is about three doves in length across.
After making the cut behind the temple up to the second cut; and burn all the skin that is between the two cuts completely until it reaches the flesh above the bone. Then cut further along the middle cut up to the other end, and then remove this hot broth.
If there's a first cut in the opening made with the tool known as "cutter", and it is very sharp on one side, while on the other side it's blunt, not sharp, and this has the form: And place the cutting edge towards the inner flesh at the elbow, and the blunt edge towards the bone, and make the cut until it reaches half-way through. And remove all vessels that descend from the head to the bones as long as the incision continues up to where it opens at the elbow, and then do this further halfway in the first incision up to the other opening; and then remove the blood evenly, expressing the limb for the blood taken; then place a piece of old cotton in each incision, and apply wrappings soaked in vinegar and oil and garlic, and ensure no pus leaks out; and on the third day release the bandage, and provide a large amount of water bathing, then apply the ointment cure with rose oil, and other cures for wound healing, until they heal completely.
from the pus
When it comes to sudden catarrh (illness) accustomed to occur, and you see the eyes red and small, and weakening of vision, and burnt paper; and the hair is greasy, and one sweats profusely in fever, and the body shivers; then know by these occurrences that those substances and that catarrh do not come from many veins, and the moist cure that it is, if it is this.
And you instruct the patient to look behind their forehead, then make a large cut through the forehead, and another broad. Start from the temple on the left side to the temple on the right side, and with this incision go up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during eating; and when the bone is revealed, bleed it all out using a sponge, then cleanse between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton wool, and linen fabric; then cover with wet cloths in wine and oil, and avoid removing any pus; once the bone has been removed, you should rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with desiccating substances that promote healing.
In this manner: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of coloflorence, and make a paste; and apply this paste to the wounds to promote flesh growth everywhere.
Of the burning of the ears
All that is inserted into the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or mine stones or similar things such as iron; or seed, such as beans, peas; or flowing matter such as water and air and similar things.
When he inserts into the ear a stone or any other thing that does not fit in the ear or does not grow in the ear, then place the ear under the sun. If you see the stone, if there is no drop of violet oil or nut oil distills, then proceed with extraction; and make him sneeze with camphorated oil, and stuff the nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool into the ear; and keep the ear above. Many times this cure succeeds; and if it does not succeed, then proceed with extraction using fine forceps, as follows:
If it jumps out with the forceps, that's good; if not, proceed with extraction using fine forceps of small double curvature; and if it does not jump out through this, then make a spider's thread and plug the end of the thread or the ear wick strongly, and stuff wax into the part inside the thread so that nothing can enter the hole with the thread; then pull forcefully, because many times it succeeds as we have said; and if it doesn't succeed in this manner, then take some glue from this, mix it with its oils, put a small tool suitable for this task, and place a little cotton inside; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull forcefully. And if she does not respond to all these things that we have mentioned, you must quickly make an incision into the ear in order to drain pus and abscesses, and relieve the pain. The method of this cut is that you first displace the head of the ear with the help of the patient's cephalic bone, and remove blood according to its natural extent, then place the head back between your hands and turn the ear upwards, making a small incision at the base of the ear near the fatty part hanging down; and make the cut in such a way that it resembles a crescent moon as you approach the bone. Then break through the bone according to your capability and suck out quickly into your mouth; and continue this until it's clean. And if it is grains that are inside and they swell up, you should administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a thin spatula according to this shape:
And make an incision to that grain. But do not perform this if you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then remove them with fine forceps and suction, just like we said, so that the extractions become easy.
In the cold indeed when one sneezes in the ear then it's appropriate for patients to use their nostrils to expel the first discharge and expand the ear with old cotton. And lie flat on that same or ear where the cold is. If it jumps out through this, well done. If not, take several stones according to their lengths and gently, and heat them a bit at the fire; then place one or two of them inside his or her ear, and stand from one foot on the other side, and make an incision with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and keep performing this from stone to stone until all the cold comes out entirely, and thus it jumps out completely. And if you see, take one stick, and place one of the heads inside the ear, and the other head in fire until the more sensitive stick burns; then redo another set of sticks until all the cold comes out, as we have explained with stones.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small size, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in division; but if it is of large size that one can feel, perform the extraction with forceps; and this is the more gentle thing to remove which is inside the ear.
In the extraction of the worms in the ears, when you follow the treatments as we have said in division and regarding distillations, and if the cure does not help, then it is necessary that you observe the ear under the sun: if there are no worms visible, then remove them with fine forceps; and if nothing can be seen, then take this form of cane which is described here.
And let it be narrow at the bottom and wide at the top. And use the thinnest part of the tool according to the extent of the patient's suffering, then apply force throughout the entire canal; do this repeatedly until all the pus has come out. And if they do not want to come out, immerse the cotton inside the canal as I have described in relation to cutting worms; and if they do not protrude like we said, administer distillations that the old ones have tested in worm incisions, and you will find guidance on distillation treatments; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, which is shaped as you see:
And let it be made of silver or lead, with a narrow end at the bottom and .i. small tube above for distillation; and to press within the distillation use .i. properly made tool from lead suitable for this purpose, and if you see .i. rasp attached to the tip wrapped around the inner extension in cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines inside the tube, and the tube is in the ear; then push within the rasp all the cotton, and press your hand properly until the oil is distilled or out of the ear; and feel the patient internally, and let one hot distillation be poured for .i. minute with fire as it's done in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, because the medicine wouldn't be so good.
Regarding ear piercing.
No child is born without any hair on their ears; and this same thing happens to adults due to wound impalement or a fetus forming inside the ear, and these wounds never enter the ear, so one cannot see them; and neither does it happen that two hairs emerge from the absence of hair, and one can see this clearly.
That which comes in through the wound, if one cannot see it, is of concern for its internal healing at various stages, and you should understand that when it's appropriate to place the ear under the sun; and look inside: if you see the obvious growth, if the work has completed this form of pus that I've mentioned.
And let it be so when cutting in front and behind completely flat surfaces, ensuring no harm to the ear; if there's a growth due to pus or part of the ear, use fine needles to pinch it gently until all that is purulent has been removed.
And if the operations are placed right in the ear, take one fine and light rasor, sharpen it slightly over fire, then place it near the ear. If you feel the operation causing the patient pain in the ear, pierce lightly, and make sure not to damage the ear's nerves; then put a tent into the ear according to its width, and moisten with Egyptian ointment inside the ear.
Continue this task every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and add powdered vitriol. And if you see swelling in the ear, it's necessary to remove the tent and insert another moistened one made of rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling disappears; then treat until it is clean.
And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and soak it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that stop bleeding which are also effective against distillations.
Of the ash of papers
When the wax that comes from the ears when they are wet and dry, it is necessary for you to spread them with forceps and scissors, and take a spatule from its roots; then put under the eye vitriol powder.
And if it is not removed, then apply the small lens cautery and burn after making an incision. And afterwards clean up several times, so that no part of its roots remains; and when they are burned by fire, those roots get burnt and do not return.
Of the gravel
Many times in papers come the eyes certain things that seem greasy by their form and hardness, and because of this is this disease called 'granuloma', and it's a collection of moisture large in the paper above and below; the procedures are: take heed if the granuloma moves from one side to another, and this is a simple thing to know; do it then broadly, afterwards lightly burn each part, then pinch it and cut. If you can't cut without piercing a bit of the paper, or causing no pain to the patient; and if the rupture is large, if there's an opening, cure until it's healed; and if it's small, don't apply any force, for ointments restore it quickly and nourish flesh soon after.
And if the granuloma descends within the ear towards the part above, flip the paper, and place the granuloma on some pincers, then cut it from one side to the other; and if the paper is displaced by the incision, this does not cause any pain; and when the granuloma has been cut out, drain off the salty water, and heal the region where flesh is nourished until the patient is healed.
Of the grease of the eyes
Extraction is a grease that soaks into the papers above, and this happens more among children than adults, and causes great distress to their eyes, and they come with teary urine in the mornings, and cannot look at the sun's light because tears rush out of their eyes; for this reason, they lie down near their stools immediately, sleep on it, and have their papers damp under their elbows that are covered by the extraction which opens in the eye. And when you press your hand to them with your fingers and feel the extraction between them.
And the way of the operation is that the patient places their head in your hand; and then take one linen cloth, and arrange a tent like a circle according to the quantity that contains extraction from each part, then place it on them; and press with both your hands on either side so that the extraction is collected within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture in the hollow at the tip a cut not too wide, which should not be larger than the wound when made to open a vein; and make the leather fit perfectly until you can see the extraction from it; and with various positions extraction comes out through the slit according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Remove it then with the whole piece of flannel cloth between your hands outside, turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and make sure you do not stick in the slit, that you do not reach all the way to the tip up to the eye, that you do not hurt.
And if the incision doesn't open at the beginning of the cut, you should slightly enlarge the cut a bit; then pull it as we have instructed. After that, smear with a moist cloth and water, then place it on the wound, and wrap it tightly in a bandage.
And if there are such cases where they grind grain and place it to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then he treats until it is sound. And if an abscess appears under the wound, then he uses healing plasters until it becomes sound.
Of paper hairs
When paper grows hairs atypical of its nature and ages, if they harm the eyes, they cause diseases such as habitual tears, paper softening, and albugine. All these are causes leading to eye damage; treatment should be done in four ways: through a combined fire cautery method, or by using water medicine as described in the previous chapter on cauterization methods, and this is also applicable when dealing with injuries, whether you choose to treat it surgically by incision and stitching or by suturing, depending on what I will explain.
It is necessary that you place the eyeball in its health and then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it turns, it's good; if not, stick a needle through at all.1 thread from above; and be it beyond the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow beneath these hairs, stitch one thread above across the entire paper and then turn it on the knife. Then cut in the area under the paper, under the atypical hairs, to all the spatumile until the large tear to the small; then extract one thread, place a tiny cotton tent and scrap of cloth on top of the paper, then draw a figure like that of bay leaf on the paper, just as you must make sure the figure matches the quantity you see, lifting the paper that is woven underneath.
And if it's necessary to handle a large quantity of paper according to how the paper is softened; then stitch all the spatumile across the two lines you've marked, and start from the large tear until the small; and let there be one of the gaps near the natural hairs in their growth stage as an inch, then insert the onion at one of the corners of the eye, then scrape it completely; then join both lips with a single thread stitch across all.1 fine thread and drain the blood, and make the excess threads dry on both sides of the lines until you see it done; and if not, don't worry about this, leave the stitches and threads for up to three days or four; then treat the wound without stitches using drying and constraining things, because the paper revives from the healing of the wound and the joining of its parts, but the stitches are moist (as the old say), and it is work without fear;
And if there is another way: and you mark the paper with a figure that is as like the leaf of myrtle, just as we have recounted, in three inches you prepare according to the form which is here:
then cut those that are above at small forces evenly according to the shape which is here:
And if you don't have the strength to hold the forceps, and the thing isn't equal, take one with two needles, place it in the figure; then hold another thread under the large artery, and the second thread under the small, and assemble between your fingers the threads evenly. Then lift your hand evenly, lifting all the skin where you have marked, just as we have recounted, then sew the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with ointments and similar healing substances;
And sometimes, the paper hair is converted: so it's necessary that you use what we have said about incising; but the stitches in both are more artificially made.
The treatment of the ears follows this form: and it is that you should convert the paper and cut inside according to what I have said, and then make four stitches by art, and two fine threads each as long as the length of the paper and wide as the space between them; and hold four hair ends from each end. Then assemble both delicately above what stands on the paper near the eye, and pull the four stitches from the four sides together; and leave it like this for a few days, and the skin that is held will heal and tighten and close, until it comes out naturally.
If it takes longer, or if it causes any force, then treat until it's healed; and when the wound is sewn up, and the paper has been lifted, and no more hair will grow; and this is the form of the four stitches that you make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
The work involves taking the following steps: you should choose a fine needle and attach two threads of silk that are fine and strong. Then, assemble the joints carefully by connecting them with each thread delicately. The lengths of the threads should be about one hand's length apart. Next, in this process, prepare another thread that is both fine and made of silk briefly; tie the joint to it securely. Place the patient's head into your position for healing; ensure the light shines on the work area as it requires subtlety and precision. Then insert the needle throughout the entire process at the root where hair is attached, piercing through paper quickly while pulling upwards from natural hair. After that, remove the hair up to the process line in the paper, and secure this hair in place if there are more than one or two hairs; finally, pull your hand out ensuring all the hairs extend fully from the process line onto the paper with the natural hair.
And if the process is treated and the hair doesn't come forth with it, then pull the process away from all the thread that you have ordered, until the process extends far above the end and you can see this through your sight; then pull the process and the thread, cover your eye and leave it covered for two days or three, until the hair hardens in its place and grows new flesh. And if the hair is small, accompany it with one long hair from a natural source, and lift it up alongside the other or let it be lifted by you until it's stretched out, then let it go.
Regarding the decay of the eye
When this disease, called 'aleacrati' or 'putrefaction', comes about in the eye, there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it occurs suddenly from a wound, or from cutting, or from burning, and through similar things.
And the way of the operation in this is that you cut open that seam, and uncovers the eyelid, and puts linen cloths inside it, and binds it until it heals; and it is not advisable to use things in its treatment that dry and restrain. For if you do this, then the disease returns worse than the first one; but work with softening things instead, like fennel; and let water or tea and linseed oil be cooked up, and put buttered onion in any of the oils, and wrap a cloth around it, and treat it by this method.
And the treasures of your cure are that you must beware not to reattach it in a form as it was before; and the operations we have spoken about do not go beyond treatments for this disease so that it does not return in the same form as it was before.
Of the fluid which comes to the eye
This disease which is called "axacrati" truly is natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds, fissures, cauterizations, and similar things; and the way of the operation in this involves piercing you take an arrow, in which it has a double thread, and you insert it into flesh, and make it pierce on the left tear腺 up to there, so that the threads pass through two channels of flesh; then the flesh is at the top above all the arrow, and the cut is made with one wide slit.
And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is supposed to be, it's good; if not, take one pair of scissors and place them in the slit, and turn the paper, making two slits inside the paper; then let there be corners of the two slits at each angle of the cut you made, and make those angles such that when they are assembled, the shape resembles a letter that has the form of 'two Greek letters'; then remove this flesh according to the quantity that its edges are equal to or more than, from the one who cut the paper, then adjust the two cut ends, and sew them with a thread of wool; then administer the treatment we have spoken about for softening medicines and plasters until it has healed.
And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make a full length cut along the hairs of the paper (which could be interpreted as skin), and follow the procedure mentioned previously; then split between the two halves like a tent, as I have said. One must perform the operation according to the shape of the disease for she varies greatly in form. The surgeons should prepare themselves with all necessary tools so that they can return the figure to its natural shape; and even the patients themselves need to do this, according to what actions suit the procedure and instruments most in various conditions.
right away from the paper
When this stitch happens in human hands in such a way that the paper above is glued with the white of the egg, and cannot move or do its natural works, then it is necessary that you pierce the tip of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and stretch it to the clamps, until you get to the delicate part that comes out of the fine spatula, which should neither be too sharp nor too thin, so that the patient does not suffer from the spatula being too sharp and causing irritation in their eye; and make your incision, burn this gathered together part slightly, gently, so that the paper regrows according to its natural shape; and cleanse all of it, and do not put any salty water into the eye once, then lift it with cool water and wool; and after that, fill between the paper and the eye with a linen tent, and place wet wool on top of the eye; and after this, use cold colliers and other things to heal until it is healed.
of the eye's eyelid
Know that the nail is in two ways: it's nervously and resembles one hard substance, and another which isn't nerve-like, but resembles white moisture frozen, that when you touch it with iron and care with the force of pincers, it cannot; and both appearances start at the large lacrimal sac, and grow a little by a little until they cover all the eye and all the light and movement of the eye.
And the way of incision is that the patient puts their head in your healthy position, then lets out the pus; and lifts the eyes with care; then takes off the paper with your hand, then straightens the nail by pinching it slightly from both sides, and lays it above; then take a needle, and insert one horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and one strong thread; and double the needle point slightly and sews it into the nail, piercing all of the needle through, and fastens the nail with a thread and lays it above, and scalds right down the length of each hair on the edge of the nail until it reaches the pupil and the silk fibre to the base of the hair up to the root, then cuts off the remaining part under the lacrimal sac from all the delicate tissue and small forces, and leaves the natural tear duct, so that no body fluids flow out through the incision as usual; and only once is the nail laid at the bottom of the cut, and with the thread, just like we have said; then scalds off all the delicate tissue from this point onwards, it being thus the form:
And ensure that the cautery does not touch the flesh and tear it, nor should the needle pierce; and after making the incision, pour a little flour into the wound, then make a collar out of stannic acid paste, and let this remain until the next day. Then clean as is appropriate for as long as they are well.
And if the nail is not nerveless and you cannot push in the needle, and the nail cuticles cannot enter it, this issue of nail-like structure can be treated with many medicines; they will come out as I have described in the division section, and if you see them filled, treat the eye with this medical knowledge, take the cautery point lightly sharp according to this shape:
And lift the nail gently upwards, and if you see that it is not getting smaller and presses against the reason, distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of stannic acid and red paste and flour, and swab out the eye until the next day; then begin another procedure in this same way, as long as she is completely extracted.
If there is no opposing factor in the eye, like an abscess, then you must proceed, and first treat the abscess until it is healed. After that, restart the operation as was done before, until it heals.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear ducts is disturbed in the eye due to great harm, then suspend it on a pin and extract some parts but not all at once, until tears do not flow; then instill red oil into the eye which is made of stannic oxide.
of the flesh that arises from the pupil
Some people's eyes produce red flesh only once and it covers the pupil, restricting vision and appearing behind the eyelids; it looks like a rose made of beryl. And in performing surgery on this, one has to ensure that the patient is well until the operation; then remove these red patches using a tool suitable for this task, holding it firmly; first remove the initial layer of flesh as closely as possible with the tool until you reach the end, making sure not to injure the eye during surgery; and make an incision close to the nasal passage that we discussed earlier in the chapter about nail excisions and minor operations on small bones.
And when the incision is completed and all of the flesh has been removed, apply oil from the hemp or distil red balsam into it along with other corrosive medicines. Place cotton soaked in the oil outwards to prevent pus formation; if no pus remains and the wound heals without infection, then leave the oil and treat the incision with remedies that soothe against pus formation. Then return to your work until the incision is clean, and thus perform many cuts using this method in oil.
But still it is necessary that you treat each weak oil in the natural and accidental ways; and with iron operations, in this manner. Do not let your hand enter any of these operations until you see that the limb endures this operation.
of veins and eyes
When the veins that cover the eye are red and concealed over it, they tolerate damage to their vision for several days. Therefore, when you first examine this person, assess the state of his eye, where these symptoms lie, and recognize there is no other illness besides the sebel; then guide him in this manner: instruct the patient to align his head with your healthy position, then suspend those veins along the entire circumference according to their wisdom, and let the circumferences be subtle doubles following this form:
And let there be two circumferences by degrees in one course according to this form:
Then gently guide those veins with skillfulness and let blood flow hour by hour from another vein until you see the affected veins removed outside the eye; make sure that you do not pinch the eye against the ends of the needles, perform this operation at noon in front of the sun, and be very active in your work so as not to apply force other than on those veins. And when you have accomplished this, then pour a collier of green and red essence into the eye to corrupt that which remains due to sebel.
And if you don't have the strength to do all this at once, make a plaster with things that soothe the pain of the eyes and leave it on for some days until the pain is soothed and assured of no pus formation. Then start again according to this manner which was mentioned before until he/she is healed; and this is the form of strength:
of the ear's discharge
The remedy for what is called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with a cautery and with burning water medicine as I have said before, and if it hasn't healed yet, there's the area where you cut into the abscess, at the place where it should die out, and drain all the moisture that's there, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is discovered, and you will see corruption and darkness, if you take possession of all the instrument as described here; and it is called "hard head", and made from iron in the shape of one inch of a chief's head, and pointed like a file just as it appears in this form:
And place the corrupted part of the bone upon it, then turn it between your hands and press your hand a little until you know that this corruption has been removed; and do this once, then restore the part with medicinal remedies.
When the joints are joined and the flesh has grown, and the body of the bone is united, it remains like this for 40 days, and doesn't reoccur or become an abscess again, nor do any bad incidents happen; know that it is healed. If not, there's no other remedy than to bring back the fistula to its original place according to this form: and then you uncover the bone a second time with iron and medicines. And when it has been uncovered, take a metal rod in accordance with this form, and fix the metal head of iron at three angles, and let the stem be thinned out up until its end just as you see here.
Then place it on the bone level under the collarbone, and keep your hand away from the eye for half a pace. Then return to completely remove the forest until you pierce the bone and feel the pain through this area when you breathe in if you hold your hand on your neck; then restore the limb with dry medicine as I have instructed you, and when the charcoal has begun to harden and toughen the limbs, bring the matter back to the neck; if it is lighter for the patient.
from the extraction of the eye
When the eyes open completely and there is no disturbance in the chest or diminution, it is necessary that you tie the patient. Then heal them, then place suckers or a plaster without piercing for suction on the eye, and apply an ointment made from acacia, aloe, incense, and sarsaparilla, and then drain the eye, and cover with strips of cloth; and the method for the strips is that you take cloths soft enough, fold each one into four, and place them one on top of another according to how many times the eye needs it. Then apply a hard bandage from above and repeat the suction without piercing; then remove the suckers and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the strips loosen, you should bind it even tighter; then remove the strip after day and night, and if you see that the eye is healing, this is good. If not, continue applying the ointment, cloths, and strips as well as the suckers until they are healed.
from the breaking of an oviductal membrane
When disruption comes to the oviductal membrane, then opened, and brings out material like a grain of resin and is observable; thus if you see this coated, the organs are such that you can insert a needle at the root of the part below until it reaches above there, then insert another needle or with double thread from the part behind the bladder; and make the puncture, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cut the part of the double thread and tie a portion of the membrane internally, and tightly stretch it, then remove the needle and place wool soaked in abundant egg on it; and let it until the thread and the membrane are both removed with the oviduct, then treat the eye with soothing substances until the wound is healed; and none of these times is the wound restrained by the membrane from each part of a circular piece of cloth until she is healed.
And if the eyes show a large appearance, then pierce at the thin sinus which comes through the back of the eye, and drain the watery mucus and lower the eyes, and enter into them straight away; then remove it until it is healed.
From the bowl of the eye
This disease called "alcunnati" is only from a bowl that collects in the eye, seeming like a drop descending, and it is not real drops; and the way of seeing this work is that you make the patient sit with one bowl above your eyes. Then take their head between both hands, then move them until you see the bowl coming up to your eyes; afterwards place them so they don't descend and remove any obscuring light, and observe all things within as it was before; and if it doesn't descend over this, know that it is a drop, and if the descent of the bowl isn't visible in this way as we said. Make the patient sit between your hands, then take a thin spatula and perform along the corneal surface with the continuation of the conjunctive tissue and the cornea, until the bowl comes out; and when it is out, distill a hot drop of eye medicine mixed with honey, or a drop of fenugreek that has been boiled with honey, then apply another curement until it heals.
From the tears of the eye
In our experience with this division, and the need to pierce; so that it follows according to health. It is necessary that you place the patient between your hands in a cross position, away from sunlight, and tie the healthy eye very tightly; then place the paper of the eye on your left hand when their eyes are on the left, or on your right hand if they're on the right; then take with your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or with your left hand if the eyes are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument beneath the rim by about half the width of a nail in that region around the eye up to near the smaller tear ducts, then firmly force the "almagda" tool through this area and rotate your hand until it pierces the paper skin behind the eye and feels that almagda has reached the hollow space; and the measurement of the path of almagda should match the distance from the pupil up to where darkness ends in the eye; and this is the rim around the eye; if you see bone through the cut paper by the lightness of the corneal tissue, then place the tool until it reaches or where the water was, then express through another line. If the water now descends, you will see the patient looking at themselves and the instrument in their eye.
After a brief rest. If the water ascends through the second channel, apply force with the tool, and when it is embedded and does not rise again, gently remove almagda by turning your hand in small increments; then return to where you left off with a little silicified wax, then remove the eye from this area. Then place under the eye something soaked in oil rose or ointment with plenty of eggs, and bind it with the healthy eye. Now, for those who are in our time, let us proceed with an egg mixture generously applied.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are people who have hard eyes, it is necessary that you take the tool called "alberit", which has this form:
And therefore puncture just the conjunctive only, do not go too deep, but make it .i. subtle, then insert alum, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient .i. additional poultice, on which he lies on his back in .j. dark room; and be free from all movements, eat light meats, and do not move your head neither to the right nor to the left, tie him according to his posture until the third day; then release him within this dark house itself, test his vision, let him see some things, and then bind him again until the seventh day; and it should not be done in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but you must wait, because the fever rises quickly.
When you are dealing with abscesses, make sure to release the eye before the seventh day, and use someone who relieves abscesses. And when it has calmed down, then release vision and place .i. wadding on his face for covering one day, and stay within this dark house. Then leave the house gradually, returning to his usual state; know that no novice should intervene in such a situation.
One came to us who was from Yrach, who told us that they used to pierce alum here, sucking out the fever, but still, I have never seen anyone like this in our land nor have I read about it in old books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of mercury, because those who do not know them see them; and they are properly of the property:
And these are the head of the four from this same subtlety, and the last one in three angular veins.
from the flesh at the nose
None of them are born or raised as knotted flesh balls of various kinds; some resemble scorpions in appearance. If there is a ball with a reddish color and if it has a good flesh color, then for such cases where the ball isn't red, you should have the patient lie under the sun between your hands. Squeeze their nostrils and pour vinegar on these balls, then remove them. Next, apply what can be held by hand to the very fine sharp point of the spatulum tool on one side until you know that the ball is fully extracted.
And if there remains no matter we cannot remove, if you open up to allow the use of all one instrument finely lightly, ensuring nothing stays; and should it not ascend, or pus appear, then seek it out as seems fit; and should these be malicious pus, act swiftly and apply heat until the pus is stopped and every hair is removed completely, then pour water or vinegar.
And if it remains open and wetters come up to the throat, know that there is pus present; and should no wetter pass as it should, know that there's flesh formed inside the bone above, where the instrument doesn't go for cutting: thus, you need to take a thread of linen somewhat thick, and fasten it between your thumbs, ensuring an inch or less spacing between each knot; and put the patient down on their side with the thread in their nose by force, pulling it out with fragrance until it comes through the nostril within the mouth; and many times this is done to children at school, as it's a simple task for those who wish to do so; then hold the head coming out of the nostril with one hand, and the other head coming out of the mouth with the other hand, making sure you know which comes next as we guide them with our fingers. Do this until you're certain that each knot has rotted away any flesh, then pull the threads, clean off any blood, moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment and put it back at the nose exactly as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments have corroded all that remains of flesh; and afterwards place a clove in the nostril for a few days until it's healed, and if you need dried medicines, use them; and this is how the tool purges the head, to which oil and medicines are distilled or used with vinegar:
And let it be of silver or arsenic, resembling an open lamp, like a rod, and guide him thus; and if you see fit, make a closed rod, and have your instrument filled for purging the head; and hold one end of the rod when you heat oil or any liquid.
from the nostril's wax
Many times at the root of the nose a disease is born which is called 'telul', it grows and becomes large to see; and because this requires that you catch it at its beginning, then remove all bone, afterwards place in the middle the cautery or hot medicine; and if one delays catching it until it's big, they must beware if it's hard, changes color, loses sensation: don't touch it with iron as it is an infected abscess, for when you catch it once, it causes great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is due to heat contact, not due to losing color, and you see that one can catch all of it, then empty the patient and treat the area with dry and restraining substances.
When the nose has been treated and sewn up
Know that when solutions of continuance arrive in one of these bodily veins, they benefit little or not at all in many individuals. Therefore, it's necessary that this event doesn't occur to anyone, if you observe the wound is still bleeding from its entire blood; and then adjust the two edges to a seam, proceed with treatment until it heals; and should the edges are already dried on both sides, it's essential to sear all parts of their area until they heal, then join the two edges to a seam, and hold them together, powdering with dragon's blood powder and incense ground. And place the powders on a plaster piece of strong or another solderable plaster, and leave it until it discharges by itself, then treat with ointment until it heals.
The method of the seam is such that you join the material: or with threads, as we have said in the abdominal seam; or with string, as I have informed you.
removal of abscesses from lips
With the cautery of fire commanding the unwell to let hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
From the pulp of the gums
Many times, bone pieces arise on the gums that are attached, which the ancients called "albulus"; you should hold it with forceps and remove it to its root, allowing for bleeding or blood; then place it under vitriol powder, or other drying and restrictive powders; if this flesh returns after incision and many times occur, when you remove it again, cauterize it: if it doesn't return even after the cautery; these are the forms of instruments to remove it.
Of cautering with fire, instruct the patient to allow the hairs to grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
Some occasions are gathered at the root of the teeth within the mouth between the gums, and unpleasant and rough layers; and several times there is a black tooth with citrine stones and worms until the decay reaches the gum, and the teeth become stinking. Therefore, you need to hold the patient in your hands and have their head on the floor, and pull out the teeth or the scales that you see, as long as nothing remains; and then perform on the darkness and greenness, and yellowness and other tones until they are removed. And if what needs to be taken out is done at the first occasion, it's good; if not, start again the next day and the third day, until you have everything pulled out. Know that teeth require various types of instruments for pulling, according to what the work shows, because the scraper that pulls teeth from outside has different shapes than that which is pulled between the teeth; these shapes and others should be ready with you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay removing it as long as possible, because one should not do this; because this is a very high material up to there therefore there should be no excuse for pulling. So when the patient is forced to extract the tooth, you must be sure of which tooth hurts. Often during pain, one believes it is a holy tooth, and attempts extraction of the good tooth; but until the bad tooth is fully removed, do not depart from this pain, as we have already taught our healers; and when you are certain about the hurting tooth, it is necessary to cauterize around the tooth with one or two spatula-sized burns to protect the gum from all sides; then move your hands or use your fine forceps gently, bit by bit until it is fully extracted, then secure well the forceps; and have the shoulder of the patient in your holy hands between your knees, and keep him still so he does not move.
After extracting the tooth properly without breaking it off, and if it doesn't fall out on its own, take none of these instruments and gently push them inside from each side, and shake him as you did initially. And if there is a hole where the tooth was lost, then it's necessary to fill it with gauze at the site that got loose; and if it needs to be extracted precisely using forceps, see that it doesn't break while being pulled; and it must be sharply opened around the gum to remove the tooth.
And see to it that you do not break him and leave a piece inside. Inform the patient about this by telling them that they will experience greater pain from the root due to malice later on after the initial extraction. And remember that don't act like ignorant healers who, out of haste and recklessness, break everything once and don't follow our teachings. Instead, allow complications to come in only one instance through the operation of this great disease because of the roots that remain or the bones they break, as we often desire; and when the tooth is extracted, wash his mouth with wine or water and vinegar; and if bleeding occurs (which it often does), then fill his mouth with vinegar; and if this doesn't work, cauterize him.
The shapes of the tools, with which you make your teeth first, should be long-pointed and have large handles, so they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
And may have large parts that do not bend during use, and they should be made of well-crafted iron, with teeth for holding them securely.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains during extraction, it is necessary to put moistened cotton inside the mouth with butter for one or two days until the gums are softened. Then remove the forceps called "algefri," making the shoulder seem like a well-tended beak; and they should be made in this manner:
And if the roots do not wish to emerge from all these tongs, then you must uncover the flesh completely along the root and place an instrument which is called "althali", meaning palainche, as it appears in this form:
And make it hollow and thick so that it doesn't break at all, and if the root jumps out through this, it's good; if not, use all of the instruments, as their forms come after this:
And if you have to help with this tool that has two points, as it appears in this form:
And other tools that are arranged in the proportion of teeth in front, and with this tool that seems like large pincers, as it appears in this form:
And be aware of this tool so it cannot break, and know that many tools of bone exist; similarly with other tools which are not named; and also skilled surgeons find their own instrument on their own according to what their tasks and diseases show them. For there are parts of diseases where the old did not teach any tools due to their variety; and if it breaks from carrying or another bone, or if it rots when it should remain solid, if they seek out the tool they need among those I've mentioned, and help through gestures, as shown here is its formation: And may they be large and well holding to hold the bone, so it does not escape but can be held and removed; and then return him to his place with medicines that suit this. And if there is decay in the bone and it is small, if he uses all of this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and it is ugly in shape, especially in maiden women, if you need to know whether the teeth have been born after the tooth and are not in their proper place, and cannot be worn or filed: then extract it; and if there is connection with the tooth, take this instrument as described here which resembles a pair of small hooks, and made of sharp iron.
And the bite is made little by little in my hands because of the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move others, and if it appears that one could shave it off, then I grind it with a piece of stone as shown here:
And it's also like the file used to make needles; and I grind the tooth slowly by hand lightly, so that it doesn't move until it finishes; then you level off at the end with a rasping tool, and if it's too sharp causing pain in the tongue, then you need to smooth out its roughness until it becomes even, so that it does not cause pain in the tongue nor damage speech.
when the tooth is heated
When the tooth is impacted within the mouth, through percussion or impaction, and when the patient cannot press upon it to cause evacuation of pus, and you have treated it with restricting medicines, this method isn't effective; then you should restrict it with a golden thread, for silver threads turn green and decay, but gold does not change ever. And take a thread that's neither too thin nor too thick, according to the size of the gap between the teeth; and if you notice a fitment of teeth, take the thread and hold both ends together between two healthy teeth, then place the dislocated tooth between the diseased teeth, whether there is one or more, until you see it properly on the other side of the healthy tooth; then continue with covering until reaching your starting point, and pull your hand subtly and precisely, until it no longer moves; and bind your thread to the root of the tooth so that it can't escape. Then cut the threads near the tooth with pincers, gather them together, place them between a healthy tooth, and set it in such a way that it doesn't injure the tongue; and then leave it compressed as long as it can stay, if it comes loose or if the threads break, you will have to tighten it with another thread; if it stays and serves like this throughout its time, this is the natural position of teeth and the fitment between two healthy teeth, and two diseased teeth, just how you see.
And when the tooth is removed, if it's placed back in its socket gradually, as we've said; and don't intervene with anything other than what you're instructed to do and can bear, and at no point make a form like an ox bone tooth, and place it in the socket where the defect is, then tighten it as we have described, and it stays and serves for as long as possible.
covering the wound of the tongue
No time is spent on the ties which come from the tongue or nature that we are born with; or by accident due to a healed wound; and these operations consist of working in your mouth towards the illness, having your head healthy, lift the tongue; then cut off the nervous ligament across its width, until the tongue has been lifted out of its position. If there is hardness or clotting, it’s due to sudden wounds, so pinch off the hook and cut across that connection; and ensure that the cut isn’t too deep as it’s near blood vessels; once done, lift your head from a pinkish watery state and ease away, then put over the tongue a linen cover; and rub the illness every night, making sure the tongue doesn't heal. And if bleeding occurs, place vinegar on your head instead; and if the wound doesn’t heal, cauterize using the slow-burning cautery, which is good for this purpose; then continue to treat with other cures until it has healed.
And if you see it to be of any color or blackness or hardness that the illness doesn't feel, do not touch it for it's a sore; and if it declines towards yellow fever, and there is moisture present, use the hook on it and cut with a fine incision from both sides, then release it on all sides; and if your wound doesn’t heal in your operation, place vinegar on it until it stops bleeding, then return to your operation as long as you apply force; then lift your head away from wetness and ease, and continue other treatments until it has healed.
extraction of throat abscesses
No time passes within the throat glands that are called "godath," and they should properly be called the two almonds. And when you treat them, as we have said in division, if they aren't healed, take care: If it's pus-filled abscesses with a small sense of touch and fusse color, don't touch them with metal at all. And if they are red and the root is large, don't touch them with metal either, for fear of blood spilling; but leave them until they're sore, then you will remove them, or it would burst on its own; and if it's white in color retains, and the root is subtle, have your instrument ready to scoop, but first ensure that the pus-filled areas are calm and pacified. Then let the patient stand under the sun, with their head in a good position of health, and have them open their mouth while you grasp their servants' hands between theirs, and press the tongue down over all the tool, as shown here; and may be made of silver or finely crafted gold just like knives:
Can you press the tongue with all this tool, and see the pus-filled abscess? Take an onion and place it in the almond, and pull it up harder than you can; take nothing from the tissues with it, then scoop it out with your tool, as shown here; which looks like some strength. And both the head are set straight, and one place the other, and are very sharp, and made of metal inside or of silver:
And if you do not have this tool at hand, scoop it out with forceps, as shown here:
And make the incisions on one side and the other; and when you have completed one of the almonds, complete the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the sick with hot water, or hot and easy-to-swallow water, and if blood drainage occurs, gargle with hot water, or peelings of cooked cherry stones, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the saliva is completely drained; then complete the cure until it becomes well; and do not allow any new abscesses to form in the throat other than the two almonds, then proceed similarly as for the two almonds.
And I treated a woman of an abscess that was inside her throat, to be precise, a small abscess. I had almost completely sealed the entire throat passage, so much so that the woman couldn't breathe due to the obstruction, and could neither eat nor drink, she died if she stayed like this for one day or two days. The abscess had risen so high that it had placed two ropes through both nostrils at birth. I acted quickly then, put an inch of wax into one nostril first, then pulled it out with a large portion of grease; then made another cut under the other nostril, and got her to open her mouth while pressing her tongue. After inserting the wax in these abscesses, I took out some of them, only a little bit of blood came out. And thus opened up the passage for breathing inside the woman's throat, she could now drink water and then wine, without stopping my continuous cutting through that abscess; and the abscess would grow back again and fill the space I had emptied, to such an extent that it grew quite large; then I took care of her and cauterized inside the throat: thus did not continue growing; and I left these parts, may only God do good after me.
from the eye
When the bile rises in the eye, and it swells up and is long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it's called "bile". When it is treated as we have said in division, and the treatment doesn't help, and you see that the pus has subsided, and it is subtle; then you must remove it. And when this one is round and assembled and isn't long; and if it's bloody or of a mustard color or black, then you should avoid making an incision in this case. For there is great danger to the patient. Therefore, whenever you see it according to how I've said with regards to its smell and lengthiness, have the patient face the sun, press their tongue onto the tool as we made remembrance of previously; after that, insert the pin into the bile, then drag it outwards, and remove it using two tools we described in incision of two almonds. And you should not use too much force when removing, only up to what is beyond its natural end; because if you take more than necessary, it may hurt the voice or speech afterwards. After the incision, use what we said about incisions of almond, and treat until the patient recovers. And if your patient faints due to this removal, then when using cautery on this case, use something that makes them feel less pain. The manner of the cautery is sharp. Then let the patient's head get into your healthy state again, and after pressing their tongue onto the tool we described in chapter about cautery, press it with a lively blade until it isn't too thick or too thin; then utilize the movement of this tool, as described here:
And place our head with a hair or where we put the medicine, like in the movements of a spoon, and place the tool across all the medicine on the bile; and let the patient remain stationary on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth towards the medicine inside, ensuring it doesn't descend into the throat, and the wound heals. Then keep your hand over the medicine and press it onto the bile for half an hour's worth of quantity until you see that the irritation and actions of the medicine are subsiding; and if you notice this, take cotton and wrap it around any tool, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the tool on all the cotton above wax, until the cotton dries on the bile. And repeat this process as needed until the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and wait for four or five days afterwards. If you need to restart with medicine cauterization, do so, and after the cauterization of inside the bile, clean up that which was inside the medicine using a buttered cloth; rinse with cold water, and continue gargling until fully recovered.
This remedy is safer than the incision, not just the cautery; if it is treated with fumigation using this method, take camomile and myrrh and wormwood and rue and mint and similar herbs, and gather them all or any of them into one pot, and pour water into it, and let it boil; and ensure the pot is well sealed with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot place one cooking utensil according to this method: And make it of silver or tin, and have one of the shoulder blades placed in the mouth against the sore until the vapor rises up the nose into the eye, until the eye is dead; after that repeat often, until the eye dries out, and be sure not to do this at the beginning of pus ejection, for many things occur; and don't do this when it's nearing the end of pus ejection. And if this instrument isn't available, take a stick and place inside your mouth an eggshell, so that there is no unnecessary heat in the mouth; because the eggshell doesn't let the vapor weigh down the mouth, and it's a good combination to heal together for safety.
Many times, open in the throat bone or spine of fish, without anything else; if it is thus that you should apply what you can see, press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you may observe movement; and that which does not open at all and remains in the throat, you should make the patient vomit until the substance leaves; by chance if this thing is expelled through vomiting; or if the substance swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a small piece of dry bread; and attach to the sponge a thread, then swallow it again; and when she comes up to the surface, if it rises, and then proceed to draw out. And if this thing does not come out from what we have said, take one of a cork instrument according to this shape:
And let the tools be adjusted near the neck so it can more easily enter the throat, have the head raised high above; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, so nothing goes beyond or pushes the bone inward; adjust the tools as they apply pressure on what is being removed, because if this happens, if you push it down too far, or pull force equally along the entire tool until it's done.
of the windpipe
No treatment is given for the windpipe, as I have mentioned in division, through medicine therapy; and when this does not help, then look inside the throat of the patient towards the sun, press their tongue with the tool I've instructed you on. And if you see the windpipe, guide it slightly, to a length of half an uncia (an ancient unit), or use fine tweezers suitable for this task. If this doesn't work, take a hair and insert it into the throat towards the patient's discomfort; then pull out one or two hairs until a noticeable change occurs, repeating this often. If the patient feels cold water, fill up to half a pint with cold water, wash their mouth with it, and swallow while moving your hand frequently; and as soon as the windpipe feels the water, they will vomit.
And if it doesn't heal as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the tool we've mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times because it will heal without causing damage. And this is how to perform the fumigation: take one pot containing burning charcoal sticks and cover its middle part with a perforated lid; then place the end of the tool inside the lid's hole. After that, pour your fumigation into it, and put the tip of the stick in the patient's mouth, seal their mouth so that no fumes escape but only reach deep into their sinuses; now this mucus will come out, and if it doesn't heal, restart the fumigation multiple times. Allow the patient to be thirsty, eat salty things and similar, do not drink water; then eventually she needs to leave by this method.
The form of the tool that treats the mucus, when you can see it, resembles curved tongs for moving things into the throat; and at the tip, it has a shape like a doctor's beak, and it also has a rasping edge, so whatever she takes cannot leave; now see this form:
The chapter on abscesses
No mention of discharges are there, according to what memory brings forward from one and another in this book, they vary in perforation and size; and it's done in two ways whereby one is in its own form, and because of the moisture it holds. And the second way is for bones within the body. For abscesses on the head are different than those on the base, and abscesses on the fatty part of the body are different from those that come at joints, and each has their judgment in action.
And if there are abscesses one should not pierce them until the body is dead according to its completion; and for such as it is necessary to pierce when they have grown but do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that come from joints. For when abscesses come from joints, and you leave them while still within, by chance if both the tendon and nerve of the joint are corrupted because this causes contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is within the main limb, and if you delay perforation until it is dead, it will harm the principal limb; or if it's within the base, piercing should be done while it's dead; and one should not pierce an immature abscess without completed digestion except for those that are within the base which could grow fully through and remain inside, leading to a fistula; and would not heal in a large manner.
And it should be known when the time is for perforating the abscess which has died according to its completion, and this is when the pain eases, and the departure of fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and from the movement and sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it should be done where the perforation stays higher above the abscess or below it depending on its location, and where it opens outwards; and make the perforation long through the body, and if the abscess is in hands or feet, joints and nerves and arteries, and all places where there are no wrinkles.
Among those who bend, according to that member. And when abscesses are in the fatty parts of the body, if they burst you should allow the perforation until it is confirmed by digestion being completed, as we said before. For if you pierce ahead of this, they will stretch along his body with the venom from him and become filled with a lot of dirt; and by chance make his skin hard and the depth of him. And for any abscesses that are pierced across the width of the body, according to what the limb needs. And it should be that you remove small abscesses, small pus-filled sacs; and in large abscesses, large pus-filled sacs, and many cuts according to the size of the abscess; and for those abscesses where it is necessary to have a knife's cut, and cover; when it has become as big as two pieces of cloth, and is flattened, then it should be done in this way for milk blisters: and for those that are split into three angles, and those that need to be covered like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses from the angles; and for those where a round cut is made, and other cuts and similar cutting methods.
Those who do not have a head, such as superficial abscesses, you should pierce them fully; and when the abscess is large, and has built up much pus, if you pierce it, do not drain all of the pus at once in that moment, but only a part of it. Then stop the incision until another day, then leave nothing to interfere; repeat this method gradually larger to larger, until the pus comes out completely; similarly when the patient's strength is weak, or pregnant women, or young children, or elderly people who are decrepit. Because the abscesses shudder many times with the exit of the pus, and by chance kills the patient, and you do not notice it. Therefore be cautious in this chapter, and if you have pierced your abscess, when it heals, check if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it's a full cut, provide linens or old cotton to dress it; and for large abscesses, with much pus, each of them should have tents that lie one against another. And if you have made a part in the skin in the abscess and covered it internally, then fill it with old cotton or linen wadding without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then wash, and treat with ointment until it heals properly.
And if blood flow occurs in your body part, dress with cold water and ease it, and moisten with a piece of cloth, and place it on the wound several times. And if the blood flow persists, take care of it and treat it, and use the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it's due to fever or if your body or abscess is very nervous, then you should apply moist tents and cloths soaked in wine and oil; and if it is in a state of fatness and your body is fatty, then it would be appropriate to place pieces of cloth soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil until the third day, as we have said; and then remove the wound dressing and clean and treat it properly until it heals.
And it is necessary to know universally in treatments of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here comes the chapter.
of the womb
Where small abscesses come from, and their methods are as if they're in cloths, like the tail of a cat, and many resemble these. There are some that are fat and some with moisture just like mice; and there are others that are hard and stony to the tailor, and there is no doubt that the artery doesn't oppose this. And the work of the operation comes from that you prove through all .i. tool which is called "entromissoire", its shape comes after this, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, then let it cut through long. And when the moisture is drained, then remove without leaving anything inside the skin containing that moisture, because it returns immediately once you leave nothing; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; if not, in water and vinegar, and apply to the wound and leave until the other day; and this follows what stays for the night. And after renew the cotton as before on the second day, and the third, until you know that it doesn't stay overnight; then treat the wound with ointment according to your convenience, until it heals. And if the abscess remains .i. hard, then cut along this shape, long; and let all your treatment dry inside the garment where it is; and if the artery opposes this, then do what I told you afterwards. And similarly treat when it's stony, and to the tailor and to treat as I said.
And concerning the treatment of abscesses containing stones and moisture, it is more effortless, because there is little blood involved. And if any of these abscesses or boils are without moisture, and among those were two abscesses that I dealt with around an elderly woman; and found the abscess to be like a hard stone, rough and white, and unable to break; and even if one had not pierced through them, they would have been treated just as well for stones. In other types of abscesses, it was observed that those coming from around children's heads and ear roots, the opening needs to be left open for as long as possible to allow pus to drain; and treat them accordingly.
regarding scrophula
Many times abscesses occur in the neck, and when they rupture, and in anger, and nowhere else or on the body, and are small, and stick together. And each scrophula is properly contained within its case, just like a nut and an abscess around the head, as we have mentioned; and there are many appearances of these scrophulas. Some contain moisture, and others are malign and do not wish to obey treatment. In such cases that you observe good disposition towards the doctor, and resemble the color of the neck, it remains silent from each part and is neither close to the ears nor near the artery or in the conduit, and is not deep; then it's right that you cut over them, and peel off each part, and use two knives for the corners if necessary, as we have said about abscesses around the head; and treat it little by little, make sure not to cut into the nerve or the vein, and avoid excessive cutting that your hands slip away, don't go too far ahead when you are not supposed to cut.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it doesn't allow you to open, then put in the wound vitriol broil, or any powders that expel blood, and restrain the wound; and leave it as long as the abscesses are soothed, and the wound has softened, and begins to decay. And when the blood has been expelled, return to your work until you have completed it; then stop according to your duty index if there remain no small scabs, then remove them. And if there is a large vein in the root of the scab, it should not be that you cut that scab at its root but bind it with a double thick thread and let it fall through it without harm; then apply the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then start treatment.
And if you cut the entire scab, it should be that you join together the two sides of the wound and stitch them now, then there is no remaining of excess due to the size of the scab. It should be that you attend to cutting the root of it, drain it out, and stitch as we have said. Those scabs containing excess, pierce where it opens up; and pierce in this manner like those previously mentioned, by hanging, then apply healing things with ointment and similar items, so they decay what is remaining of corruption; and when the wound has been thoroughly cleaned, treat with an ointment covering flesh until it is clean.
Regarding obliquity or deviation
The old ones spoke and wrote about the surgery of cutting the throat; but I never saw anyone do this in our land, it's just recorded from their words.
For those who have squinting eyes, it is necessary that the incision of the throat known as "epiglottis" be performed; and one should not attempt this procedure alone, because all the veins and the windpipe are in danger for those with pus-filled abscesses either in their mouth or in the throat or between the two mandibles. When the disease is within the lymph channel of the windpipe, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss that comes from suffocation.
So, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we make three or four small cuts through it, between the two circles, so that the size of the cut does not touch the cartilage.
And these lungs can be subjected to the division of the epiglottis where there is no fat, and the vessel is long outwards.
And if the surgeons are fearful, it is necessary for them to extend the skin of the neck up to the whole oncine, then cut through the bone until they reach the cartilage; and avoid blood vessels, if you see any substance, and then close the site as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the stream from the cartilage which jumps forth through the limb that has been broken, and due to the loss of voice.
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the time has passed during which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two sides of the wound neatly, and all along the seam without touching the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause healing flesh to form, until it becomes sound.
Albanus states that one should not perform this until the entire throat is blocked, and the patient is deemed dead, and there is absence of breath. Then one must cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe normally. They will breathe through the wound and thus be kept alive from death.
And because of this, the ancient doctors commanded to leave the wound open until the danger of the illness passes. And once it has passed, after three or four days. And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and treat it, until it was healed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a maiden take one dagger and plunged it into her neck, severing some of the veins near the collarbone.
and I was called to treat her, and found her already dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood issuing from it, and indeed, there was no major vein or artery that led there but rather the windpipe, and the veins flowed through the wound.
I acted quickly, and thus healed the wound, and treated it until it was cured;
and there was nothing left for the maiden but that her voice became weak from speaking, and she returned after that to her duties;
thus I declare that in tailoring the epiglottis, there should be no fear.
In the large throat
Cysts in the throat are called "throat hernia", and they are large cysts of a blackish color, and are very common in women;
and according to two ways: natural and accidental; or naturally there is no organ.
And the accidents are according to two ways, of which one is like pus from us, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from our artery; And there is fear, and it doesn't allow for big operations outside that in the one who is small, and it has been proven and searched through everything intrusive: if you find it as thin as a newborn calf, and cannot allow any vein to pierce, then treat it, just like one treats a calf wound, and apply all its remedies, if there is need for it; and search well soon, and treat it accordingly until it is completely healed.
from us
Many ways exist for us, of which I will mention all the similarities;
And it is fitting that I describe all the differences that exist between us and dislocation.
I say that dislocation is characterized by heat and fever lasting until the body's fluids have disappeared and decay has occurred; then the fever and heat subside.
With dislocation, there is no heat, fever or pain, and contains one pus sac which is its own bag, and is according to the color of the body, it begins also like a boil, and becomes large;
And they depend on two appearances, or greasiness, or moisture, and no color are like as I described in the classification.
It is necessary when you come to the treatment of a new injury that you first try and inquire about all the tool which is called "the introducer", according to its form or chapter that follows.
And the method of inquiring about the pus from wounds is that you take what is more moist than what you find inside the pus, and twist your fingers slightly and slightly, until you know that the tools have pierced the core, then do it according to the size of the pus.
Then remove the introducer, and be careful not to let it jump out.
When moisture seeps through, whatever its color may be, if it enters as I have described for other abscesses;
And if after the introduction of the probe no moisture comes, know that it is fatty, so cut it across, and take hold with tongs, and gently scrape it from each side, leaving the garment where it lies, which you should remove cleanly with a pincement.
And if you cannot remove it cleanly, then remove it piece by piece so that nothing is left behind.
Because if anything is left behind, it will recur through multiple occurrences;
And if it stays a little while, and the loss doesn't trouble you, use powders that corrode when applied to wounds, and hold the wound still. Place things that soothe abscesses nearby, and treat other treatments until it heals completely;
And if it's large, cut the two edges of the wound, and treat whoever is bleeding inside.
And if the vein is larger than what is contrary or another thing that requires urgency, prepare the wound with vinegar and let it sit for two days or three days, until the wound heals from inside out. Then resume treating where you left off after removing the old material.
Here are the forms of the instruments for intervention, and there are three ways: large, medium, and small. And if you have four square ones which are called "albaret" and one which is called "breb". There are also three types in terms of size: large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses of fistulas;
And they are also like the needles from which one removes the thorns, and they are made of amber citrine, or iron, or silver, and yellow ones are more effective than black lead for enclosing abscess cavities.
And they come in three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the openings of the wounds.
The shapes of the hooks resemble sheep, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if the hooks have two swellings in three different ways, just like that.
And if the hooks have two swellings and are also in three ways; and if there are hooks with two swellings, single-hooked hooks, and these too are in three ways; and all of this is necessary according to their place.
The head of this one that they make be sharp, and there are some who do not cut strength from both sides, of whom one sears the skin, for in such cases one does not encounter the vein nor the nerve.
And of these introducers are the lancets placed in sleeves, so that the patient does not feel it when abscesses are opened.
There are three ways: large, small, and medium, just as you see;
and only use it with the inner arm for things like legs, arms, breasts, and similar body parts;
And no other small instrument is made, resembling whips of thieves', according to this shape, to which one stops the blood:
And it is placed only once in its proper location among veins that are repaired and arteries, and never follows this large form:
Never do the breasts of some men swell when they begin to become corrupt, until they appear like breasts of women;
And remain ugly and swollen, and those who wish to cure them should do it according to this shape of the line b. up until g.: Then scrape off the fat, and apply medicine to the wound to promote healing, then join the two edges of the wound for stitching, and treat until it is fully healed;
And if the mammary gland is sagging down and shrunk by its size, similar to how it occurs in women when they are old or after childbirth, cut it into two halves above, making two apparent slits; From which one holds to the other at the end of each and both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b. until the line g.; Then scrape off the skin that is between the two edges, remove the fat, and follow what we have instructed about stitching and powders, as well as everything necessary for treatment until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, or the incision hasn't been fully made, because the patient doesn't want to rest, or due to the bleeding, it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment. And let it be until it begins to eat and move about, then you treat it until it is healed.
removal of abscesses and boils
Abscesses that come from the armpits are methods of scrophula nodules or swellings, and if there are any containing moisture.
Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this shape, from line b. up to line .g.: And when all the pus from within the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton and apply ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula, cut it as we have said in cuts for scrofula sores, and if the wound is filled with pus, apply a cautery as we said previously.
Regarding the rupture of the artery
When the artery is cut, and the skin is sewn above it, there often occur abscesses, and similarly with veins and abscess.
And if one knows that it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long enough for sure. And when you feel it with your fingers, if you sense pressure; and when it's due to the vein, then there is a clear swelling.
And it's foolish to cover this abscess, and indeed even when it appears under the joints and bones or around the neck and in many other places, and is very large. One must then avoid the iron treatment, and one who is on top should also be avoided. And in the case of swelling from an artery, they do it through the skin for a long time;
One must then avoid the iron treatment, and one who is on top should also be avoided. And in the case of swelling from an artery, they do it through the skin for a long time; Then work on the waist at intervals, and beautifully remove the artery from the tissues, until it is uncovered;
Then stick a tool under it and pierce up to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread for two lengths as I taught you in the extraction of two arteries which are in temples;
Then puncture the middle part between the two lengths with an instrument until blood comes out where there is none, and thus remove the abscess;
Then proceed with the treatment until the wound heals; Then treat that application of ointment until it becomes clean;
and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, it is necessary that you dye with your hand whatever part of the abscess you can remove from all the skin, Then insert the needle through the part of your hand you hold, and make it pierce, and let there be one double thread, so that you can pull it from the other side; Then cut out the abscess, just as I've told you, or tie off one of two ends with a thread to;
and if you suspect that the threads might break, if I re-thread another needle with both ends of one thread across the entire abscess at the incision point from the first needle's opening, and then hold the threads in four places;
then cut out the excess of the abscess as it comes out, then cut off the excess neatly and leave what is tied;
Then place on one part of it a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil, then he brings about treatments and applications of remedies until they are healed.
removal of abscesses or nerves
Just like an abscess can form in the artery and vein, an abscess may develop in nerves when they are injured or due to excessive work, and similar things.
And this happens more often in shoulder joints and elbows, and everywhere there are joints, it is one type of abscesses, and their color resembles the color of flesh, and can be found in various positions without causing pain;
And when one constrains its form, the patient feels pain, but not entirely through the body, but rather throughout the flesh;
And moves in all directions, neither forward nor backward, neither downward nor upward; one who is in joints should not be covered with iron: by chance it might cause contraction;
And that which is at the head or forehead, makes the skin smooth. If the abscesses are small, then use forceps and remove them from their root;
And if it is large, suspend it at the navel, and cut off the skin afterwards, then remove the bone, and join the wound together with the stitches, and treat until it is healed.
And for large tumors, they are suspended No occurrence is found in the belly or anywhere else similarly shaped; it's a disease named "fungus" based on its appearance, and it has a subtle root, and large swellings; there are also smaller ones.
And I saw one person who had two bellies which looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference at all; they were white and had small roots, and were cut open, and they rotted due to moisture.
I collected and found them in one 16. ounces weighing, and in the other 5, and in this operation during incision if you observe that the patient's skin is moist, and the color of the artery is white and moist with a subtle root;
If you operate on the large artery, and have the fire cautery present with you. For the surgeon often experiences too many bleedings from the incisions, and if it escapes your notice, then quickly use the cautery;
And if you see the skin startled and fearful at the incision from the iron, take one piece of well-made hemp thread, and bind the artery as we have said, and let it be for two days;
And then hold it in place, and do not stop holding the thread of plonc until it touches the artery, and any part that is easily worked; and if the roots are large, if you have fear in touching them directly for the belly, but you can still manage to work half of it.
And then apply cautery so that it doesn't re-erupt; then treat the wound, and ensure you don't touch the blood vessel which is of thin consistency and poorly responsive to touch.
For this is an abscess that has opened up, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene next.
When the elbow bone twists
The appearance of the elbow is due to an injury or fissure in the skin, and it occurs on the belly and in some parts of the elbows, just as it happens in other ruptures, or blood that escapes from veins or arteries following what precedes, or from windiness;
And if it's through the rupture in the syphilitic and via the opening of the elbow, then the color of the abscess resembles that of the blood, and is a slight matter without much pain, and opens from various exits. And if it's due to the opening of the intestine, then it becomes more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers it comes back and then returns, and by chance it might tighten up and enlarge much at the entrance of the bath and through hard work.
And if it is due to moisture, it's a minor issue, and opens nicely when you press it with your hand, without constraining it; and if it's because of blood, then opens through these signs, the pus being large and hard, and sticking according to quantity;
And if it's due to wind (ventositeit), it stinks at the touch, and the vessels so that you observe whether their appearance is like blood from an artery, or from a vein, or wind. It is necessary that you leave the treatment alone. For there is doubt and fear if, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if its appearance is like the intestine or liver, it's necessary that you instruct the patient to sweat their body and stretch it completely straight, then cut across the entire area of the wound. Then instruct them to grow strong between your hands, then go within the body where you have indicated to all the sinew, then let half of the abscess be above at each major hook;
Then half of the pus sac is spread out over the ligament, and you must press your finger into it, and inspect the intestine; if you find that it's stuck in the ligament, then release it, and press the intestine back to the front of the abdomen;
and if you find that it's bloated, then take hold of its root, and remove any excess.
and if it goes against the artery or vein, then go straight ahead and return to your work, taking two needles, and place two thread loops, and insert the two needles into the one you made a hole in when you pierced.
Then grasp the abscess for four fingers above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the wound heal by itself until it discharges pus, When it becomes subtle and hard, then you treat according to what is needed, and cut the abscess as we have said.
When it becomes subtle and hard, then you treat according to what is needed, and cut the abscess as we have said. And remove any blood or moisture you find, then treat the wound according to what is needed, and stitch up the wound.
towards the sore
We have discussed the appearances of gangrene and how to treat them with medicines, and how to avoid iron treatment. Let us say that gangrene grows in the armpit, and great caution is needed when treating it. The old ones said that if gangrene appears where you can scrape it off, such as on the nipples, in cooking areas, and similar body parts, then you should remove all of it at the beginning; and when it becomes large and old, one should not approach it at all because I have never known anyone to heal from it. Nobody has ever healed under my care before.
And in the operations, when it's in place or can be removed, as we have said, you should cleanse the patient of any black bile once; then let the surgeon know if there's clear fullness, then treat the wound properly so that the operation can take place. Then remove your tumors or ulcers from all sides and ensure nothing remains; leave all the blood to flow freely, clean the area well with your hand or without anything touching it, and when blood drainage goes against the incision of an artery or a vein, cauterize until the wound is dry; then proceed with other treatments until the patient is healed.
of dropsy We have mentioned the indications of dropsy in division, and how it is formed, along with the signs for each indication, and treatment administered through medicine, as well as that which is treated by iron: these are clearly explained; however, iron should not be used only in these two conditions. It means, peritonitis and edema, because this is a deadly matter; hence when you use medicines to treat dropsy known as 'eclites', with medicines alone, and if the patient doesn't improve from it, then look if the patient's condition is weak, or they have another illness besides dropsy, such as abdominal distention and similar things; in this case, do not apply iron because there could be doubt. And when you see that the patient's condition is very greenish, and they only have dropsy without any other illness, and their age isn't too young nor too old, then it should be like this: Guide the patient straight to your hands, and have them press their abdomen while you pour boiling water onto the lowest part of their buttocks. Then take a thorn-shaped instrument according to this form: And make cuts that are one and a half inches long at their tip point, but do not cut too deep so that it might come until reaching the intestine when inserted, and cannot be pulled out;
Then observe if the inflammation has advanced towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you cut through inside of the pouch at three inches below the buttocks; and if the inflammation is due to illness in the liver, then make your incision to the left side of the pouch for three inches. And if it's caused by pus, then do so on the right side, and it mustn't let the patient lie over the incision where excesses might flow into that weak spot;
Pierce the whole skin with the tool, and pull it out, then lift your hand so that the instrument rests between the skin and fat as when you would sear at the size of a fingernail or slightly more; then pierce the fat until the thorn-like part reaches about five fingers high, this is the height of boiling water, then withdraw the force, and use this tool like it's shaped: It resembles a fine silver reed, with either silver or brass material that is light, having two small notches on one side; three on another, and one each on the other sides. And make the incision in the shoulder as if you're trimming feathers, and this describes the shape of the incision that writers describe by trimming the feather.
At the top is the heart, so when the instruments reach the water, they now descend upon the instrument; empty it then half or a third of it, for if you empty more than necessary at that hour, by chance the patient might die from the release of his spirit due to the weapon's impact, or he could lose his hands, or he would approach death.
but empty it according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what the virtue's dispositions mean for the patient, and their pulses; then guide the instrument and retain the water, and she is now retained due to the numbness that affects the syphilitic who is on the wound, as I have spoken, by perforating in this manner; then restart the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw a small quantity of water.
Do this every day, and refrain from drinking until it no longer remains but a little of the water. And if you doubt about the patient, and leave too much water, so that the burial or sand heats up, and through sweating, baths, sun exposure, and if it turns red; and drink accordingly. And treat with drying medicines until he is well, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extracting the water, as I said earlier.
Of the stopping of the penis None give birth without having defects in the penis, or if they have any are small, or do not fit in their place. If it is suitable at once that he has pierced through completely to one half. .i spatumile very subtle according to this shape: then put in a .i thin clove of iron, and bind it and keep it thus for three or four days; and when he wishes to urinate, should remove the clove, and pass urine, and then put it back; and by chance there is nothing else that suits because the urine which comes out does not let him closed. If the penis defects are small, there is a medicine using iron clove as we have said, if it expands. Those who do not have their penis in its place suffer blindness, because none give birth who have the penis at the tip of the penis; so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis up; and cannot impregnate either because the matter cannot reach to the spermatic substance, and this is a bad disease.
And the method of treating such is that the patient lies on their back, then the head of the penis and the testicles are positioned as large as a feather's width, so the parts to be treated are in the middle, just like it should be; and guard against bleeding which occurs frequently, and if it happens, stop the bleeding by the one who stops blood flow, and treat the wound until it is healed.
pimples of the penis Many times blisters appear on the penis, and there is an unpleasing appearance; among them are benign and malignant ones. It's necessary that you take samples of size one-twelfth part each, cut them all up, then apply Egyptian ointment on cotton. Then treat with diafinicon ointment until it heals completely. And if the boil is malign, turning red and discharging pus, it is necessary for you to bring in a cautery. When you have prepared it, and if the boil has appeared along the length of the penis, having part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary for you to remove the boil that is inside first; and when it is healed, then cleanse from the outside. For when you cleanse together, there must not be any leakage from the penis, causing blackness and decay within the penis and at the anus; if this occurs, cut away all that is black and decaying, then apply a dressing of honey and flour made from almond shells and vinegar, then continue other treatments until it has healed.
And if bleeding occurs, it is necessary to apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizations should be arranged in two places together: that is, at the bleeding and decay; and if the head of the penis has become decayed and removed and you are circumcised, it is necessary for you to use a stick of opium and let the patient urinate with it among them. And when hair grows on the tip of the penis which comes from those who have not been circumcised or due to wound or abscess, then it is necessary that you burn it with a single tool for one time until the ties are untied, and release the head of the penis from all sides;
And if it's difficult to discuss this matter, it is necessary for you to burn it with a single needle in the middle of the head of the penis and the skin; then make a clean incision between them, and I place one fine linen bandage dipped in cold water on top so that it does not heal immediately.
Concerning circumcision
Circumcision is not merely a continuation of other diseases; still, whenever we perform this act of our own will and for children, it must be done with the best work, and in the gentlest manner possible for health.
I say that the old ones did not mention circumcision of their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
But I have wanted the majority of masters and lords who performed circumcision between the first day and one week, and during all infancy; it was the best because there are two layers there, and by chance, if one leaves this above and the other remains below.
They recover with difficulty and the pain is doubled, and at the operation where the body is cut open, it's not clear exactly where the injury lies; and in the amputation of a bone by mistake the surgeon cuts the limb, and proceeds with the work, often performing amputations when they're unnecessary as I have noticed.
From the operation which is performed to strengthen everything, I found that there are advantages to experimentation, because strength cuts as well above as below equally well.
But when you press your hand, if it cuts equally in the middle, .i., all is tensed. However, ensure that the threads are well twisted together inside the skin; and adopt the manner of the first operation so as to make the child think that you are only applying force by threading the thread around the penis just like that, and then let it hang in every way possible that you can. Then make the member straight in your hands, and rest the forces between your hands or beneath your feet so the infant does not see them nor any of the instruments; then place your hand on the penis and blow or guide it upwards until the head of the penis is inside. Then clean it well from the dirt that has accumulated, then tie the opening with a double thread, then tie it under .i. inch below and .i. inch above. And hold it by .ij. fingers through the second layer to the pouch and the first knuckle, cut between the .ij. threads, then lift the knee quickly and pull out the head of the penis;
Then make the member straight in your hands, and rest the forces between your hands or beneath your feet so the infant does not see them nor any of the instruments; then place your hand on the penis and blow or guide it upwards until the head of the penis is inside. Then clean it well from the dirt that has accumulated, then tie the opening with a double thread, then tie it under .i. inch below and .i. inch above. And hold it by .ij. fingers through the second layer to the pouch and the first knuckle, cut between the .ij. threads, then lift the knee quickly and pull out the head of the penis; Then let the bleeding continue for a while because this is the menses; and put powder here and there on top of the powder. Apply one drizzle of an egg yolk tempered with rose water, mixed with fresh and well-beaten oil, and leave it there until the next day, and treat it again with another treatment until it has healed.
The shape for the cleaning is this: let both ends be held and be sharp, and have the ends as large as the fingers evenly.
The error of world creation happens when the kidneys inside are disturbed during incision; therefore, it is necessary that you extend up to your fingernail, in such a way that they make an abscess; and do it evenly, and if you cannot hold up to your fingernail, then use tweezers, and then proceed.
And if they penetrate for three days, and the one which is beneath the penis is swollen, let him wait until the abscesses around it are alleviated, and gently scrape it; do it as much as you can move, and avoid touching the part of the penis, for it will not harm it.
Then treat the inner part of a sore wound with powder, as we have said or treated powders, and if you scrape beyond the knee excessively, and it goes too far, it will do no harm; then treat it accordingly, just as we have said, until it heals.
holding back of urine
The retention of urine is due to the formation of stone, or frozen blood, or bladder obstruction, or a formed lump, or similar things that we mentioned in the section.
And if the urine is released and you see retention due to stone in the bladder or neck of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient be supported on his knees. And they should have their feet under their back, and extend their stomach above the part at the back, and restrain the patient so he is bending forward as much as he can; and then it forces the neck of the bladder to express the stone above, which causes the urine to be released;
And if it does not come out as we said and the patient feels intense pain, it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the tool which is called "syringe", of which here is its form: and let it be made of fine and light wire, like a bird's feather; and let it have a cane of about 1½ palm in length, and make sure it's fine at the tip.
And the way to relieve the passage of urine is that you take one double thread, and tie at its head one piece of wool or cotton, and place the head of the thread inside the syringe; and remove the excess of the wool and tie it until reaching the tip of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and beaten egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a seat, and push up the bladder and penis from moist oil and olive oil and vinegar;
And then gently place the syringe in the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the anus; then position the syringe forward until it's before the bladder, and let the patient feel urine come up to the empty thing, and this is not done following this order because what leads it off was twisted; then wind the thread all through the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it forcefully, and make the urine flow.
And repeat the process until the bladder is emptied, and relieve the patient.
On diseases of the bladder
When burns or blood come to the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, then have all the instrument called 'clepsidra', and it has this form:
It is closed, and if it has three parts: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and let the medicines flow through that way so they thoroughly numb the penis without addition, if moisture can be removed, and to push when necessary;
And when you see the medicines flowing in the bladder, place the strainer in the moisture, and pull on the puller which is attached; if you remove the moisture with the strainer, then push forcefully on the puller afterwards; if the moisture enters inside and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it.
And this is the form of the subtle bladder stone which one treats with a cathartic for the bladder: if it's thus:
And it is of silver or of iron, and the shoulder is higher up; and from there to your thumb you can touch it; then take a sheep's bladder and place it on the moist substance which one uses to treat the bladder, then tie it between your two thumbs in the form of a firm double thread, and heat one end of this moist substance over fire; then guide the part with gravel into the penis, then press your hand against the bladder with all the moisture until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make one circle, then pierce it roundly all around. Then insert a strong thread into these parts, assemble the circle as you would assemble two plates, and place inside what you see from moisture and water and vinegar, then tie it in the tool; do this as you did with the bladder by pressing against your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
from the stone
We have discussed the methods of stone division and extraction together with medicines; and we have spoken about the difference between indwelling stones and those in the kidney, as well as all the signs, and when one should operate on a stone; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will clearly and briefly tell you.
I say that stones which are indwelling in the bladder occur more often among children, and this is a sign that the infection jumps from the bladder akin to an infection that manifests through subtlety; they open the urethra, and rub the patient's penis, and he urinates many times, and then it gets caught. And at these jumps of the stone, its base can be found; and for several months, children's healing is light until they reach four years old, it causes much discomfort in the elderly, and occurs in middle age, to those who are between adulthood and old age; and the treatment for those with large stones is lighter than for those with small ones.
And when it comes to treatment, the first thing is to cleanse the body through urination, in order to drain all the waste that is in the intestines. For it often blocks at trying to remove the stone.
Then take hold of the patient by the feet, and lift them up and move them downward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and exits once below its height. Then make them sit between your hands with their legs spread apart, so that the bladder is fully sloped downwards; then you look into it and touch it from there.
If you sense the stone in space, hurry now to cut on the stone. And if it doesn't pass under touch throughout, moisten your index finger of your left hand, for if the patient is female; or your middle finger, if the patient is young and mature; then push into its base, feel the stone, and when you sense it with your finger, remove it to the neck of the bladder; then press at this spot, and force out from your finger where you see to cut.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to extend his right hand upwards above the genitals, and place his left hand on the skin that is over the genitals in the area where cutting is done; then push out the urine, of which this is its shape:
And make the division between the two that is between the coions and the foundation, not in the middle but at the edge of the left side; it should be straight on the stone, and your hands should reach to the foundation or the edge, and make its size crosswise so that it's wide outside and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
By chance if the press is where it should be which is at the foundation, she needs to jump forth without effort; know that there are parts of the stone with angles and edges: it tends to split in these spots; and if there's a part submerged, resembling a nut and being round, from which the extraction will be easy.
Therefore, at the parts with angles and edges where extraction might be difficult, increase its size; if she does not jump out, it's necessary that you apply pressure using tools akin to a file on the part of the tool that is similar to one, in order to strain against the stone so as not to let it escape; or you can use a delicate curved tool to press down from above. If you cannot manage this way, widen by half an inch its rough side, and if you cannot remove the rest without damaging the part, rub with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stone, start by removing the largest at the neck of the bladder. Then remove from above, then force out the tube, and afterwards the smaller ones if there are any more. And if it is very large, then it should be soiled and make a larger incision. Because two things occur to the patient: or he dies, or urine comes immediately through it as soon as the legs can't hold; but nonetheless strive with force for the removal, or for separation with tweezers, until you remove it piece by piece.
And when you have completed your work, fill the wound with frankincense, aloe, and dragon's blood, then press it in, and place over it one wet bandage in oil and wine, or in oil and cold rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then set the patient upright at their neck, and do not loosen the tie until the third day.
And when you loosen it, make sure to sit upright from the oil and water well, then bathe with dyacina ointment and basil ointment until they are healed.
And if abscesses enter into the wound and ulcers, and blood clots in the bladder, and should this be held back causing urine retention, which is known in such a manner that without jumping along with the urine: therefore you must apply to the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and spoil it;
Then heal the wound with cold, salt, and oil, and help it in all the ways that you see fit, as long as it is healing; and you should ensure that when you treat him, you tie his two legs together, and apply the remedies to his back.
And if the stone is small and it's placed in such a way that it blocks the passage of urine from the penis, causing retention; then treat it as I instruct by cutting multiple times along this method, and forgive any concern for size due to these treatments. I have already proven this works like this.
Take one piece of iron according to this shape and have it pierced at three corners in one point:
Then take one thread and tie it around the shaft of the member just below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then place the iron piece in the member gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron piece with your hand on the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from another side; if urine comes quickly, then press your hand onto what remains of the stone which is inside the member. If it breaks quickly, flush with urine, and protect yourself;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie one thread around the stone and another above, then place the member between these two threads right over the stone, then flush forcefully, and remove the thread, and clean off all the congealed blood from the wound; and treat until it is healed.
From the stone of women
It happens that stone is found in women, and if it occurs once, the treatment is difficult, and is prohibited for three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows how to expose herself even when she is pure.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who knows this art of surgery; and the fourth way is that the stone in women tends to be closer to the surface than a man's stone, so it requires deeper removal, and there is great fear involved.
And if necessity arises to this degree, you must seek out a skilled midwife and place your trust in her. If you do not find one even among the pure-hearted, then look for someone who has some knowledge of the art of women's health or an experienced woman who understands something about it. Command her to perform what you instruct regarding stone removal.
And very carefully inspect if the woman is a virgin: then she must thrust her finger or its base and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, make her press upon her finger, and she should thrust her finger or bring the disease under her finger, and advise her to thrust her finger or place her hand against the bladder firmly.
And if she finds it, it must be moved gradually from the entry of the bladder until under, as long as she reaches the root of the thigh; then apply pressure on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the womb, where the disease manifests, and feel the stone in that area; and do not move her finger above the stone or below it, cut to size first;
Then cut the rib in the waist, if you feel the stone continue to increase the wound until the stone can emerge forcefully, and know that many types of stones are: this means small and large, smooth and rough, long and round, and those with grooves. And learn their appearances to know their outcome.
And if it doesn't heal, put in your place sulfur paste, and hold it for an hour until the sore is healed; then return to your work until the stone is soft and have at hand the tools I've told you about in stone extraction procedures to assist you with your task.
And if the sore doesn't heal and it's an artery that has been cut, put the powder on your wound and bind it with strips of cloth. Don't repeat this method again, leave the stone alone and don't try to remove it by chance which might kill the patient; then treat the wound afterwards.
And when the heat of blood has been calmed and your limbs are recovered, return to your task until the stone becomes soft.
Of fatty hernia
A watery hernia is nothing else but a gathering of moisture or white yolk, which is found in the area around the kidneys, contained within the egg; and it's called "yolk", and one cannot properly find it on the surface of the egg if one thinks it's another egg; and this is the skin under the kidney containing the white yolk that we have mentioned; and this doesn't have any hole.
And the formation of such a watery hernia is due to weakness that affects the kidneys, and this spreads that substance.
And it never comes from impact on the kidneys, and this moisture can have many colors: or it becomes a declining yellow, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and this happens more frequently.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is or white and firm as we have said, then the pus sacs are present, .i., long so like the figure of an egg, and do not open the pores, because there is moisture throughout.
And if there is moisture in the own fabric, then the pus sacs are present with part of the egg, and by this we think that it's another egg;
And if the moisture is between the skin of the pores and the white as we've said, then you'll feel it well; therefore when you see the color of the moisture, test thoroughly through all the square opening, from which its form was described previously. According to this then, who comes after the introducer, judge of what is inside him.
According to this then, who comes after the introducer, judge of what is inside him. And when we cure him with a metal tool, the patient's wounds must be treated according to our ability and his body's capacity for recovery; then place him on his back on something slightly elevated, and put blankets under him.
Then have him sit to the left, and command the minister to sit to the right, extending his arm to one of the two ribs close to the kidneys;
Then take the spatula knife, and cut through the skin of the kidneys between him and along its length up to his elbow, and make the incision straight down through the kidney skin until you reach the white fat, and carefully scrape off the fat according to your skill.
Then make a full-thickness incision about an inch wide, and remove all the water, then place your fingers, and position the incision above; do not touch the inner lining of the wound, but only let the incision be present; cut through or bit by bit across his side until you are sure to have made it cleanly, otherwise the water will return.
And if the egg jumps to your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the incision; then join together the two sides of the wound with stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find that the egg has been corrupted by another illness, it is necessary for you to tie the ligaments that are suspended, in case of blood flow; then cut the membrane all along the suspension, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the wound is united in two parts together, know that these are two twigs; take hold of the other part as you did with the first equally, then bleed out the blood, and apply wet wool in oil rose to the wound.
and put on another layer of wet wool in wine and oil, and place it over the two kidneys, then cover with folded cloths, and secure it all along the bandage according to this shape:
Then take two cloths, and use them as knitted wool according to this appearance, they should be joined by sewing in the garter of the breeches, and one of the shoulders is placed on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part near the elbow; and the second head is above the two angles, and it should all come together with the tightening in the loop of the belt.
And never is medicine given to this rod of the cautery in place of an iron amputation, and take the first tool, a finely crafted fire cautery, and prepare the skin around the amputation site, and heat it as we have described so that the white fluid containing water becomes visible;
Take the cautery according to this form and pierce that white spot like an inch, then apply it with this fine heat cautery until it scours:
And the incision should be made in all ways that you can, as long as you remove it completely; and remember not to let the fire touch the egg; know that this operation is more saved; and protect against blood loss, and be aware of the incisions for amputation;
And if nothing opposes you, or if pus comes out, or if blood flows elsewhere, then treat whatever is opposing you according to what has been said previously.
And if the patient is afraid and does not wish to undergo this treatment because of its horror, then perform a puncturing procedure as I instruct you, and know that when you are sure based on the meanings we have explained that the watery branch is there,
And have the patient sit on a raised seat; then puncture the abscess in the part under it at its widest point over all pus, and make the puncturing long through the entire thickness; and make the incisions broad so that all the pus can be drained.
Then place cotton on the head, bind it, and leave with contact to water, then treat until the wound is healed.
And if the white material does not allow water to exit from the wound's mouth, it is necessary for you to insert a needle or a tool used to treat water in drops, as its form was described before; and make sure that water widens one inch across the wound, knowing that water returns and assembles after about 8 months or somewhat more, and when it is assembled just as before, then this will pass through the disease's time.
regarding the pus in the throat
You should know that within this branch there are various positions of fear, which is why I believe it's better to let them be.
And I will tell you the procedure and appearance of an abscess.
Therefore, it is known that many abscesses can occur on the body or limbs; and this happens due to various reasons.
This means that it occurs from excess of sourness and fever, which spreads throughout the body parts, or from impact;
And its color for the abscess matches the color of the body; and there is no feeling of pain, it is an abscess with discomfort.
And by chance there may be one or more pus-filled and stone-like lumps with a yellowish color, and it never comes from the artery, or inflames veins.
When it's from an artery, if you know how to handle an abscess correctly, by pressing with your fingers; And it is not right for you to touch it.
That which is filled with swelling in the veins can be recognized by its position and response when touched with your fingers,
And can well do the size on this likeness, and on the other chapters; And you should cut the vein of the heart, then place it at the top, and make the artery white and smooth, and release all suspensory threads from the egg.
If the egg is already bound with these chapters (likely referring to surgical instruments or knots), then you must remove the egg and the cut.
And if it is white at the artery or in that which is inside the vessels, you must release all of this vein, and cut around it round.
And if the birthplace of the heart is behind where it usually is, then you must take all of it and remove the egg, just as we have said.
And when your operations are finished, apply the wound with moistened wool in oil and wine, then continue other treatments until it heals.
regarding the pus of the ears
This is a pus-filled abscess covered by an envelopment resembling one and a half rings, with the swelling of the ears, And if the body is being strained when it moves;
And the treatment of this disease is so effective that it matches what was mentioned before.
Yet we will tell you about its practice according to what the old did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat of one meter, then hold it up with your hands under the buttocks. To all those who are close to the genitals, and instruct their masters, and stretch them out in form;
Then cut into the scrotum deeply but not too deep through the veins, as long as they are exposed,
Then scrape from each side, as we said when removing arteries that are in the temples;
Then I insert a needle with two threads attached, and tie it at the first location where the screw has come, and do this immediately to the other end as well. Then cut straight through the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture;
Then treat the wound as with others or bind it tightly, so that no fluids leak out until one of the kidneys grows;
because nothing bad comes from this, and if all veins are involved, it is necessary to remove the kidneys throughout the veins; so that the kidney does not lose its growth due to cutting of the vessels, and dries out and cannot help each other.
Of the rupture of the syphilitic sore The occurrences of this branch happen by the cut that leads to syphilitic sores, or the stretching on the belly in the part of the glands, because the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the groins;
And this rupture is from syphilitic sores, or from the stretching of it, and come in these two ways by means of several causes: from percussion, or a jump, or barking, or lifting of a load, and through similar things;
And the signs when it is from stretching of syphilitic sores, are that it occurs gradually and steadily over a long time, and does not come suddenly. And the pus is even until near the front, because the suction pulls on the intestine.
And the symptoms are when it's from the suction of the intestine, it causes a sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various pus appearances near the skin, because of the exit of the intestine and the body under the intestine.
And none of the loops descend with the intestine, and they are held back, causing suffering great pain to the patient, even when they are pressed.
And in these iron-wounding cases, because one must avoid them.
And the way of performing this operation is such that you instruct the patient to make the intestine move inside their body through the wound with your hand if it can fit in. then sew up his neck. Between your hands, lift the legs;
then stretch out the belly above and peel all the skin from the groin to the length. then stretch inwards the belly lips according to your skill for opening a wound and ensure that it is done so they can emerge properly.
Then scrape off the scabs that are on the inside of the foreskin, as long as all sides show the white foreskin;
then cut your index finger on the one that surrounds the penis, between the white scab which is on the skin of the testicles, and between the second scab,
and cut the one behind the testicles, and between the second scab; then move with your right hand inside the scrotal sac, and place the white scabs on your left hand, then lift the testicle towards the stomach; and command the attendant to extend the testicle upwards, and loosen the one behind the connection;
And seek at your fingers if any part of the intestine is covered or white and hard, and if you find nothing, then push it out from the belly downwards;
Then take a needle or have one of the size of ten strands of thread and push it behind the syphilitic part, which comes after the skin of the anus; after this process, then cut out the lumps that appear from the threads, until there are four threads. Then join them one above the other in a way of a cross and bind the syphilis, which we have mentioned is near the skin of the anus, with a firm thread of two parts. Then wrap the lumps from the threads and bind them firmly with two parts so that none of the stitches they produce can enter in it, ensuring no abscess can spread. And make the first band along the longest line of that one two spans from it, and after these two bands leave some space which is under the knee of the leg as wide as one span.
And after the whole other according to the roundness that it carries; then cut in the area under the skin of the leg as long as it does not touch, and the bone, just like we said before.
Then apply wet wool in oil, and put it on the wounds, and place the bandage as we have said. And once the white wound dressing that we have described is burned after the incision, in order to prevent bleeding again.
For this happens many times and let the bandage stay until it discharges from him; and if he doesn't fall off quickly, immerse him in hot water, and apply what we have said until it discharges.
Then continue treating the wound with another method until it heals completely.
of fatty hernia
In this branch, I never find anyone who dares to perform the iron cure.
And the old ones said that it is done like a branch assembled with a vine, in such a way that you tie the veins after trimming them lightly above the mouth.
Then cut me here, and clean the abscess of whoever works on it, as long as the veins bleed; and treat it in the way we have said, while it is still bleeding.
Never allow any tearing within the wounds, as we have said, and open the openings; and do not let anything of the intestines escape into the cavities, and if it does escape, that is little harm, and repair all parts.
And even if it stays too long at this point, suspect the wound or gangrene, until the intestines start escaping;
And this happens due to the extension of the syphilitic disease which is in the limbs, as we have said, because it is extended, then made soft and swollen in the joints and opened.
And the treatment consists of a cautery, as we have already mentioned; and no treatment is done by iron in this manner:
And let the patient lie with their back facing up between your hands, then apply the limb over the swollen area as wide as three inches according to its size;
And then remove the syphilitic matter that is under the skin as you proceed, then take a thread and place it over the visible part of the syphilis.
And he presses at the bottom of the belly, then cuts both of them near the anus above the head of the penis, and cuts each one separately;
then he extracts the head of the penis, and does not touch or stretch the anus nor extend the egg in any other way, as I have instructed you in the treatment of removing the thorn from intestines;
then treat him with wound care procedures. And when you cut the children [here likely referring to testicles], if he is in need and needs treatment for the wound, until it heals.
The anus is restricted and does not show any signs in the process, and the cauterization is performed near this area, closer to healing.
from the softening of the skin around the kidneys
Many times the skin around the kidneys becomes soft in some people, because the substances inside are being softened and can be seen; when one wishes to treat it, one must make the patient feel better on their back, and pull the softened skin towards the natural skin. Then join the two halves of the skin at a stitch, and if needed, sew the excess soft skin into three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat the wound like any other, until it heals, and leave the thread in place.
of chastisement
Know that chastisements are excluded in our law, and because of this, it would please me if I did not mention them in this book. And they are necessary only for two reasons: one is that the person must know how to respond when asked about them and how to treat them; and the other is because we often need chastisement on certain animals to help us, as with sheep, goats, and cows, among others. Thus I say that chastisements are carried out in these two ways: either through attraction or by making a cut.
Of those who are hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites are like this in two ways: one way is when between the two openings as if it's the natural figure of a woman, having hair, and sometimes excreting urine. And the other way is like men, having on the belly button similar to a penis and two openings. The treatment for both male and female types is that you treat all the connected parts as whole, treating them just like any other wound; in the second way, for males whose urine jumps through the skin of the openings, there's no specific cure.
Regarding the text you've provided, it seems to be a medical treatise from medieval times written in Old French, which unfortunately lacks context to provide an accurate translation without knowing more about its content and purpose.
Tattooing is an addition made on the natural part of someone's body; when it's too ugly to see. Some women have tattoos as big as a hand, and that needs treatment. You should remove the excess tattoo with your hand or nail, doing so gently; don't do this more deeply than necessary to avoid blood leaking out. After that, continue treating until it heals properly. Then treat another spot at the mouth of the vagina and anus, possibly elsewhere by chance like on a mole, resembling the shape of a cow's head, hence they named this old ailment 'cow disease'. You should remove any tattoo you see following the method we have explained for tattoos and continue treating until it fully heals.
Of wandering.
Wandering if it is due to the woman's natural condition not being fully perceived or the loss is small; and this occurs naturally at birth, or by accidents through illness that has come about. Or it could be because of a tattoo, or due to excess body fat or hairiness, and caused externally on her back, or ribs, or elsewhere; one must understand how to conceive and deliver the baby, and sometimes even get flowers for breeding; knowledge of this comes from observing the belly. If the protrusions are close and visible, you can feel them with your fingers or your hands. If it's due to body fat, and if they're close to her two breasts, you should act like this: put your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two breasts so that the subtle protrusions are rounded, covering them completely; then take lint, mix it with fat, and place it over her skin, and let the woman rest every day until she can't bear it. And if the fat is hard and lumpy, you should remove it as though it's a rose leaf. If the protrusions are due to birth, you should lift them with your thumb and remove them; take hemostatic medicines such as clove, dragon blood, incense, mixed with an egg yolk; then apply a wide piece of gauze so that the wound doesn't heal; do this for a long time, and after that put on a linen tent; until it fully heals. And when there is birth fat in her belly, if you have to remove it as described here, if it's an abscess. For an abscess in the belly should not be touched with fire.
Of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that occur without regular constipation. When hemorrhoids are old they become thickened; and we have described their appearances, signs, and will describe those related to treatment hereafter. I state that when hemorrhoids along with the thickened areas get inflamed inside the anus, they cannot be felt through the sense of touch unless treated by iron. Those located at the mouth of the anus can be felt and thus treated. It is then necessary to have the woman placed in a cold house, and then apply the thistle as treatment for piles using forceps, with camphor in its roots, and then sprinkle medicine that stops bleeding on it, such as comfrey, dragon's blood, and incense among others; afterwards, bind her legs at the knees for an hour, and then immerse her in cold water. If bleeding persists after this, then have her stay in a decoction of sumac and peel of red apple cores and gall and similar remedies, and then take oat flour, mix it with honey and ale, and apply .i ounces on her back. And if she stops bleeding, that is good. Should this not work out, have the application of suction cups on her back and nipples without piercing them; next, take wool and apply a paste made from its juice mixed with either plantain or allspice in old wine to her body. And when the abscess settles down, then treat her back until it heals. The one called 'albathir' is red, resembles .i hard lump, so it should be treated as I've described for the thickened areas; and after that, continue treating it until it heals fully.
Of abscesses of the anus
Many methods of pus discharge occur in the armpit, such as chancre and pustular abscesses, herpes, ecchymoses, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other abscesses; among them are several diseases I have mentioned in the division. Therefore, it is necessary for me to address the chaff abscess that appears in the armpit, which isn't one of those that get better on their own. And if you see how the work of iron proceeds, then observe whether the pus is flowing abundantly at its beginning and is full of heat and fever; and if it turns red when seen. Then do not hasten to pierce, but wait until the pain subsides; and afterwards make the patient lie on one side with .1. small pillow, and two smaller pillows under which he leans, and support him against his back and have his legs bent towards the parts below the leg; and let his arms be spread out, place them under his knees, tie them firmly together with a good bandage; then guide the operation to your right side and introduce the tool you use for opening the armpit, from which comes the form later; it must be that when you see this instrument being introduced, that you make the first cut just deep enough to know the depth of the armpit, so that what enters into the tool does not go too deep beyond what is necessary and does not hurt the patient; and if the tool is larger, then cover the depth of the armpit with strips, so that the tool does not bother it; it must be that you place the funnel of the tool above and cut the tool. And when the pus opens up and one holds it with their hand gently, should then cover it on top at the head, at the axillary gland; and once the pus is emptied, you should put moistened bandages in oil rose or in dried green oil into the wound; and place a cloth covering over the part of the armpit that is already cleansed with clean, damp linen placed under water or where cooked parsley leaves are used; then cleanse after two days of ointment suited to this, until it heals; and no single time should you lift the armpit and wound by dripping water and honey, but instead cleanse them as we have said in the division.
Regarding childbirth
Proficiency comes first in the dance of knowing the figure of natural birth and recognizing its signs. If you see a woman nearing labor with intense desire to push, and she wishes to smell something: then the child急于 starts to force its way out; from that moment you know the birth is happening according to nature's design, coming forth from her head, followed by the afterbirth; and when these signs are seen, gently pressing her belly is appropriate, so the child can emerge quickly. Because as it descends through her head, then the placenta comes with it, being freed of its excesses by proper cleaning. Any other way doesn't happen naturally. It often occurs on her feet or in body parts like arms and legs, or on her belly or backside, transforming unexpectedly under her collarbone or in other unfortunate configurations; so skillfulness is required from a midwife in these matters, wary of mistakes and deceitful perceptions, and I shall show you all the figures how she should assist properly.
When the child emerges through her head by natural issue, and the woman labors intensely, and her strength is weak, she should sit on a stool or have women hold her; and from that nature where fenugreek has been cooked, then put the midwife between her fingers to hold this small spatula shaped object as follows: And cut the afterbirth, and pinch until the moisture within is expelled; and press her belly as the child descends, and if it doesn't descend, you should anally administer muscilage from fenugreek mixed with sesame oil to her; then make her sniff and sneeze a mixture of spices, and keep her mouth and nose for one hour: now the child is delivered. And if both hands emerge, gently pinch them in and out; and if they can't enter, have the woman sit on a stool, lift her feet up high; then remove the stool from under her, cleanse her, so she doesn't urinate during delivery; and if the hands can't enter, and the child has died, you should cut her hands with a previously placed knife, extract the child, and pinch equally.
from the birth of the child on its feet When the child is born on its feet, what matters is to push it upwards; and then turn little by little, until it becomes even;
then take one of the feet and extend it slowly and gradually.
If he jumps up to his thighs, if you command it, and make him snort with consideration; If it jumps further, may God will it.
And if it doesn't jump as we have said, if you turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural figure. So then make it lightly.
And if there does not come fire as we have said, take alum and oil of balsam, and dissolved gum, and grind all in one mortar; and place inside and outside the woman's body this ointment, then have her sit in hot water up to her ribs;
And when it becomes moistened off, then to him she gives a spoonful of myrrh, and places it there, and leaves it for an hour; Then she makes him sit on a stool, then has him sneeze and restrains his mouth and nose, and gently touches his belly because the child is now jumping. From the child's exit above its knees When birth takes this form, so it's to touch its baby's hands gently and gently.
From the issue of the child that comes out with one hand stretched out. It's necessary to engineer how to bring back the hand: If one cannot bring it back, then make the woman lie down and get up.
If she cannot walk, make her lie on a bed for about an hour, and lift up both legs at the same time;
then perform the massage I have described;
and if she doesn't give birth, make her sit on a chair, then try to help in bringing the hand forward; and guide the baby according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to pray until the child comes out.
From the birth of the child at its neck, and it spreads out its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back It is necessary to wash his hand first, then turn it a little bit by little bit, and gently rub the wetness.
And when it is even, place it on the natural muscle movement of elevation and oil, as we have said, then command her to move a little bit by little bit;
And when you have done this, make her sit on a chair and command her to pray; and make her sneeze. In this same manner for all the rest
In this same manner for all the rest When it comes to dealing with everything else in this way, if you've reached the second bone towards your nail, as long as the moisture is drained;
And if it happens that it begins under its skin and around its neck, make sure the duct isn't blocked, and don't let the infant die;
Then place the child inside, as long as you have placed it correctly and according to need, command the woman not to give it any milk at all times:
from the birth of twins You know that twins are born many times, and sometimes they are born three or four at a time; this is not an unusual occurrence, it just happens. Two are uncommon things, and do not live together, if they are not separated;
I know this, that they are multiplied, and they are cut by the scabbard which devises them, which is linked to the blade;
and they also come out naturally as many under one at once, just as we have said.
And if they come out painfully, apply the treatment as we have said, and if there are delicate things, do what she suggests promptly and gently. and act in this way to promote health. Of many children
Of many children None are formed in marriage once or twice or three times or four times or five times or six times or seven times, and they are all shaped like infants by the measurement of their glory,
and it must be that the boy knows all this, for by chance something similar has happened to him; do so according to what is right.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman who has lost her dead child or is in labor, as I have explained in the division section, if it does not come out, and you are forced to operate with your hands; It is necessary for you to know if the woman is healthy and has no accidents, or fears death;
It is necessary for the woman to be on her back, and have her hips tilted downwards, and her legs lifted;
And let the minister give off two parts, or tie her to bed so she does not treat during childbirth;
Then rub the mouth of the expectant mother with oily camphor and a mixture of fennel and linseed, then grease her hands with these oils and these camphors. Then support the expectant mother lightly, then let her take one spoonful or two of what is sufficient for this purpose.
and watch that when it descends from its head; if they pierce his eyes or near his throat or in his mouth or around his palate or below his beard or under the collarbone or close to his ribs,
and if it pierces through his fingers, he should puncture or cut near the middle of his chest.
It is necessary that they prick the finger with their right hand, and place the bend between their left fingers, and they push it lightly with all their hand until it reaches the empty thing; and they should puncture the finger in any of those places we have mentioned until it reaches the hollow object.
Then find another needle of equal thickness, or if necessary kill the third one, so that the removals are even;
and then extend it evenly by moving from one side to the other, so that they can come out, and make sure the needles are sharp enough to hold in place, as shown here:
And if there remains a part, oil some of its flanks from that place, and put them in that part, and pull the other part;
And if there remains no part, then place this cautery or higher on the body, and do this until it comes out entirely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by squeezing, If that's the case, you should wrap a piece of linen around it until it exits entirely;
Then apply the paste to the junction of the foot or at the cut, and for the other hand, do in like manner, and use two pieces.
And if the child's head is large and it is stuck at birth, or if it has an acute assembly of its head, then you must push the spiny spinous node between your fingers, and remove the head by making it acute. or you will have it with the tool that is called "almidach", from which its form comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one.
and similarly, make the child grow with a large head naturally; and then pull hard for the bones with the tongs,
and if the joint pops out and is held back by force until it breaks, as long as there's moisture inside or worse, as soon as it releases;
and if it can't come out, cut it piece by piece according to what you can achieve;
and if it is swollen in the belly or around the ribs, you should pierce it as long as the moisture continues.
And if it is born on its feet, there's a light attraction, and the connection to the mouth of the umbilical cord is light.
And if it's turned belly-up or under the tail, it is necessary for you to remove it at one and a half drams wrapped in the hand; and until the moisture that is there has disappeared, when dealing with the belly or under the tail.
and if another bone is broken and the head remains. If you want to cure a wound made by a knife, Then cut out a piece of bone or two pieces,
And if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to pus which has come in, then it's not fit for a surgeon, firstly it requires administering things moist and greasy; and apply plaster to them, and also soak in a warm softifying and moistening solution.
And if the child is under its mother's ribs, and you can place it evenly, then apply what we have told you about in the live infant;
and if you cannot do so, then treat by parts, and leave nothing of the second part.
And when you have done this, let those who we spoke of regarding abscesses coming to the marital bed be treated as we mentioned.
And when blood withdrawal occurs, let it be done in water restricting and then proceed with other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose child had died in the womb, then another one was conceived after that, and it also resulted in death for her. After a long time, an abscess came up in the throat, and grew so much that it opened, and started to cause great pain.
I was summoned to treat the wound, and I waited for a long time, but could not secure the wound.
I applied strong plaster bandages, and in came one bone, and afterwards another after some days. I was greatly amazed, for the belly does not have any bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I am to heal the wound, and guide my hands over bones, until the woman was better positioned. and I attended to the woman long thus, and soon there was a little increase in her health.
and I have recorded this chapter only for those who, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to provide help.
to guide the womb back to its place.
After this comes the form of the presser, which is written in these books; and to two parts out of two heads from two bodies. Always, let the horns be more refined than those of a restrainer, and be made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the pipe be one hand's breadth wide, and the edge of the leaves should be half a palm long; and in between the two pipes, let them be two lengths of this same pipe, which must be firm both inside and outside, half a palm long or slightly longer.
And these two adjustments are performed at the mouth of the vagina for opening when one turns the .ij. horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, can be made from the handle of an ebony or boxwood staff, according to the shape of the forceps; and it has two heads with two adjustments, as you see, one palm in length, and two fingers in width;
and when you see the vagina opening to its full length with the entire instrument, make the woman sit on one bed, her feet hanging and her legs spread apart, After binding them, combine the two adjustments together in the middle of the neck, and hold the head of the instrument right between his armpits; Then work your hand on the whole instrument, just like you would with equal force on pincers, according to the quantity you see opening the mouth of the neck, as long as the body performs what it desires.
This instrument is completely mounted and multiplied in its forms; and when you have them set out, the work proceeds faster, and they are positioned higher for their quantity compared to others.
Do not neglect the instrument until you have set it out, because its necessity is not excusable.
When the second part is retained during childbirth, it must be commanded to the patient to hold her uterus, then make her sneeze with consideration, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose; and if she jumps over this, well done.
If it doesn't jump over this, take one pound, and make a lid or cover of one part, then put in herbs that can open the mouth of a mare, such as garlic, rue, anise, chamomile, bitter orange peel and sage.
All these herbs, or any of them, whether cooked in water on fire or in a pot over the fire, then place one spoonful or two spoons of the liquid from the pot under the mare's mouth.
And for the mange, let the steam rise from within the boil; then make it sniff outwards, as we have said. If its second heart jumps quickly. And if she remains after this treatment and lacks strength, command her to dance so that her left hand is moistened in oil of sesame or in the essences of mint, then let her use the rest of it.
And when she finds the second heart; and when she has found it, you should pull on it gently and gradually straighten it out, so that the wound does not open upon extraction. However, it is necessary to gently move it towards the right and left, then cut; if this happens, it will release.
And if the nostrils of the nose are restricted, as we have said for coughing out, and for the fumigation with herbs;
and if it is not from all of this that we have spoken about, then be careful not to bleed too much during the bleeding procedure;
but it is necessary that whoever is at the opening of the nose be tied to the woman's thigh, then use a suppository with tetra-form medicine balm.
If it is treated with a cautery and then repositioned, strength will return; but nonetheless, whenever it might improve so that there's bad smell in the stomach and head, and disfigurement of the patient occurs.
Therefore, it then needs appropriate fumigation for this: none of the old have proven effective fumigation with wild garlic and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman during the retention of flowers and secondines is this:
And it resembles a cane in appearance, and one places the head finely in the flame, and the joints broadly above the fire;
And let there be the fumigation above the coals, and the scab until it is eaten away, then start another one.
of piercing the base
Many children are born who do not have their foundation pierced, but rather it has been weakened by a subtle sickness. So it follows that in the dance, she should pierce that sickness at its rightful place, and do not pierce her through abrupt illness, but guard against any disturbance so that it does not touch her.
Then place on greased linen with wine and oil, then apply the salve while it is still warm.
And if you doubt it won't stick again, place a small piece of opium on it, and let the hands be steady, and remove it when the child wishes to enter chambers.
And these sudden injuries from cuts or abscesses occur; if this needs to be treated suddenly: if it is cured, as we have said about the opium piece.
regarding the fistula from the base Fistulas that come from the base are known as knots, and thickening ones that come above the base inwardly, or in the space of two parts,
If there is one or more fistulas; and when that knot is old, it operates, and shortly after produces moisture that appears white or subtle.
And it often happens that these fistulas are Persian; and they are known by the fact that there is either excretion or windiness when the patient has an excretion, and occasionally from one part to another.
And there are fistulas that stop just before the bladder, and just at half of the penis; and they extend up to the knee joint, and reach up to the nut of the testicle.
And thus one knows the sinus permanently at the base, and not permanently: And when you bend your index or base line, and insert a subtle needle like that of an arachnid or iron in the sinus where there is no twist.
And if it has twists, you should insert a subtle thread of mastic or even a horsehair, until you feel the thread or hair at your index.
And if you don't feel it, and there's no output of pus, wind, or infection, as we have said: Know that it does not pierce at all; if you hasten to cure.
And when the fistula is so deep as to reach the bladder or as far as where urine flows, if it jumps with urine, and cannot be soldered by medicine.
If it is punctured up to the knee joint, then there's a vein coming up to the top; If there's no twisting and there's no inner pain, then it is as if it were a boil, and it doesn't respond to medicine or healing by ointment;
And concerning these Persian ulcers there is no remedy but labor, and the vain effort of those who interfere.
In cases that are neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope for healing through iron, as I have found out.
And when the patient lies with their diseases under your hands on their back; and lift their legs up to their hips, and incline their hips towards their belly; Then place an arnica tent, or if there is curvature, a donkey's tent as long as you know where the tent comes from.
If the sick person feels it internally at the base, then you must push your index finger into it.
Then you will feel as if the attempt has pierced it; and if discovered or when you feel something between your fingers like a shaft or flesh, then know that it is penetrating. If there's no movement, one cannot determine its location.
One can still diagnose many conditions well, but this happens rarely.
and when we do this aid, it involves heating the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was explained before. and he burns all hot through the fistula, until it comes out from beneath the foundation; and perform this two times or three, as long as you know that these charred elements are burnt, which resemble a feather of a bird.
and then he cures with moist bandages until that char comes out, then he applies a greased ointment on the wound and seals it.
If it ends well like this, it's good. Otherwise, it cannot be healed in any other way;
And if it is pushed inwards, and does not penetrate until the point which is the foundation, and inside your thumb and within the tent a thick covering of flesh or syphilitic tissue, you see the fistula at the one who has the covering beneath their palm; If it is stopped at the beginning of the fistula and stays in place before the tent, and then use the cautery afterwards, until it reaches to the tip of the tent;
And then remove the tent, and it will leave. Proceed to cleanse those thickened tissues that resemble a bird's feather, ensuring none remain.
And if the wound does not heal, and you cut between yourself and the work (presumably referring to a surgical procedure), then treat with fire cautery or medicinal remedies.
For fire cauteries combine two things: these are the heating of the metal tools, and the use of blood and the drying out from moisture.
Then when the sponges that are moistened in butter or powdered substances, until they release their water and smoke, the metal tools burn inside.
Then treat the wound with burnt charcoal bandages, and use dry medicines.
For when it is healed, if it remains healthy and does not recur.
And if the fistula comes just up to halfway down the foundation, and is far from the body core, you should tap your hand or foundation and inquire about it.
And if you feel the tent [a condition], and there are two things or an infection or pus, or it is about to rupture, but only contains a channel of sickness and hope, through the application of one of the three ways:
or you apply cautery as we have said, or you remove it up to the bottom, or if you can do so, then place the tent and apply a cure as initially.
and don't go too far down beneath the foundation, that you do not remove the structure holding the bottom, and allow for natural expulsion through willing action; then follow the cure, as we have said;
then follow the cure, as we have said; By chance if it has healed, or you remove that covering and cleanse the wound since it has separated from the root, either by probing or with another instrument aimed at it; then open that wetness in the wound as much as you can;
then endeavor to heal the wound and keep the pus in the lower part of the base: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And there are no times where fletching is done in this manner: and when you pinch the tent in the fletching, and it is or located deep beneath the skin above, take one that has been pierced through the head according to this form: And twist two threads together in an interlocking pattern, and thread the tent throughout the fletching until it reaches the head.
If it is inside the margin beneath the foundation, then extract the thread from the one that has been twisted, as you pinch your thumb or base;
And guide him with the thread, and gather both shoulders together, bind one to the other, and let him rest for one or two days;
And hold him back every time until the boy bears these marks that are between the two shoulders, and breathes normally;
Then treat the wound until it is healed and clean.
If the fistula does not perforate, make sure to pierce it in all possible ways until you can do so without going too deep.
For it is not appropriate to do as we have said previously, placing the body properly first and then treating it, while it remains sound, until it becomes diseased.
The shape of the spiny form from which the sinus is made is very small and consists of cutting; And on another side not, because we neither should nor must not cut like this, as you see here:
Fat embolisms occur in two ways: or they are within the foundation, like a piece of rosin, and if there are small and large ones, and blood collects around them. And if there is one or more of them, and they are outside the foundation and at the base of its depth; but those that are out have little moisture,
And even if there is a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of brown;
And for the treatment of those who have them inside the foundation, you instruct the patient to spread out and move around in chambers until the foundations release them, and then one can see the threads; If you hurry, and hold it with pliers, or by your fingernail, then cut at its roots.
And if it's curved nail can't hold due to moisture, take them with one and a half inches of string, or cotton, or a piece of camel's wool; And remove them with your fingers, then cut, and powder them with some hot powders that are used for cauterization; or you can cauterize them as it is said or in the chapter of cauterization, then treat with other treatments until they heal.
And if the foundations cannot emerge, instruct the patient to apply a blistering with a blister-producing substance that is sharp and abrasive for washing out whatever is in or on the foundation, so that it can emerge smoothly;
And if the tissues do not penetrate, and if the fibers are strong under the foundation, then the treatment is light; And if you grasp them with your fingernail or forceps, and clip them, then treat them just as we have said, until it is clean, and they fear the incision by iron.
It is necessary for you to sew according to this manner: take one twisted thread and put it into a needle, then pass the thread over and make the needle pierce through from another side, and twist together the two ends of the thread around the needle. And if it's wide; and tighten the thread then form it, tie the thread afterwards, remove the needle, do this for all others, and leave one for bleeding off excess blood;
Then place on the foundation one piece of damp cloths in oil rose or in plaster, and place it on the wound, then instruct the patient to rest;
And leave him until he heals completely, and when they are down, clean with ointment and other treatments, until he is healed.
By drying thoroughly or through the foundation. Many times, dry blood occurs in the intestine, and by nature's constraint, and when the illness is old and medicine no longer helps.
It should be that you reset at the tip of a thorn or on your nail, leaving the skin undamaged by moisture. then heat it as much as necessary until it becomes soft.
and if it does not soften, reheat it more vigorously than before, until it is properly heated and becomes scorched. Then treat as long as he remains healthy.
with trembling Ants is a small false appearance under the skin, and they move about within it;
And when you press it, you feel a true vein, and one can sense its beating like the heart's death throes, and this sensation spreads throughout the body, especially in the hands more than other areas.
And the treatment is that you take a piece of goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place this stick on the twitching spot, until the purple circle covers the twitch completely; Then turn your hand until you grasp the entire stick as long as you cover the twitch completely, and place it flatly, and uproot the twitch from its roots.
And if you see this, make it in the form of a needle or iron rod according to this shape, and be fine underneath and tapering above:
Do not pierce it, for you must hold the tip with your thumb and index finger, and apply pressure. And if you see this, use a cautery to burn the twitch as shown in the section on fire cautery techniques.
of the form of the gallbladder Never make a gallbladder of silver or lead, or of melted spider or pewter; and never make these small and large instruments according to their intended use.
And thus, when dealing with the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, they should be small.
The form of the gallbladder is both small and large, or how the belly is tied according to this manner:
And there is often an evacuation where the belly is bound, as you see, and feces penetrate inside; and at one side there are two perforations, and on the other side, one.
And it could be that the belly is where we place the medicine of a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is perforated all around by small holes.
And between each hole is one inch of space, then place a thread in these holes on either side, and wind it with a strong, twisted linen thread for ten or twelve times around, and sew the belly together as if it were a goat. And when the medicine is inside, you seal it with the tool using a strong thread first, then harden it; and this forms a circular shape.
And have the medicine neither too hot nor too cold, and smear the head with oil or yolk of egg ointment, or similar things, then gently apply it.
Then let the surgeons apply it with both their hands together until all is visible, then remove the lump, and lift the patient's legs up to the surface.
And if the medicine seems to be coming out, remove it as much as you can; and if it sleeps through a whole night, that is even more helpful.
And if you give it to someone with the illness of abdominal distension, and the medicine starts to come out quickly, then continue giving it until it is relieved.
And if they become inflamed or have a foundation, or an abscess, so even a cyst as thin as half a child;
and it is the form of the thin cyst above whose skin is constrained:
from wounds
We have spoken about the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will discuss treatments for hands and medicine according to their completion.
I state that wounds are diverse depending on how they were made, and where the wounds are located, and why they were caused.
The things by which wounds are made come from being hit by a stone, and the size of a sword or knife, or by spear or staff or axe, or by similar things;
or according to the location on the body, such as a wound that is made on the neck, or on the head, or on the chest, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar parts;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and start with wounds on the head that are simple, because the memory will come to its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes or a joint is involved, and the bone is not broken, be cautious whether it's due to stone or similar matters, and the skin has been completely torn apart and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly about the abscess: if it heals soon after a scalp treatment even if there is slight bleeding from the wound, and the healing goes against the direction of what was torn;
and let the patient consume wine and fatty meats in abundance.
And if they do not want to be treated with a scalp operation, then reduce their meat intake, and do not drink wine, nor eat any flesh.
And when you reach the wound, if pus comes out, use a wet cotton in oil rose water only, or in strong wine;
And if there is no pus coming out, place on the wound, if it is full of blood and has not been disturbed by air, a powder that I will mention shortly;
And if it has been burnt, apply some dressings until it heals.
And if the wound is large like from a sword cut and similar injuries, and the lips cannot be stitched together by tents, then stitch them together, as I will explain for wounds of the abdomen, in stitching.
If the wound exposes bone and fat, and merely holds in place just slightly when probed, upon doing so; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard tissue in lieu of skin. and instruct the patient to consume large meats such as testicles and cooked wheat, also like poultry, and similar items.
And if you find or smell corruption in the skin, and it doesn't reach to the bone, then remove the corrupt part completely, and drain pus, then treat.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicine, then tie the artery, and if you find it protruding, tie it with a thread; And if this does not benefit you, then apply cautery to it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, their treatment is light: and you should apply this powder which will stick together in such a way that when the fire touches it, it heals.
And the method of preparing this powder is as follows: take a part of incense; dragon's blood .ii parts; living charcoal .iii parts, and finely ground it, And treat the wound, and ensure it is properly formed until it heals well and joins with all its blood.
And bind it well, and let her rest without straining, if she doesn't swell; one removes the medicine only when she is healed.
Only this is done with salt alone, when one doesn't have the incense or the blood of the dragon, but only when the art has healed the wound.
And if the art (skill or medicine) has healed the wound, even then, don't use this powder;
But apply on some well-prepared poultices, or oat flour mixed with water and honey, as long as it emits a boil; Then proceed with other treatments until it is healed.
And if bone fracture accompanies the wound and it's small, one should use delicate forceps to attempt its realignment.
And I will tell you about fractures of the skull after this.
of the wound at the neck
This wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and those at the head, but if a nerve in the neck or an artery has been cut.
If it's a nerve, then there is no other remedy but to leave the wound open, and not to put anything restraining in it, for it damages nerves and causes their regression; And do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of nerves is cold, and the continuation of such things is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but use the medicine nearby, such as charcoal washed in gentle water and mixed with rose oil, and also wash the cloth in gentle water. and other mineral stones in this manner, and moist applications.
And if the wound is large, bind it with strips and then treat it until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and full of pus, then puncture or even deeper.
And if an artery is cut, and blood starts flowing out, then you must uncover it, straighten it, and if necessary, cauterize.
And if the throat is cut, or the knees, then you must keep the flow path, through which the meat goes. If you heat it on the base of the throat, and do not touch the throat but adjust it according to its natural shape; and then apply the dressing, and let it be for several days, then treat with drying ointments until it heals;
and if there is an indentation in the bone due to the wound, operate; and if there are fragments of bone, remove them if you can, and leave those that you cannot retrieve until the wound heals; and let it be released and healed by its own nature;
and if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I have mentioned on it. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as instructed in my chapter.
from lance or knife wounds
If it's a spear wound or from a knife and the injury is deep, then if you notice that wind can easily flow out of the wound without resistance from the body tissues, then you understand that the wound is fatal.
and if it's not deep and is full of blood throughout when fresh, then don't put any powder on it or bind it up right away; let the blood drain completely without obstruction until the first hour. and let him rest with his body, and keep him occupied so he doesn't move around. but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day.
And if you don't have oil, put old cotton into the wound to absorb moisture.
And make the patient rest on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more if needed. If there is no seizure, nor harmful trembling of the heart, nor single convulsions; And when you see good conditions, know that the wound has been saved. Treat with various remedies until there is no more bloodshed;
and if it does not heal and work, know that there will be an open wound; treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, whether it is simple or worse or on the back, treat as the one in front would.
If it's large, stitch it; and if it's small, use powder; and if it's deep in the bone or has broken pieces inside, clean the wound and remove any foreign objects. And if they are not evacuated, let the wound fester, assisting with extractions if needed.
And for other wounds on other members, the judgments are similar as we have said.
from the rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly can be large, medium-sized, and small;
In a major injury, one can sometimes see parts of the intestines, or the entrails, due to their exposure.
Sewing up injuries is more difficult and, in no case, is it better than treating a small wound compared to a large one,
Therefore, when we attempt to sew back the intestines in place, if they are not carefully and progressively placed; Because the intestines swell up soon after feeling cold, thus they cannot be sewn back too tightly;
And because of this we must treat the wound, for thus we massage the intestines to their place that they are in others.
Know that the rupture of the belly occurs according to four ways:
The two common sutures occur in the abdominal stitch,
and other stitches from wounds to the body and two other specific stitches are common for other injuries;
And yet they are more fitting with the stitch of the belly, and I will say each one and clarify.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine sticks out, And it's possible to heal like this, one of these two ways: or by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, Because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Moisten a sponge or one-third of a cloth only in water. or you cook in water with vinegar and cypress and spikes, And let the intestine grow as long as the womb is opened;
And do not restrain this wine at all times, and wait until you feel it beginning to relieve.
And when you see the swelling leave, if you moisten the intestine with water or broth that has been cooked well, because through this way, the entry accepts little food.
And if it cannot enter, they make a slight incision with the tool used to remove the warts;
And the first treatment is to let the cut heal, that we should not cut it without great necessity or if it's not needed;
and this is the instrument to split it with:
if you cut within the curve and not outside, and see this shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, if you put them back according to their natural shape in its proper place, and if possible, for this is worth moving.
When the wound is large, and it's situated below the belly, it's necessary that you let the patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head; and if it's in the abdominal region,
And also if there is a rupture of the abdomen in one of the two parts. So ensure that the elevated part of the intestines is higher than the other.
And in this way, it is appropriate to apply what I have said about large and medium wounds.
Small wounds are treated with what you have provided,
Then have in your hands... I. Minister pity who heals all the rupture at his hand, and bring together the lips; And this is the common way of suturing,
And this is the common way of suturing, and it consists in you using a needle or more, depending on the size of the wound's width, then start from the edge of the wound one digit's width in, and place a needle with one good strong thread; and pierce both the skin layers with both the needle threads from the flesh,
then sew them using a doubled thread around the needle on both sides, and join the two edges of the wound with stitches,
And then leave out one and a half inches, and insert another needle; then weave the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue doing so according to what you know about needles, until the entire wound is restrained;
And let there be needles of medium size, between fine and thick ones, For the thin needles cut all the flesh, and the very thick ones can't enter well at all: Because it is necessary for them to be of medium size;
and it's not right to have needles sticking too far out from the flesh and the skin,
They do not cut and open the wound before the stitch;
and then remove the needles, so they don't irritate the patient when sleeping, and cover the needles with cloths or bandages to keep them clean, and leave it until the wound is stitched together;
And this method of sewing with needles is more applicable to small wounds, because it requires one needle or two.
The second type of stitch is common, And the second stitch involves assembling two leather threads and two silk threads, which are then assembled onto one needle with a strong thread in the middle; And when you have pierced these shoulders all together,
And when you have pierced these shoulders all together, then remove the needle from the spot where you started piercing, in the manner one would cut threads;
and leave a space between each stitch as big as a small coin;
these stitches should be even across the entire piece.
And I treat a wound where one has lost an organ or has a stomach issue,
who had been cut by a knife, and the wound was larger than a hand's breadth, and it was the size of two handbreadths for the intestines,
And the wound was within the belly. I brought back his intestine, and it had been out for twenty-one hours.
And the wound healed up to fifteen days, and I treated it, and it became healthy.
And they had judged that he was going to die, and it was a miracle;
And I would not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; And I would change the cloth on the wound two times a day, and wash it with honey water until it was clean.
I will tell you the two proper methods of sewing:
Take the needle, and place it on the outer part up to that inner side;
When it has pierced the artery straight on, if you place the head of the syphilitic or costive disease where you have inserted the needle,
and make it pierce from another side through the inner part up to that which is on the outside;
and when you hear about this seam, it is like threading with a tailor would sew fur. and leave the siphac on one side once, and take it from another until the seam is fully accomplished.
The second method of stitching, as Galen properly stated,
If it is done like everyone else does, by joining the two parts together naturally, And apply one to the tip of the other, in such manner:
Stitch with a needle or the tip of a near finger, and make it pierce only the upper one, and let both of the shoulder joints be warm; then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outer part until it reaches inside. as both shoulder joints are warm;
then pierce each from the outer part until it reaches inside, using two other warm shoulder joints that are on the opposite side;
And this is the clumsy way of sewing up and the most common one.
Galien taught this word, and none testify it,
One must stitch the abdomen with two needles, or where there is thread in each one;
And one should insert one needle from one side and the other from the other, like those who stitch metals.
and know that when the rupture is within the belly, then the stitch is more serious than in other parts of the belly.
The judgement of the wound is like that of the judgement of other wounds:
and it's thus when you find the fresh wound completely filled with blood, just as the art has made it. if you set it back near the intestine, and at the wound; then place the stimulating powder above.
if you set it back near the intestine, and at the wound; then place the stimulating powder above. and if there has been a scar, apply any available ointment until the wound heals; and sew with thread, ensuring that the stitches are even and neat. then treat the wound in the same manner as others, until it is healed.
And if you do not have medicine, place it on top, as soon as it starts to bleed, use old cotton. and move it twice a day until it becomes healthy.
For you don't need other medicines in various preparations when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will cause communication with essential members, It is necessary for you to moisten a thread lightly in oil of warmed heat, or in rose-scented oil. And put it inside the joints, and over the armpits;
and if there is pain or gangrene in the bowels, and it happens often, if black wine enemas are administered, and especially if gangrene has reached up to the intestine;
And pierce within, and know that when it's large intestine, it is easier to heal than the smaller ones.
The intestine known as "young" cannot be healed once it is damaged, And this is due to the location of the veins and the subtlety of the entire body, as well as its approach towards its own nerves.
And if the boil leaps out from the wound, then it is treated again as with an intestine, while it's still fresh;
And if it is old and turned towards or black in color, you should tie the black part of it, so that no bleeding occurs from there. because there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligament, and place both shoulders hanging down from the part over the wound up to beyond it for easing the extraction when the cartilage closes them, and the wound heals.
From the rupture of the boil
When the intestinal contents spill out, and the wound is small, If one could return it to any condition,
Because I've seen that the abdomen of someone pierced by a spear can become swollen;
The injury was located on the right side of the stomach, And it became inflamed and developed into a fistula, causing malaise and flatulence;
I applied treatment according to my ability, and continued refining it until the patient was healed, and sealed the wounds.
And when I saw the wound healed, I was uncertain if there might be internal injuries in their abdomen; And there was no harm, but it stayed in much better conditions, eating and drinking;
And they told some experimenters that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated in this manner: take large pieces of flesh, then join the edges of the wound, and when the flesh has opened its mouth, place it against the two lips,
then applies another strain in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely treated;
and heals the wound. Those who are overly zealous in their intestines, and do not cause any harm to the patient,
and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from an animal's intestine,
in this manner: take this piece of intestines' string where much of it has been cleaned, And then to the head of this thread, one thin linen thread. Then stitch the thread into the needle, sew through the intestine, and pull it out again at the opening;
And this way of sewing the intestines does not go beyond what is in line with the path of faith and hope;
And if the wound is large and broad, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, if there is no obstruction or damage, it needs to be subtle.
regarding a sinus or if it be so Know that every wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called a "sinus". And similarly when it is covered and begins to heal.
A sinus is according to the truth of a hard, yellowish swelling where no pain can be felt, It is also hairy like the feathers of a bird;
And sometimes it is clear and bright, and at other times thick and dark; Sometimes little, and at other times enough;
And I have spoken about the classification of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, This is due to just eight reasons:
It means: or due to its malevolence; or because there is hard flesh within and above the lips that does not allow new flesh to grow; There is too much blood; or the limbs are broken, and the substance is of poor quality; or the medicine used in treatment is not good; or because the infection behaves like a pestilence; Because of its property in the area being late, digestion is slow, and health is delayed, and escapes naturally; There are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicine in this section.
So it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas which are done by handwork.
Know that fistulas occur in all limbs of the body; for it is from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, where fistulas originate; or in the stomach, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this manner have been diagnosed as difficult for healing, and there is no other way except labor, and lack of knowledge;
And if there are no fistulas that do not come up to what I have said, and you have mastered the treatment, And you must understand it. If you have a spider web or iron tent (a tool for testing blood flow), if the fistula is straight, then use it;
And if the fistula is twisted, seek with a delicate probe for its course, for the pikes bend and move within their twists;
And if the fistula has ends that are lost [or cannot be reached] and you can't find it well by probes, if you use enemas with one of the [ingredients],
for the moisture can vary from one to another of these ingredients, and it is cleansed;
then taste carefully according to your ability, that you may know if there's bone or nerve, and feel all around.
And ask the patient to clearly tell you where they feel pain when your hand presses them, and which limb it is on;
And once you truly know the location, whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or a vein, or in any of the locations I have told you about, if the pain follows what I have told you,
or in any of the locations I have told you about, if the pain follows what I have told you, and for the putrefaction and decay within. And then the treatment until it heals,
and if the窦 tract is well deeply opened in its right place, you should match up the opening as full as possible, just like your ability, then put moistened cloths in water, and fill them until they reach the tip of the窦 tract,
then put moistened cloths in water, and fill them until they reach the tip of the窦 tract, and continue with the medicine until it dissolves what is remaining at the bottom;
And then I place remedies on healthy flesh, until it is healed;
and if it has not healed by this means, then apply a cautery as we have said,
and if the bone is rotten from the ulcer, then operate on it. If it's a vein or nerve that gets irritated or principal limbs, as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and darkness, then cut him until all the decay has been removed. Then cleanse everything in such a manner that it becomes clean;
and if it is not clean, and you rinse it as before, know that you have not gone far enough until this point:
If you uncover and seek until you reach the bottom, and remove all decay, then reset it to its original position;
And if it is found healthy, that is well. If not, know that the decay is too far gone, such that you cannot restore it; If there's no other way besides leaving things to nature;
and if there is just a little rotten bone, and you can pull it out with tongs, if you extract it with an instrument suitable for that purpose,
and if there is more than one bone, remove them all, do not leave any;
And if moisture is contrary to this, and there's neither mistake nor fear, if strength and moisture with the flesh are applied, and free the bones.
And if you can't remove them within an hour, put on the wound something that promotes gangrene, and leave them until the flesh is rotten all around the bones,
And then they will have bones with less resistance;
and if it's a large bone, like from the leg or thigh, if only the corruption continues until all the marrow is gone, then heal the wound;
And if there is a large portion of corruption, and it extends to the bone; If it should be to cut and remove everything up to the point of corruption, and then treat it until it is joined;
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in one's leg,. so that it can serve as an example and aid for your work.
There was a young person of about thirty years old who experienced pain in their leg due to an issue that had come from within the body,
while the contents were moving towards the leg, and a large abscess was formed, and there was no external reason to open it;
but the doctor opened it as far as necessary until the abscesses opened, and they only removed a little of the contents, and it turned into a fistula, and much of the pus that was all moving with body fluids came out;
And many took care of wounds for two years, and no one was wise in the art of medicine,
until I was called upon it, and saw its leg and the remedies with which it was being treated, and that which was eating away at the wounds from within causing great harm; and became red on the skin of youth, and had a golden hue.
I set up a tent at one of these turns, and then searched all the turns,
and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I hurried then, and cut into one of the turns until I revealed a part of the bone, and found that it was rotted and eaten away, and the rot had reached inside the bone;
I noticed this was the case with the corrupted bone, and I believed there was no other corruption, just as the one I had found;
and I began to heal the wound with medicine for a long time, and could not join it together;
and then started again, and uncovered the bone as before,
and I found that the corruption had continued in the bone, and treated it, then removed it, and prepared to join the wound together;
But I can't go beyond copying about half of the bone's length, and I force it throughout its entire breadth. then I reattached it with medicine; and it was healed and joined quickly,
and no longer needed to redo the operation except due to the weakness of the patient, who couldn't endure it, and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For often there is blood evacuation, but it was completely bled out,
For often there is blood evacuation, but it was completely bled out, and in the place of the bone birthed out flesh, and it was well placed and did not cause harm or against anything throughout, neither inside nor outside.
and stretch the head so that you draw out the rotten flesh from under it. and uncover the flesh on the side where you see sinew, making sure not to injure the flesh; and place a coal or a board under the bone to absorb the rotten flesh; it is necessary to intervene as much as one can see and feel the decay, and to intervene again if needed.
And if the bone has decayed, and does not open, and the decay is in the middle or in a part of it, then uncover all the flesh; then place a coal under,
And then from one part to another there is corruption, and let the skin be of long length concerning the corruption. That is, up to three inches, as we have said;
And if the corruption is at a joint, cut the corrupted joint, and let the bone contain flesh on the other side;
And if the corruption is in the connection of two joints, if there's no other angle to cut it at.
And if the corruption is on the fingers of the hand or foot, if that thing is especially strong, but nevertheless you must inquire about this corrosion, how it opened; and clean it in all ways that you can, but make sure the vein or nerve doesn't prevent you;
know that there are many types of incisors and needles for coping with these bones, according to the setting of the bones and their appearance, and their size and their subtlety, and their grandness and their smallness, and their hardness; And for this, it is necessary to equip oneself with each semblance of work its instrument;
and know that the work will show you the tool you will need, according to knowledge of this art, and it will testify about the manners of diseases; so consider the tool you need according to what is proper.
with fire The joints may dislocate because of internal causes, or due to external factors;
And when you have treated that corrosion by medicine and yet it does not benefit, if it is necessary to cut off that limb until you reach the place where the corrosion comes from, If the patient escapes due to death, or through malice, which is greater than the fault of the member;
If the patient escapes due to death, or through malice, which is greater than the fault of the member; And if you see these signs, the limbs turn black, as if they have been burned by fire, And after the darkness, then comes this corrosion spreading from member to member, and it spreads throughout the body; if you move quickly with the copper treatment,
And if it's due to the impact of some venomous sea beasts, like a scorpion from the sea and snake-like creatures,
And if the constriction is around the neck up to the second joint, you handle it, and do not give it space to reach up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, if it grasps at the joints, so that the constriction does not extend up to the arm;
And if it comes to the arm, when it seizes at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that is where death comes. And it's not worth removing outwardly only for its measure of its virtue;
And do exactly like this when the corrosion comes or pierces: if it reaches the first joint, then cut after another joint;
and if it penetrates further, cut all through the piece; and if it goes up to the leg, cut at the knee joint;
And if it comes above the knee, there is no other cause than to make the patient die;
The method for bandaging or securing a limb is that you wrap it around and under. And stretch out two loops of each string below and another two loops on the other strings above. Then you expose the flesh that is between the two strings to one inch wide until the bone is exposed;
Then apply the plaster or cloth, and place one half of a linen sheet on each side, ensuring that the wound is not touched by the healthy skin. and brings to the patient another injury and abscess to be treated.
And when you operate causing bleeding, if necessary, apply a cautery to the wound. or you put some止血 powders; then return to your treatment until it is completed,
Then bind the limb with a suitable rope, and treat it while it is still warm.
and I will tell you what happened in one house during that period:
he was afflicted by a darkness that seemed like the presence of fire,
and this corruption came first to his right foot, until it spread throughout the foot;
And when the body is corroded by illness, it resists to withstand the pain, and becomes unhealthy.
And after a long time, during which corruption occurred or was touched by my hand, it came to me.
And I placed certain reactive things after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosion;
And he wished me to touch it with my hand, but I refused, for I had hope of reacting the matter; And I also doubted whether if I cut off her hand, she would die. For the powers of the ox were weak; and he became completely despairing, and returned to his land. And he covered his hand up until it was cured, and he became healthy;
And I have only told you this so that one might do another part, if necessary.
No abscess ever forms within the meat of a wound, it stays for so long that it causes a great gathering of blood. And then it will burst and drain, and the blood will leap out, and stay there in the patient's veins, like some vessels. And the skin above is as delicate as one eighth of a cloth piece. And it doesn't go all the way to the bone or nerve, and such diseases are called "healthy".
but if it is so long that it reaches up to the bone precisely, then it is called "fistula".
and the treatment is that you cook the skin all together, and even when it's subtle, just like a piece of fabric. and does not swell because of its decomposition.
And if you have noticed that the skin is burning and the corruption has not yet reached perfection, and the skin is thick with pus, so treat it like a bladder infection:
look if the breasts are large, and the milk that comes from them has a pungent smell, therefore, use the Egyptian colic-powder remedy which is described here: Take it slowly, and oil it, with tallow, equally, and place to cook in a single vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take from this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and insert it into the rectum, and keep it in place. And let the medicine stand there for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
Do this number of times, until the breasts are freed and the milk is expelled;
and do not in any way make them ash-water, when this medicine is absent and you take ashes of vine wood and pour water over them,
Then let out, and by enema, as long as you know that the intestines are fully emptied;
and if the patient cannot bear it, nor can Egyptian medicine or ashes water be used, if an enema of water and honey is tried, or even with a little lithium powder; or you try an enema of honey and mixed wine, where the honey has the property of purifying and washing; And wine makes the sick person better;
And when you have done this, and you have ensured that the wounds are well cleaned, if he performs in such a way as to cause the birth of flesh within it,
and if you seek to plaster it with a thin layer, and do so using rose oil and wine; You will apply some medications and ointments to it,
and if it's short near the stomach and small, if it's somewhat wide like a stick, then insert a tent of the Egyptian ointment, or basilico herb paste, as long as it is wide enough;
And if the wound is too large, then he cuts and leaves just one or two fingers' width so that only a thumb or index finger could enter.
And if the pus-filled wound is above the belly button, then cut it higher or lower than where you are. For when the wound is clean, do not allow any dirt to enter it; and if you cannot cover the breast entirely as you see fit, If it is arranged in such a way that the arm reaches as low down as possible,
and if you cannot cover its chest area as you see, if it is arranged in such a way that the arm is positioned slightly downwards, and nothing is left of the arm; And take consolidation medicines to put in the breast,
and place them on a 1-yard linen cloth that covers all of the breast; then cut in such a way that it fits around the lowest part of the breast, one and a half inches wider than the first cut. and spread tallow on another piece of cloth according to the size of the cut. And place it on the nipple of the chest to ease the bowels, but do not remove the large curtain only after many days once;
And the one who is around the nipple of the breast, often removes to empty the bowels, Know how much comes from the bowels, whether it's poison or little or enough, or if it's digested or undigested;
And be vigilant if the patient feels pain or no relief, and whether there is an abscess or not;
And when your medicine has spread to this extent, and you see the nature that jumps onto the point of the heart, if you know that the heart has already increased and moved towards the health;
and then release it in the morning or on the third day, and when you release the wound, if necessary, change another dressing, and renew the ointment.
And if your chest is full of undigested food for many days, know that your stomach is not working properly. And when subtle poisons linger for a long time, don't despair of your health,
but health is close at hand. For there are people whose healing from pain in their wounds takes longer, and for some it's the opposite;
and if your chest is full of undigested food after several days, know that your stomach isn't functioning properly.
And if his breath is delayed or far away, then adjust dry substances with moist medicines in terms of their properties, in the case of an ointment that has hardened, because there is a large portion of vitriol, and it's the last medicine;
take a hard ointment, and prepare it with rose oil, and soak it in old wine of equal consistency.
then cook the mixture and apply it; and do this same procedure for cooked honey thickening it. When ointments for healing are absent,
or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and spread the powder over honey when it is mixed with fire; and then apply one pound of wax to it, and place it on the breast, and give it once to each physician for a long time, and the roots of celestial lilies, which is also like flour from thyme and wormwood;
and the roots of celestial lilies, which is also like flour from thyme and wormwood; And when using simple remedies or compound ones: grind them, make into a powder, and place it on the honey I have said, and use it; And if the treatment takes long and is not cured by this remedy,
And if the treatment takes long and is not cured by this remedy, So know that corruption has penetrated fully, and manifests within the bone, or in stiff limbs, or injuries; If you follow the cure for the abscess treatment, as we have said previously.
From the abscess of the nail
Panarice is an abscess that forms under the nail of the hand's knuckle, or on the foot, or may accidentally form in other fingers;
and when it has aged and if no care is taken, if it becomes a second abscess on the foot, And when it runs and flows down as far as the root of the nail, and by chance it runs all the way.
And when the corrosion reaches up to the bone, as long as there is stinking pain, and the head of the nail becomes two wide, and the color changes.
When you treat it as we have instructed in the division, and the treatment does not bring any relief, Then it is necessary for you to take the first step by removing all the excess that has remained of the nail, Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery should be quite large if the bone is healthy, and the joint is healthy;
and if the joint presses into the flesh quickly, and starts to pierce, and causes blisters, then it is necessary that you place the rod under the nail so that it can puncture the flesh. And at the top of the stick, and cut this small piece finely and gently, and place on the inside of the meat medicines that are hot and corrosive to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is inside the bone, then cut it out, and apply force, because whatever level of bone decay there is, cannot be healed;
And if you see the knee to decay, treat it as one would any other ailment according to what has been said previously, then heal it while it is still healthy;
and if it becomes hardened and yields, and it feels great pain, then you must first heal it; then trim the nail with a sharp knife across its surface,
And see to it that the cut does not extend up to the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
And if it happens, place something on top that soothes.
The bones that grow out in the hands of some men by chance are very bony, And by chance there is a part with bones, and at no time is there an angle,
And none of them are born at the root of the joint, or birth occurs in no place beyond our reach. Those that are born in any part of the second do not move, And those that are born at the junction of the second part, by chance they do move;
The size of one who is muscular is light, in such a manner: Cut it at its root from a broad spur.
This which is born in the root of the joint needs to be cured: if you hold onto this, it will become a cure for you.
In that which is born or must be at the end, it's necessary to hold onto the soft tissue until reaching the bone, first. Then cut the bone to a suitable length for it, then treat it as long as it is healthy.
The injuries that come together through birth, or by accident in wounds, or from the cautery of fire, or from similar things.
It is necessary for you to cut that seam, so that it may be repaired according to its natural shapes; Then place between two wet tents or cloths in oil, so they do not weld together. Place two fine pieces of quicksilver between them until the joints are soldered together, as it should be done.
If soldering occurs at neither of these points with the palm, then remove that soldering job as it should be done.
Of low quality
Vessels are thick-walled and filled with surplus melancholic substances that originate from various parts of the body;
And more often happens to those who walk on foot and work and carry things, than to others.
So you should then give him or her an emetic once, and afterwards heal from the basilica.
The iron treatment can be done in two ways: one way is by having them bleed, and then force the black blood out; And the other method involves opening the vein and forcing it all out.
The size is determined like this: heat the first leg of boiling water quite strongly, until the thick skin becomes delicate, Then stretch the leg from the knee above to the part below the thigh; Then cut the vein in one length of the patient's body, or in two lengths, or in three, with a wide size,
Then lift and drain the black blood from your hand, from one side to the other, as long as there comes out as much blood as the virtues of the disease can bear;
and then remove it, and instructs that one dye it with meat juices to turn this black substance.
And continue the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are full, harming the patient.
This is how to perform an amputation: lift the leg of the diseased area, if there are hairs in it, Then immerse him in a hot water bath until it turns red, and the veins swell;
And if you don't have a bath, heat him by the fire, and then place him on the vein from top to bottom of the leg, or in the area below the ankle;
Then scrape off the skin with an awl, and burn the vein from both sides until you can see it when you touch it;
And it appears red and black, and when it enters or touches the skin, it seems like a white thread;
then apply the cautery while it is elevated from the skin, and then press down gently with the needle.
then apply for another three lengths above three fingers; then burn through the skin over the vein until you see it appear. then lift with your thumb in the manner you have done before, and press down again with another notch, just as you did initially;
then apply a different size (notch), or more if needed, then lift it and apply twice with your thumb up to the bone.
Then pull and lift until you reach the second size; then strain from size to size, as long as all strength escapes, then remove it.
And if you can't pull and lift it, tie a strong doubled thread like a needle to the whole thing. And tie it and pull on it, and tie off two threads, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out; And make sure it doesn't get stuck, for if it does, one cannot pull or lift it, and it causes harm to the patient;
And when you have treated it completely, place wet wool in the wound with wine and rose oil; and cleanse until it is clean.
And if the body parts are twisted together, not straight, as we have said, It is necessary that you cut it with effort, but do not twist it; and treat it as we have previously explained.
It is necessary that you cut it with effort, but do not twist it; and treat it as we have previously explained. The shape of the iron tool used to work the bone is curved, and does not slice, but bends without cutting through the vein;
And it is of great curvature, for if it were subtle, it would constrict the vein, but being so large as we have said, and this is its form:
From the civil vein
This vein is confined in legs, in warm areas where no herbs nor trees grow, and in ground with no moisture;
and by chance it emerges elsewhere than in legs, and this happens due to corruption that comes from under the skin,
As it comes inside the body like snakes and worms, insert between skin and flesh.
And if the symptoms of the onset of this vein are such that there is a tremendous inflammation in the leg, then change the limb, and thus the vein begins to emerge outwardly, like the root of a plant.
When the shoulder joint is opened, it is necessary to wrap with an object three and a half by one and a half feet in size, then fasten it.
And let the incision hang on the leg, and in all times when it reaches the end, if the skin envelops around the incision, and there; And if it's too long, when you cut off a part of it, envelop the rest and bring it back together, without cutting its root, until it is fully out; because if you cut it off, it enters the flesh and causes pus and decay or infection at that spot, leading to a bad disease;
for this reason, she/he should treat it little by little until completion, and leave nothing or anything else.
And it is not every time this vein when it is treated of five long palms, or of ten, And one came to me, at which she is treated of ten long palms, and when you operate on it, if it yields a single tooth or if the wound is minor, then pierce until you reach the bottom,
So that all discharges; and let the internal matter be drained out, and apply healing remedies against putrefaction for a day or so, then treat it like abscesses.
And never with this vein by wet means, and similarly when it opens at the foot bone, or through the foot. And much comes from loss, and which falls off; then therefore treat it as we have said before.
Worms that are born between the skin and flesh
This illness is called in our land "cattle disease", because it occurs frequently to cattle,
and it's a small worm that hatches between the skin and flesh, traveling throughout the body both upwards and downwards, And you can feel it well by touching each part of the body, as far as the skin goes, and jumps out;
And it is affected by corruption of some fluids, if they come towards worms, snakes and roundworms or in the stomach;
And there is doubt about its nature, because when it travels through the body, and ascends to the head, and reaches the eye, Perhaps it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being treated and drained, one cannot help but note when it will:
so it follows that you should tie the joint above and below with a strong bandage tightly,
then apply pressure and drain it, and if the source is close to the flesh, and you don't find it: if you need to use a fire cautery over it, until it stops bleeding;
And the biggest harms it causes, if they go towards the eye, as we have said;
And if you see it coming close to your head near the eye, hold steady over him with your finger, then lift up and pull strongly.
It is necessary to use the application of purification from bodily fluids through medicines in solution for the ailments caused by humoral imbalances,
And if meat causes putrefaction when eaten.
The pain that comes from windiness This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to any limbs, And it spreads from limb to limb; and I have seen what I am telling you.
I was called to attend a woman in distress, and she showed me her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
And one or two days later, the wound ascends as if a worm at the shoulder, Sooner than anything else, like hot silver when it is cut off from its source;
The pain leaves that side and enters the shoulder,
And then a little later it spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm;
Then I was told she twisted inside the body, just as I saw.
I marveled much how she moved from limb to limb in this way, for I had never seen this disease carried out like this before. Anyway, I have seen many times that well people would move their pain to another part of the body, but I had never seen such a thing like this in a woman;
And I thought it was because of this that the woman had smooth skin, and her veins exposed, And because of this appears that constrained wind;
And do not perceive according to this reason among those who are delicate, and have wet bodies and veins that respond.
And when you see treat this illness, and if the patients feel pain, if it opens up as we have said, if it opens both upwards and downwards quickly, and then stops until that constrained wind within the body comes out; And apply the cautery to it; and if you cannot see it by your eyes,
if you are treating someone who suffers from wind disorders, such as foul pills and Serapis' pills, and similar sorts.
Of arrows
Arrows vary according to their shape and the location of their impact on the body.
The variety among them is such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and hairy, and fused; and of those that have two angles, and of those that have tongues, and of those where there are pieces; and the one that urinates in no member but does so according to two ways: or through the main body,
or like the brain, heart, liver, kidneys, bladder, intestines, and similar organs. When it comes to dislocation, then indeed not at all any part of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, becomes evident: It is necessary that you be prepared for the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in various circumstances; And when that bad sign does not appear and the arrow has not been fully extracted, you should pull it out, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, causing the fluid that is under the brain to escape, When there is blindness and swelling and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and convulsions and confusion of intellect, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is loss of smell or hearing; and sometimes he loses speech and voice. and the wound becomes moist with white pus resembling maggots, and it also appears like burned flesh;
and if this sign is visible, you should continue with the treatment, and remove the arrow if it's still there.
The sign of the arrow when it hits or pierces the heart is that it is close to the left breast, and also feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; And by chance the arrow may also remain silent like the pulse, and in black blood, and causes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: So, with no doubt, know that death approaches.
And the sign of the arrow that never leaves is that there's no foam spill from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's skin changes color, and they sigh loudly with a chill in their breath.
And if the arrow closes in the thigh's covering, it affects the small bones; and there is great pain and great distress, with sighing; and they move all their limbs from the shoulders.
And if the arrow penetrates or touches the stomach, by chance it leaps out of the wound without digesting any substance.
And if the arrow penetrates or touches the belly, and leaps out without passing through any intestines, then there is no hope for treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow pierces the bladder and urine flows out and escapes, causing severe pain to the patient: you must know that the wound is fatal.
The other body parts, such as the arm and neck and throat and shoulder and shoulder blade and elbow and collarbone and ribs and back muscles, and thighs, and similar limbs are safe according to many dispositions. When the arrow is in the muscle or artery and it's not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because when you do something else.
It happened that at two in the morning, an arrow struck him in the side of his thigh at the knee joint: I tried it and moved her across under the ear's fat, and felt nothing unusual.
And in one game an arrow, as it falls into the grease of the eye beneath the paper beneath, And the arrow was returned, and one could only touch its tip towards the shaft, And the arrow was large as one might find on a Turkish bow, weighing just slightly over half a pound without including feathers; the game was fair, and no unfortunate incidents occurred.
And I aimed an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and this arrow had feathers:
I shaved them, trimmed until I was satisfied with my work, and made sure they pleased the Christians.
And drew out an arrow from one's body or stomach, that it was embedded inside, and I thought he would die;
and after thirty days had passed, if its position did not change; I cut into the arrow, I fitted it with a mechanism, and I pulled it out, without any bad incident.
And if you see one or two arrows hit or pierce someone, and found the wound healed above;
and keeps the arrow inside, without altering its natural disposition, nor finds any harm in any of its natural works.
And see one other person, who was struck by an arrow on their face, and found the wound healed;
And thus one endures great pain; and no other similar symptoms.
And took an arrow from one and a half homes of the princes' king, which was stuck in his thigh. and it was slightly tilted towards the right side; and the arrow had been fully inserted.
I was summoned for the treatment after it had happened for three days. I found the wound to be very tight.
I tried to understand its entire delicate attempt, but did not feel it; and there was pain and discomfort all over his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the dart.
I put an adhesive plaster on his ear because the ear did not swell; And I saw the head of the arrow.
And I saw the head of the arrow. I applied the healing salve for several days, and quickly resolved the wound, then let the patient rest for a long time.
Until he sensed the arrow within his nose; and he told me about it. I applied corrosive ague medicine to the wound for several days until it was opened.
And tried, and felt the head of the arrow which was piercing at its base; then adjusted through the opening of the wound using this medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and passed well inside for about four months,
then I opened the wound properly so that I could spread the tweezers, and pulled on it from both sides, but it wouldn't come out;
Therefore never cease refining and engineering ways to create tools until I took the first one, a pair of well-made tweezers, for use. Following what its shape will bring to the end of this chapter, until I treat it, and will repair the wound.
And those who examine believe that the cartilage at the nose cannot be restored: So I treated it accordingly, and healed the wound, and restored the health of the patient completely.
You have been told about the nature of extracting some arrows, so that you place your treatment on what I do not say, for the books cannot take in everything;
but listen well to a small part of my masters' wisdom, and about what is here and lacking; test true knowledge or nine works, and the ninth tool, for the removal of things that occur in this craft.
I say that arrows do not stay within the limbs where they are embedded thus: or by entering through their length, or from another side;
And the one that jumps in when it enters or when it is embedded, this arrow penetrates into their flesh, and does so no matter if it happens once now.
And if it doesn't jump in now, leave her until the body is thoroughly cooked internally, and allow for the juices to come out.
And similarly if it's stuck in the bone, and can't come out, leave it like that for several days, and remove a little each day;
And then it jumps out, and if it doesn't jump out, puncture through with a small hole for all one inch, until the depth of the lesion is widened, and then remove it.
And if the arrow is returned to its original place inside the body so that you can't see it anymore, then seek it out with all your effort; and if you feel it, then guide it with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot do so due to the tightness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and if there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then cut as long as the wound becomes large; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears attached to it that she holds,
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears attached to it that she holds, if you can remove the bone which is stuck in at two points by its length that you can handle, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as long as you can pull it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as long as you can pull it out; do this carefully so that you don't break the arrow, making its removal easier.
And if you can't do it all at once, if until the middle of your arm is still sore, then try again, because the extraction will be easy. And if the recurrent bleeding goes against you, proceed with what we have instructed about treatment in this chapter;
and be cautious of incising near nerves and veins, and take care to draw out the arrow without risk,
or quickly or gently, firmly or skillfully; and adjust the patient according to the shape they were in when the arrow struck them. Because it is the greatest help possible for you, and if you cannot do it, then place him according to what the sign shows you.
The arrow that comes from another side, or if it exposes any part of the body, or if the skin is swollen in such a way that you can see or feel it clearly:
Cut there up until your tongs can take it, and then extract it. If it jumps now, do so immediately.
And if she is caught in the bone, twist your hand around it until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it.
And if it cannot come out, she/he should still allow it to remain there, and then continue the extraction until it comes forth forcibly.
and if it is an arrow that is in him, he removes all of the shaft;
And if it's a child who's affected, and you see them requiring treatment with a bone extractor, then administer one bone instrument to them. so that the tip of the arrow goes into the opening of the tool; and then push it forcefully,
And if he has an arrow stuck in him, take one sharp tool to help remove it.
And if the arrow touches his skin, you should cut all the flesh around or where it pierces, if you can. Then treat the wound as is appropriate.
And if the arrow hits or pierces in the chest or stomach or bladder or ribs and is close to vital organs, and you can access it, then cover up, if you can.
And protect yourself from cutting the vein and the nerve, and then you remove it, and then suture the wound if this task is required; And continue with treatment until it heals.
The shape of the forceps used for arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and here is the shape:
And in terms of size they are as follows: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
from the veins of common horns Of veins through which we cleanse ourselves are thirty-one, from which there are sixteen,
This means: And the two arteries that are in the two visible temples; And two veins that are in the two eyelids of the two eyes, which are called 'aspirers'; And the vein that is inside the forehead; and the vein that is on the head under the nose; and the two jugulars which are at or around the collarbone; and the two veins that are in the cheeks above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "aughers"; and two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins that we commonly heal are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic vein, and it runs under the left rib, and they call this "the arm vein"; And the median one is called "the fast" and consists of the cephalic vein and the basilic vein, And they call it "the heart vein"; and the basilic vein is either under or on the right rib. And they call this condition "the vein of the belly", and it is located on the flank, and this is the one that heals, which opens clearly on the sack.
And the salve area is the vein located between the index and ring fingers, and it extends to two inches;
and on the leg and at the heel are three veins: one is below the bend of the thigh, on the left side of the body; And the second bone which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein that is called "nurse", which is in the ankle of the other side.
And in the other leg are three veins beneath those.
The health of the veins that are after the ears helps with catarrhs and migraines; And the qualities of the healer, as I have told you, is that you smell the head of the sick person,
And the qualities of the healer, as I have told you, is that you smell the head of the sick person, And rub the arm or the veins with a rough cloth; then pinch the patient's neck to one side, until you see the two veins behind the ears in each of the two arms depending on the head: then place your hand there, and where you feel the pulse under your hand, gently guide it;
then take the scalpel, and insert it along the vein until you reach the bone, then lift your hand all the way up to the vein above. And cut and let the skin and the vein well two inches deep, and make blood come out until you see;
then tighten and bind it, as long as it is healed;
and I have already spoken of the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples is like an old maid, And indeed, with ointment for the eyes acquainted, and on the body of febrile tears the eyes act.
And that quality of the physician is such as I say: And it happens that the patient stretches his neck, so that the two veins can be seen clearly; and feel the pulse over your two arms, and then judge by this;
Then lift your hand above the vein near your thumb tip, and hold the scalpel steady, and lift the vein upwards, and cut it, just like you did in other veins, and let blood flow according to your need;
then release the patient, place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put cotton there.
And then let it form, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of this before concerning its development and extraction, or the start of this book.
The drainage of the vein on the forehead is as valuable as that of the superficial temporal artery among ancient diseases and migraines, and for flushing.
And its quality is that the patient twists his neck in order to relieve the pain until the vein appears; Then take the tool known as "awl", which has this shape:
And place the tip on the vein, and apply pressure with your hand or another object, and allow blood to flow according to the amount you can see. then release the neck of the patient, and tie the vein as long as it remains healthy and no cut is made with a flame that could widen it.
Every vein, it must not be too close with the flames; and the cut should be clean from side to side, because bone is nearby, and by chance the flames could break when they are thin.
The healing of the two veins that are in the eyelids helps with eye issues, and at the nose, and at the cheek, and in the ear canal, and for face diseases;
And the quality of their healing is such that the patient twists his neck by binding some tie, as before;
Then let the healing take place, and make the healing pass through, somewhat like a long flame slightly wide, for there is no flesh.
And if the flames are subtle and should break by chance; then make correction with blood, as much as you need to, and then bind it with cotton, and bind it well.
The healing of the vein near the nose is good for fever, and after full recovery, and diseases of the face, As when there is migraine and swelling that appears on the face, and similarly when it becomes old;
And concerning health, if the patient constricts their throat, then they strain their nose with your left hand; And take a long fine flame, and place it between the two nostrils in the space on the lip; For the nostril does not open properly like that, and now the air will begin to pass through it;
And don't go too fast, and adjust with your need for blood flow, then leave it for a night, as it is very quickly restored;
The health of the two kidneys aids in the tightening of the liver and the beginning of fermentation, and much illness, and pus formation, and corrosion, and herpes, and ulcers;
And the quality of health is such that diseases constrain their neck on both sides, as we have said; And let the masters stay on top of the head of the patient, and the patient lies down for one siege,
then make a vein long somewhat wider, then drain blood moderately, or as much as is needed;
then do the same with another vessel, then untie the knot, and press moderately on the vessels. so that the patient doesn't suffocate; and leave it until morning, so that the wound heals.
Of the health of the liver The health of the veins in the mouth helps to form within the mouth, and leads to gum deterioration, and裂s in lips, and nosebleeds.
And the quality of health consists in making the patient lie before you, and restraining his neck as I have said; Then turn the mouth, and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left. And you can recognize them by their being black, and by the fact that inside they have small black veins: Treat both accordingly, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt,
Treat both accordingly, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, If you treat the largest of each part, and do likewise with the two veins above and below, for this is the same method.
From the treatment under the tongue The healing of veins located around the tongue is assisted after the healing of the capillary [perhaps meaning superficial or minor blood vessels], and this occurs in constriction of the throat. It addresses illnesses of the cornea, and illnesses of the mouth;
The quality of the surgeon is such that the patient's body should feel the warmth of your hands in front of the sun, and lift their tongue. Look underneath on each side; there is a black vein:
Then heal both equally, but do not overheat them either, because beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the arm that are commonly treated, are healed according to two methods:
Let the flames of all one candle be large, or an olive slender like knives, and named "anesil"; And they are large and slender according to the width and narrowing of the veins. The shape of the mirthin flame is much renowned, and it is quite wide as you see:
It serves to open the large veins filled with visibly abundant blood, and those containing much thickened blood; and this is the shape of an olive oil flame:
and it is more delicate and pointed, and it is for purifying small veins or minor blood that is yellow.
The purification of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat, and the neck, and the lungs, and the abdomen;
And it is for the surgeon to purify carefully, and to be aware of the artery that is nearby. And if blood flow has stopped due to a clot, and if bleeding occurs, then it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I have said. and should not be held over the flame but trimmed like for rabbits.
And if the basilica is not clearly opening, it is necessary to extract it, and replace with another one; Or you want no part of this, or you repair the vein by placing it under the arm: it opens clearly. And the treatment for a flame-cautery, as we have said.
And if you are familiar with the location of the heart, it must be thus: you should straighten the arm and touch the area where you know the pulse; then mark the location of the collarbone, and then hold the arm in place, and treat with a flame cautery at that site;
and watch out not to pierce the artery when you see the pulse area swell, for that is an artery: be careful and avoid it then.
And if you see it protruding up as much as urine from a child, and the veins are red and delicate, know that this is blood from an artery: Hurry then, and place your finger for a long time, then hold your finger in place until the wound stops bleeding, as this has happened many times;
Tie the arm down and leave it like that, do not move the patient's hand; be cautious and do not move them until they recover.
And if the wound does not stop bleeding and it takes time, and you lack the medicine, if you detect a blood vessel that is open, do so because the head retreats; and stop the bleeding on the wound.
And take a peel of fig, cut it, and take one half and bind it well up to the other joint;
If there's no bleeding, that's fine; if not, treat it as we have said, with powders that stop the blood;
And the bandages should not be too tight for the smallness of the wound and the strength of attaching the arm.
The healing of the vein in the middle is aided by treating blood from above and below it. Because she is made up of the basilica and cephalic parts, as we have said;
And it is necessary for the surgeon to be aware of the nerve that is underneath, and if he does not go far enough, and he finds the nerve, And it swells and the health gets hurt, and by chance cannot be cured;
And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any due to its subtlety, then it is necessary for you to heal the wound with an artery saw before. And listen to the nerve with your touch.
And if there is a vein between the two legs, make a cut long through it.
The healing of the occipital sinus if it helps, that it has blood flowing down to the head, and helps with eye issues;
And it is necessary to heal at the oil flame or at the mint flame, for this is the safest of all veins, as it does not have a nerve or artery nearby.
Always, seek to apply the lightest weight, and don't be discouraged if it needs to be done twice, and you repeat it; And by chance the arms of some people swell up, until one needs to do it for the first time, but they feel no pain. The quality of health is according to your thought.
The first thing you should know about being a surgeon is that medicine is practiced only for the purpose of preserving health,
and to avoid future diseases; And let the healing be done in one of the three veins which are or cut: that is to say, the cephalic vein, the femoral vein, and the basilic vein; And one should heal during the beginning of prayers on their knees, and in autumn and after winter after eating, when the sign of fullness is evident;
And one should heal on the first or third day, after two hours or three days.
The healing for diseases does not have a determined time, but only when need is of day or need, in all hours and at all times;
And it is not suitable to heal children until they are twelve years old, nor a pregnant woman only for a quarter of the months until the seventh month. Neither should one heal an old person who has passed sixty years.
And when anyone wishes to be healed, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary for them to cleanse the intestines with a gentle purgative, if he has retained urine, so that the arteries pull away the superfluities causing harm to the main parts;
Neither does it heal well those who are too overfed with meats, nor those who are drunk, as long as they have strength, nor the elderly.
And if someone becomes unwell after colic pain, vomiting, abdominal cramps, frequent urination in women, and the stress from work, staying awake, or sexual activity, as well as when too much medicine or something from a weapon or injury;
Then refine the bodily fluids; if someone is overweight due to food and drinks and medicine, then you should consider their tolerance.
Then in or with a bath, if no harmful thing is found, for refining the blood,
And heal from the wound down to the belly just past the third quarter, as we have said;
And guard that day of labor and pain, and excess, and such like things;
And bind and join it, and have the herbs higher than where you're healing, and rub the arm two or three times.
Then slightly loosen the bandage above in the middle, for when it's too tight or not enough, then it can't heal properly;
And then rub the area with hands until the veins swell up, and one can feel them;
Then moisten the flame of a small amount of old oil, then place your left hand's finger on that vein right below the shoulder slightly or where one wants to cauterize; so that the vein does not burn and rupture upon being pricked. For there are veins that behave like strings when cauterized, and some have such a strong suction force. If one places it over the flame, it withdraws to the flame, and cannot open the way, and thus belongs to those;
And if it opens the way, then the wound is too narrow, for this reason it means that the surgeons should be experienced in such matters.
And if the vein starts working for the first time, that's good; if not, it can still be attempted again a little around the same spot or suddenly, provided that the limb is not swollen.
And if the limb is swollen and the patient feels pain, it should be left for one or two days, without tying up the arm: By chance there will come pus filled blisters; do not enter or bathe, then restart the cleaning if it pleases her;
and if the duct is small, or if the tube opening is delicate and you doubt that blood is not escaping as much as you see, if firmly in that same duct straight to all the flame directly;
and let the operation proceed somewhat quickly, so that the limb swells; for this has happened many times when the wound is small.
If you see the limb swelling, do not restart the cleaning again, and place a little oil on it instead, for it relieves the body of the pain from blood and heals the wound where the oil is placed.
And so administer oil to each wound you heal, for it stops the flow of blood;
And similarly perform treacle and bone setting when you place them on the head; if the skin is too tight or slippery due to its thickness.
And if it comes to large abscesses that occur often, even when it has not been healed before because at that time the opening of the vein is small, If you rush, place a wet sponge on the head in warm water and some wine, and hold it for an hour;
And it is necessary for you to do this after the blood has left the vein, and if it remains in its place after several days without any sign of blackness or greenness, or does not harm it; And if you see this, apply some aloes or myrrh dissolved in the juice of calamus, amber, or something similar.
And many times an abscess would develop and show signs in the area of healing: therefore put your hand there, and if you find that part soft under the pressure of your hand, then this indicates an unhealthy condition. Therefore, do not apply any of the things we have said, for by chance they might damage an artery; but make it once again with dry plaster to harden the area, then treat it with another treatment until it heals.
And treat each person with blood according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
And if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it large, let it remain until it becomes refined; and if it's too hot, let it cool.
And it is necessary for the one who is full and fasting, needing blood extraction, that you make him larger incisions, and have the flames wide;
And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and make him healthier with small cuts, often, and you must make him healthier by cutting across, not straight;
And this method of healing prevents blood loss and nerve entrapment, and is worth more than the long-term health.
And for the person whose body requires treatment, it is necessary to give them a mixture of meat broth and juice from rhubarb apples; if they are heated, they should be treated with a bleeding ritual three or four times.
And if they have a cool constitution, they should be treated before treatment with meat broth in molasses syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-smelling syrup.
And if they faint during treatment, after bleeding, it is necessary for them to inhale the steam of broth and a subtle-smelling syrup.
And make use of the other things we have said in the section or chapter about fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wishes to sweat his arm and cleanse it again, if necessary, when he is weakened by much cleansing, he should cleanse gradually, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
And if someone wants to sweat their arm after the first cleansing and they have strong veins, then they should cleanse seven hours after the first cleansing, or after the new hour.
And if one wants to cleanse another part, then one should cleanse on the second day or on the third.
For there is much blood within the body which has already heated up, and it causes fever; so one should remove a large amount of it, and widen the constriction until it can expel through the needle. Then when you have fulfilled all the conditions of health, and place your hand on his heart when it is healthy, so that death does not occur instead of healing. And this happens many times, when the healers are neglectful;
And it is not right when you see a limb escaping and blood coming out the second time, and the constriction has closed, that you press forcefully; If it's a shoulder dislocation, do not extend the arm quickly; for this would cause harm.
But let it until the second healing happens; or you touch the tip of the flame there, until the ice-free vein comes out. and place one part of salt dissolved in water, and gently press it.
And if the vein is swollen, let it alone without compressing it until the abscess subsides.
And if you need to bleed again from the blood, should it be healthy in that place itself, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein is healthy in the place of the main vein because it is made up there.
And the method of healing involves bathing their hand in hot water until the veins become red;
Then bind it moderately, so that you can see the vein clearly, then now heal through it, neither wide nor long;
And if the cuts are wide, and if you have them very close to the joint of the hand, and if there is no way for it to come out, then place the hand in hot water, and let blood flow in the water, as long as you need.
And if it's frostbite, do not put the hand in hot water, because you would make it worse in winter than frostbite.
And this vein is more healed compared to all other veins; there are no arteries or nerves in it.
The healing of the salvation of the right hand is equivalent to all diseases concerning the liver, and this is the method:
Hold the hand, and dip it in hot water, until the vein is drained, if you can see it. and if the vein is cut across, and if you grasp it completely from beginning to end, so that nothing hurts;
and do not go too far on the side, because the nerve is almost entirely free of flesh,
and then immerse the hand in hot water, if it is frozen at the wound site, and cannot escape.
And when you have treated for the blood as much as your skill allows, place on the vein, oil and wax to quickly fuse together, and thus proceed with each patient.
The cure for one in the left hand corresponds to the disease of the mouse; and do exactly as I have instructed you regarding the right side.
The remedy for the sore throat is effective against all diseases that are in or on the body, such as gynecological diseases, congestion of flowers (possible medical term for bloating or swelling), diseases of the kidneys, and leg ailments, and similar diseases.
And concerning their health, it is that patients bathe in hot water, and rub the vein until it dissolves, And above the ankle joint; and the vein is at the ankle, and upward from the ankle goes in many directions.
So the sound or larger veins, whether at the ankle or at the ankle itself, are those that move.
And if you heal it at the ankle, beware of the nerves that are nearby, and heal from there as when cooking; and let the fire be in front.
And if it cannot come out without help, you should immerse the point in water, and let the vein drain properly.
And if it is salt from the first time, if you repeat the second one slightly above, because the veins are salty; Nor should you doubt about the nerve, as we have said before, and do likewise on the other side.
The thigh muscle of the sciatic vein is at the ankle on the back side, and its inflammation corresponds to pain in the buttocks when it's due to hot blood.
And the quality of its health is such that the patient enters or bathes, and strains above the ankle, doing four times by twisting.
For otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, you should heal in all possible ways, and also across; And remember to support it when you handle it, as the tendons are there, and she is very responsive to human hands.
And remember to support it when you handle it, as the tendons are there, and she is very responsive to human hands. And if you don't find it, heal no vein that opens or is behind the foot, and toward the small toe, and beware of nerves;
And make sure to contain the blood as you see fit, and then release the bond, and place cotton on it and tighten; it is now healed.
Poultices made from suckering
Blunt suction cups are made from horns, or spiders, or leeches; and suction therapy is performed in two ways: by piercing to draw blood or without piercing.
And this suction method that involves piercing can be done in two ways: either hot or not using heat;
And two of them on each side of the neck; and the suction cup under the chin; And the suction cup at both shoulders; and the suction cup over the knees; And suction cups on both arms; and suction cups on both legs; and suction cups at the ankles; and suction cup treatment does not target blood, for it is present in small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh,
and because of this, one does not weaken oneself at all, as one would do with bloodletting; and it should not be administered at any time, nor in the heat of fire or with sense of fire, in any disease that comes from overabundance, until all parts are emptied.
And if suction is necessary for diseases or out of habit, we should perform it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at each time;
for there are some who, when they need to suction, weigh first;
and for those who find congestion and redness in their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and for those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, have swollen tongues, and cough up blood. And if there are those who think, and see by means of blood, wounds, and suchlike things.
And when we see these signs, especially during the first month, we command to suck after three hours of the day.
The health of the womb helps in the healing of the head sickness... which comes from the eyes, and it's not right for this to happen after the expulsion of everything from the body;
And this suction is part of the treatment of head health,
And it is not suitable for those with cold constitution to use, or who have fever, for this causes great harm to them;
And because of this, it is not suitable for those using ice baths, or those who suffer from cold illnesses.
And the one who often bathes in it, becomes oblivious, and because of this, you should place the suction cup slightly further down due to the risk of becoming oblivious.
Suction at the neck is in the place of cold bathing and basilica, for this reason it is effective for tightening the heel. And to cut through the channel of the heart, and suddenly, and to refill;
And it should be lightly squeezed, for if it is held too tightly, it may cause obstruction of the lungs or stomach and heart.
Ventilation of the two ribs near the neck can alleviate pains in the head, eyes, and teeth, as well as in choking, and in pain at the roots of the teeth.
And it is in the location of the health of the basilica; and you should instruct the surgeon to hold his hand when placing it, not to grasp the artery, and not to allow repeated bleeding.
The ventilation over the chin is associated with illness in the mouth and gum decay, as well as similar diseases that occur within the mouth; it involves the health of both lips.
Ventilation over the shoulders is associated with illness that comes from heat and congestion.
Ventilation of the arms is equivalent to three veins in the arms, because it draws blood from these major veins;
And instruct the soldier not to make too deep a cut, for the lungs are naked of flesh, and there is knowledge throughout nerves and arteries.
The suction cup on the shoulder is useful for hemorrhages from beneath and various diseases nearby. It should be large and made of animal hide since it needs to be well treated. By chance, if it were too fine, it might break and cause significant injuries.
Leg suction cups need to be applied directly as they draw blood from the entire body, and they are beneficial for old pains in the kidneys, bladder, and urethra, and they alleviate swellings; they are placed at the knees, ankles, and sometimes they weaken the body after long use, causing emaciation in various conditions.
The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: place it initially while empty, apply a steady suction, quickly apply it, move it evenly, and keep doing this until you see the skin turn red and swell up. Then stop when you perceive the reddish hue due to blood; afterwards remove the suction cups, and take care of your body placement since some individuals have thin flesh with clear pores: one must pierce once only in such cases, make cuts wide but not too deep, and apply gentle suction.
And if the artery is large, it's necessary to make two cuts: the first time to delicately clear the path of the large blood.
And if the artery is very thick, it's necessary to make a third cut; and when we wish to drain little by little from the blood, it suffices to do it only once.
And if we wish to remove much blood, we often proceed this way; and if the artery is thick, we pierce it completely, and the ends are such that the veins are pierced suddenly.
And it is necessary for the one who has thick skin and hardness, and has contracted sores, that you grease their limbs with suction cups where an opening appears and a dissolving agent: If it's in the state of being purple oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
And if it's in yellow color, of mustard oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or another similar kind.
And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or balm, or aniseed oil, or similar items.
And if it is about strengthening the flesh and broadening small pores, there should be no need to put any oil,
but it is good to wash after a rose water bath, or cold water, or water from the mulberry, or water from a gourd, or water from a porcelain dish, or any similar method.
And for those who have moisture, they should be lifted with eucalyptus water, or sumac, and other similar substances.
And those who have excess of fatty substances can rise from old wine, or from water of sulfur, or from decoction of thyme or chamomile, or others similarly.
And it is not advisable to use a suction cup before or during the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two hours; and do not sleep afterwards.
And it should be known when he needs to be suctioned and when he has been suctioned. Watch over those who are being cured, especially if they have a hot temper, and ensure that their condition is not overly inflamed; If it requires cold things, such as apples, chicory and lettuce in the diet, and similar items;
And eat hare's flesh, and meat of castrate cattle, and damp meats.
And for those with cold constitutions, they should consume syrup made of honey and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and small portions, and hare meat, and the flesh of young hares and small birds like pigeons;
And on the day they start to feel better, they should drink more than they eat.
And it is fitting to give some men neither thyme nor muscatel before or after blowing the bellows, lest they strengthen the main members; And it is wise to take the lungs, but it should not be that which is hot drinks.
The suction cups that are placed to irritate are those that are placed on the liver, and on the kidneys, and in gout, and on the belly and the uterus and the bladder, and in the hip, because this member does not endure being irritated by suction on wounds.
And it is only done to draw blood from one part of the body to another, As when we place them on the nipples when the child is well; to remove the viscosity which is in the body, as we suction cups on the belly and on the buttocks to reduce the member.
And relieve the pain when there is an obstruction or stone, so it relieves the pain by its attractive power in case of obstruction, or empties the stone from its place;
And thus she does when you put her on the liver and the lungs if there is retained suction,
And these cups are used empty to suck only; and never are used together with fire, and they are not filled with water either.
If it's diseases due to crying, and in such a manner can we fill the suction cup with hot water, or with water that has cooked medicinal herbs suitable for this.
The shape of the heated suction cup applied is as follows:
And it has two and a half inches in width from front to back, and at its center on both sides there is a small sharp point, just like one would use to pierce an awl,
And let it be made of horn, smooth on the front so that it does not irritate the patient upon placing it on the limb;
And there is midway an inch long across of spider leg or iron, for putting a candle in place.
and they be both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
for the suction cups for children are different from those for adults, and the thin ones are different from the fat.
And one should place this suction cup thus on the limb:
Take a candle wax plug or one piece of linen, and place it inside the suction cup at the opening of the penis which is within the suction cup, so that the heat is at the bottom of the suction cup and does not burn the testicles;
and then place it on the member, and hold your fingers on the same spot that we have said, so when you want to, if the steam goes, remove the suction cup;
and apply the paste in the same way as before, and repeat it often, if you need to.
In suction therapy therefore, which is administered in the disease of pleurisy, there should be no stickiness or lack thereof, and it is only used when it is full of water, and placed solely on the limb.
and this is its shape:
Suction methods are not used only for limbs where we cannot place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and on the underbodies of animals like hooves or noses, and other similar areas.
And if you find veins that are clean and free of pus in clear water, take them;
and place them in sweet water until they are familiarized and have nothing inside. and then cleanse the limb with bleeding and suction cups, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place the veins on it.
and when they are full and bleed, if there is a place where suction cups can be placed, then do so, as this does not last much.
If not, raise it with ease, then with water, quite well, and then incision;
and if the joints swell too much after the course of the arrows, cool it with one and a half linen cloths dipped in cold water, and place them until the arrow wounds are whitened;
and if there are multiple arrows, then apply powdered vitriol or garlic and similar substances until they turn white;
or you put half of peeled peas on the wound and leave them there until they dry out on the wound, which will now stop bleeding;
And if you need more skill, take other assistants.
And if the assistants are not willing to help, then rub with fresh blood, or you stick an awl in until the blood comes out. Then place them, and as soon as they feel the blood, they should strengthen;
And when you see that they are bleeding, powder a little aloes and finely ground wheat or ash on them; they will now improve.
This begins the book of fractures
This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know this, dear boy, that the leaves of this chapter, they contain nothing that was ever found in any old books, nor did anyone read a letter from it;
And for this reason, the knowledge has been lost in our land, because I have never found anyone skilled in it;
And I know nothing of this, having studied the ancient books by which I have treated that science so much through knowledge and experience, as well as practical experimentation, and through my daily routine;
And I have described in this chapter what is contained here, abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I did in the previous two chapters.
So it is necessary that we outline or introduce the main points of this book in its preface and chapters where the senses engage understanding, and remain truthful, so that those who have experienced it may know and learn this noble craft, and teach it to others.
I say that when dislocation or fracture or twists or bruises occur to any part of the body, it is necessary for you to quickly treat the patient on both sides, without missing anything, such as weakness due to age, children, or elderly individuals;
If the cautery is not too tight, or too cold; and consume cool foods, which means cold meats, and liver and rabbit meat, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself with too much meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have doubts about an abscess infection, nor spreading of material in the limb; if the patient feels well under their initial regime they've been using.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you consume meats which cause heavy digestion or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and leeks, and kidneys, and pies, and beef spleens, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar items. For this kind of digestion causes motion and more quickly the breaking (or disruption) is resolved.
Know that when bones break in old and aged individuals, they cannot be healed or joined properly according to their natural state due to the withering of limbs. Also, for those who are too tender, such as bones of young children;
But do not worry about it, reset the broken bone. For large protruding bones that separate and unite the limb together again, until it can withstand as before; and do not allow any movement in his work, for this requires feeding him with large meats, as we have said.
Know that fractures occur in various ways.
For a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the foot, or leg, and in this chapter I will tell you all the ways of fracture. For there are breaks that go to the arm, and others when sharpening, such as sawing through a feather for writing.
For there are breaks that go to the arm, and others when sharpening, such as sawing through a feather for writing. And in case of breakage with wound, and breakage resulting from a small crack.
And for each way it has its own instrument, and its proper tool in the restoration process, according to whatever memory comes to mind;
and is known by the breakage of the bone when the limb is twisted and opens well outward, and hurts under the pressure of the hand;
And when there is no twisting or misalignment of the limb at the socket, and if the patient does not feel significant pain in the body part, should there be no breaking;
but it may well have a twist or crack, or a small break. If it is not suitable for you to move it by hand, but apply the following remedies, and then gently correct it now.
And know that the break that occurs internally, and with the two parts being disjointed, you should now put them in an equal position, so that abscesses are placed one above the other;
And if pus forms and comes, if he lets it go for any day, until the pus becomes calm; Then place it evenly with what you can do lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than when there are pieces. Then tighten him, as it should be done according to this.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is separated by two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or at your hand if it's a small limb, or by two strings, or by one string and at your hand;
and place the limb according to its natural form, so that when the parts of the broken member are removed, then adjust it in all directions by your means at their usual position where you can, and guard that through your work no injury or pain befalls the patient;
And adjust well the two joints of bone according to the best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if you think it is not quite right: do it beautifully in position, don't pull too much, and apply pressure as those who bring about discharge through a wound and muscle contraction do to the member, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limb is in place, chastise well the patient so they do not move it, whether awake or asleep, turning or in any other manner; And make sure that the limb is securely set so that the person does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not yet at the correct spot, and it must be placed in such a position that he does not feel any pain;
For when he feels no pain, it is not yet at the correct spot, and it must be placed in such a position that he does not feel any pain; and make sure it is placed straightly, so there is no twisting when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken limb should be according to what I am telling you.
Know that broken limbs are various in size and degree, and in shape.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar: it is necessary to envelop them with soft and fine linen cloths;
And those that are larger, such as thighs and legs: it is necessary to envelop them with wide, hard ropes, for wide ropes encompass the entire large limb, restraining it equally from all sides, so that there is no twist;
Then tie them loosely around with lighter bands, 3 or 4 according to the limb's size, and hold your hand a little on the rope as you go around it, then proceed above the joint and restrain less, so that the joint can move slightly away from its position;
And gradually make the band softer and softer, until you have treated most of the healthy part, then take another band, and go around again from above the joint;
Then return to the part below the fracture, and apply pressure moderately, neither too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first lesson above;
Then place between the heated threads of linen or cloth until they are all equal, then tie everything above with one band, and then put your well-made stars on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there's a swelling or an abscess, place something soothing on it that removes the swelling and leaves it in such a state for some days;
Then apply pressure to the stars, and make them half as wide as a thick stick, or from the wood used for making staffs, or from palm tree leaves, and they should be arranged like this:
However, it is necessary that the iron rod which one places on the fracture should be a bit larger and wider than the others;
and also as long as it is appropriate to the size of the limb whether small or large.
then hold it on the rods in the same way that you did in the first attempt, then tie an additional strap over it, just like you tied in the first attempt over the fracture;
tightly fasten this more than before, but not too much; it is necessary that the thread be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and should be made of soft linen;
For if the threads are thick, as in works made by humans who weave their linen cords twisted, and this is a great mistake, because the thread cannot be equal if it's too fine, and it doesn't suit for there to be less than half a finger's width between each row.
And if the patients are injured by the rings after tightening them on their healthy parts, then put linen or woolen bandages over them, so they don't blister.
When the wound is swollen and the joints are broken, I will describe the treatment below.
And know that it is not proper to strain all broken limbs on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not proper to apply pins straightaway but rather after five days or seven, or more depending on your judgment each time an abscess appears;
And here is the method of the old plastering for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take some flour that sticks to the mill walls, mix it with plenty of egg, and make this concoction neither too thin nor too thick. Use this application, and this is the common method of restoring fractures in various positions, as well as for women and small children, because it is not too expensive or too cold.
Another method of plastering for restoring fractures and dislocations and twists: take three parts of each of these ingredients - garlic, dill, rue, and asafetida - mixed with three times the weight in powdered gum arabic and myrrh; add five parts aloes. Grind all together into a fine powder and mix it with plenty of egg; if the mixture is warm, use this plaster, for it has a good composition and rapidly heals broken bones, and it is beneficial to many people.
Another method of plastering for dislocation: take mugwort and myrrh, in quantity of 3 parts; frankincense and aloes, in quantity of 8 parts; meadowsweet vi parts; Armenian balm in 10 parts, grind well together, mix with vinegar or sufficient egg white, and apply.
Another method of plastering for joints and bones cut open, to alleviate the pain caused and tenderness, and for bone cutting: take new wool and its grease cooked in oil, put it on your wound. These plasters do not heal completely but are better for soothing abscess fever and properly treating bone pains.
Another method of plastering that heals broken bones: take dried fig leaves and terrestrial oak leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method for setting a broken bone and removing pus. Take roots of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of ginger, one part each; grind them, mix with wine, and if the limb is warm, mix it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Another way of plastering more strongly than the first when pus is in the process of restoring the limb. Take valerian roots, and linseed seeds, borage, clover, and watercress, as well as violet and chamomile flowers, one part each; grind them, mix with saltwater, or sweetened water, or wine according to the heat of the limb and its rest period.
In his book, Ispocrates says that for restoring strength to a broken limb, only balm made of beeswax and oil should be applied, and no other thing besides. He states that it should be soft enough between two fingers without being too sticky or too hard.
And it seems Galen that we should apply to the broken limb for restoration, things dried but slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, just as we have said.
Another way to plaster for injury and pain: take mussels and offals from slaughtered animals, or bird feathers, and vervain, and milk of equal measure. Crush them, make a paste, and apply it.
And then remove a little later, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is his bone in its place injured; if not, remove it by hand.
And if pain comes to the limb, or itching, that causes no rest or swelling, then hurry and remove it, and apply the plaster now; take light linen and a wet sponge, and dip them in water, and wash the limb until the itching stops and the pain is relieved; Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool, moistened in water or oil of roses, and secure it with a bandage until you are sure there's no pus;
And let the inflammation rest on the limb, and reduce the pain, then restart the gentle healing process, and add a little plaster, but don't apply it as tightly as before; and proceed gently until it's sound.
And if you see that pus and redness, pain, swelling are present throughout the affected area, and you need to apply plaster and bandages, then restart as you did initially, in exactly the same manner.
And if nothing of what we have said happens to the limb, or if it is not released until after three days, four, five, or seven; and each time leave it for twenty days, according to this method, as long as the healing process continues, and progresses towards reattachment of the tissue.
Therefore the healing should go beyond what it was at first, and the body will regain its strength as I have explained before; and if you see that the skin is drying more than necessary, know that no remedies can be applied. Apply hot water regularly each day when you reset the dislocation, and let it be every third day, and gently cleanse the area.
Through this process, correct the dislocation of substances in the limb, and immediately fix what foolish people do, causing the member to be forcibly restored: this is bad. Such actions are dangerous and unnecessary; I can only advise rest and correctly opening it.
through various methods of breaking up Many ways of fractures exist, and various forms, and their causes are distinct;
because there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and in these cases, the skull bone crushes all the way to the base of the bone, just below the skull, as if it is breaking the bone; thus this kind of fracture is called "hacking" or "halving".
Or when the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing it, this kind of fracture is called "absolute" or "clean"; and these are either large or small injuries caused by such fractures.
And if there is sequential impact, or crack in the bone, or through stone, or on stone, or other similar cases.
And if there is a fracture that reaches up to the ligament surrounding the bone, or above the bone, and this injury can be large or small.
And if there's a wound that penetrates into the bone as finely as a hair, and has small cracks, and because of this it is called this 'hairline' fracture;
And if the wound is made by striking with a stone or falling, or by something similar, and causes part of the bone to break inward, and has its fragments as close together as candle holders when they are fitting into the candles; if it penetrates the stone from within.
This happens more in those with wet bones beneath, such as children's bones;
And there are various methods of breaking up substances where small pieces are removed such as these; and I will discuss them in their proper place.
And let us know all methods of breaking through by taking away from them, and the examination of attempts, and by the putrid matter which is upon.
The hair appearance is known when one has exposed the bone and rubs it inside, for then you open the black breakage.
In treating the breakage, beware of the bad occurrences due to the malady, and if you see no harmful accident such as vomiting bile, loss of appetite, stretching, dizziness, fever, or other symptoms in various conditions, then there is no certainty for recovery.
And if you do not see an alarming accident and hope for salvation, then start the treatment.
And when the knuckle first comes to you, and it's in winter, then you should remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the start of the month that you can.
And if it's in summer, then hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh around the bone becomes rotten, and accidents occur as we have said.
And if the bone fracture reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you should split the fractured part like this: and take hold of the head from the diseased limb, and expose it on the bone in all ways that you can, and according to the shape of the wound as much as you can.
And when the flow of blood comes to reveal the bone, or if pus is present, you should assist with what's necessary, and it is that you fill the wound with moist cloths soaked in rose oil; And have the wound rest until the pus has calmed and there is assurance of blood flow; then begin working toward the bone to extract it, and this can be done in two ways: one way is that you cut with a narrow incision upfront, and this is the form:
And then make another incision larger than the first.
And the second method is that you have several sizes of incisions, some narrow and others broad, all with points, made from metal and work them gently, making sure not to injure the head.
And if the bone is out and hard, it is necessary that you pierce inside it, in such a way that you apply cuts with needles, not completely but so that they do not penetrate beyond the bone at all times; and there should be an opening or circumference of about 1 inch above the point where no part of the needle can pass through the bone. And you must have more than one, so that each goes into its place of the thickness of the bone, in such a way that you have needles for all sides; and this is the form of three types of needles:
The quality for piercing through the broken bone is that you place one needle on the bone and turn with your hands until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then move the needle elsewhere a little after, and do this throughout; then cut along the incisors of the gap between the bones where they are apart, and do it more finely than possible and gently, as we have said, until you can pull the bone to your hand or any tool you have like forceps, and be sure not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
And when you have pierced and cut the bone, it is necessary that you finish smoothing out what remains of the gap between bones with another tool similar to an incisor but it should be stronger and more delicate than the other incisors;
And if there remains any small bones or no scales at all, gently remove them with instruments of one inch in length; then treat the wound with bandages and remedies that we have described.
And another way of operating is this, as Galen stated, which is safer; and the knife should be quite strong, for it's his word. Firstly, you should uncover a portion of the bone, where the fracture opens and moves, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place under the tip of this lens-shaped incision, as described here.
And do not cut from one side only, and let that part be in two segments, so that the cutting is toward the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so you gently crush the entire bone, and take care to keep away any mesh that is nearby.
If it is pressed against bone, gently apply force to it, because the bone is quite sensitive and can cause pain.
And if the bone break does not go all the way through the membrane, and only part of the bone is cut above, with small fragments remaining, it's necessary to clean up any roughness afterwards. Use a thin razor for removing scales that you should have in different quantities, so as to apply the most suitable treatment in each case according to the treatise and the nature of the break.
If you're facing large razors and then even finer ones, don't stop doing this until it's done well.
In every other kind of hair trimming and fine breakage, you must apply the treatment according to its location; this is something that cannot be left to anyone who has devoted their studies to this craft.
And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary for you to take one linen bandage according to the size of the wound, soak it in oil roset and place it on the wound; Then take another bandage double thickness in two or three layers and soak it in wine and oil roset, then place it on the first bandage; do this as lightly as possible so you don't weigh down the wound, then apply a further layer of strips over it, but don't pull them too tightly so that they only touch the wound.
And keep it like this for one or two days until the abscess is no longer inflamed, then release it and apply medications such as wildflower roots, flour of camphor, incense powder, and similar substances; and from these things make a powder, apply it to the wound, and give further medicated remedies without causing irritation.
And make sure the wound is clean immediately, do not leave any pus behind, nor allow any matter to be assembled at all, for when matter assembles upon the skin near the brain, it will flow and proliferate and cause great harm to the patient; for when one places something piercing above this, it becomes corroded from above.
Then take care, so if no accidents happen to the patient, as we have said, if there is a doubt it should not be doubted.
And if it happens only because of the medicine that we have put on, and should this virtue be present, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix them into a paste with one cloth piece, and place it on the affected area; Then the treatment of various treatments is necessary, as long as he remains healthy.
Know that neither of the two nasal parts above or beneath which is broken once, or only one by itself, because they are two bones; and this lower part is cartilaginous, it does not break at all, even if forced or twisted, then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you bend your small finger or thumb by the nose, and place an equal break inside on your second finger, and at the base towards the front, until the nose revives according to its natural shape; And do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your action.
And if the break is in the part above the nose, and cannot come to the nostril, you should place it even with the tip of a reed slightly thicker.
And if the break is in two parts, redo the procedure, and try to restore on the first day if you can;
But if not, after the seventh or eighth day when the abscess has calmed down, then try to bring back up from the nose head towards the linen cloth bandage, if the break is in one part.
Or you should bring up two others from the other side, if the break is there; and make them so large that they fill the hollows of the nose.
And it is said that one should moisten the tents with butter and change them each day. I do not think this is correct, but rather they should be moistened in an omelette mixture made from egg yolk and ground powder; then leave the tent until the bone is hard and the cartilage hardened.
And in each instance use goose feathers instead of tents, and if you have one egg worth of dressing to cover it completely, then keep the wound clean, letting air pass through; simply do as you see fit.
And if abscesses come up to the nose as you work on them, then apply a poultice or wet cotton in oil, or a pinch of lavender oil.
And if pus does not come out, apply a plaster on the outside, made of saffron flour and incense powder, mixed with yolk oil. Then place it on light wicks, without binding them tightly;
And if the fracture is small and broken into small pieces, then use tools suitable for this task to extract them. Then cut along the wound, clean out all contaminated material inside, and sew it up, using plasters and remedies that are suitable for this purpose;
And if there is no wound within the bone, then treat it, and apply cloves until it heals.
regarding the rupture of the jaw
When the jawbone is fractured and there's no wound at the surface, and only the breakage is outside completely, not broken into two parts but rather split internally within, one can easily identify it.
It is necessary; if the breakage is in the right part, you should bend your index finger into the mouth towards the sore area; and if the breakage is in the left jawbone, you should bend your index finger of the right hand instead, and gently press on the breakage internally, and then proceed to the other hand by pushing it outward, and place them evenly.
And if the breakage of the jawbone extends for two inches, then it is necessary that you apply an extension of two inches until they are even.
And if the movements of the teeth occur, or rupture, then you should restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk. Then place on the broken mandible plaster, and place on one piece two folded cloths; and place on that cloth a large flag made well, or a piece of leather equal in size to the mandible, and stick it on as best you can, and command the patient to rest, and consume light meats.
And if you notice that the figure changes, or that it loosens by the third day, and then set back what has changed; and apply plaster, mixing with powder from the mill with plenty of eggs or flour of yolk, after you have removed the plaster; and place on the plaster light wool, and if the plaster hardens, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be until they are healed. Many times heal in three weeks.
And if abscesses appear, then apply what we have instructed many times.
And if there is a breakage and wound together, reward any piece of the bone that has been removed; so much skill is required for the extraction tools suitable for this.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, if it is large, cover the wound with one dressing suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it is healed.
by strength The force breaks many times before reaching the shoulder, and the break occurs in three ways: when it is broken and removed cleanly with two parts, and there are pieces left, making it easier to restore; or when there's a break accompanied by an injury.
And the veins are such that when there is a break accompanied by an injury, you have two assistants, so that one feels for the shoulder where force has broken; and the other extends to the neck towards the affected part. Then equalize the break with your hands, so that the shape should be as it should be, without any appearance or movement.
And if you need to extend further, place a round sponge under the shoulder and towards the hairline, it should be large according to your needs; stretch out the force (possibly referring to surgical instruments), secure the sponge in hand, so that you can equally apply pressure with your hands, as necessary.
And if you cannot draw the head from the strength at the back due to it coming in front, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their shoulder blade and put half an armpit under them, and push the shoulder down until the bone of the strength lifts.
And then place the break in your fingers, and if you find debris inside, it is necessary to cut through it; and pull the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join with any leverage, cut into one of the incisions you have made. But place this tool against the strength so that it can ward off the syphilitic affection:
Make it resemble a spoon, and do not place it inside, but make it as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the operation; have two of them, just as you see fit, with one being wider, and the other narrow, just like the wound that was made when treating the bones.
And when you are assured of the incision made, suture it and heal the wound; if the opening is small or you doubt about the incision, then cover the wound with bandages and tents, according to its quantity.
And if there are several incisions, moisten them; apply oil rose and wine, and place them.
The setting of the bone, when it is close to wounds and cuts, involves applying a plaster made from the powder of mill and yolk of egg onto the bone, and place light patches over it, and put a pea under the skin if needed; Then take a very long bandage about the size of your palm in width, then place two layers of cloth patch over the bandages and apply plaster; then take a slender stick about three finger widths wide and tall, and wrap it around this bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang down. And place the lancet over the wound, and turn the needle up to the neck, and next to the healthy artery, and next to the diseased one; and reset each part, and when you see that the blood flow has matched the insertion of the instrument, and clearly see that the lancet doesn't move on top of the broken bone, then reward him daily, and when he removes his bandage, then keep him restrained.
And let the diseased area rest on his back, and when he sleeps, place him with a small pillow under his arm to raise the shoulder; this will alleviate the pressure of the weight onto the wound, or you tie his arm around the neck, and do not untie it for fear of accidents happening, until twenty days.
Then renew the plastering if you see that it is needed, and hold him in place like this until he recovers; and she will recover at most within twenty-eight days, and less time for some individuals.
Of the breaking of the shoulder
Sometimes the shoulder breaks or dislocates either at its ends or in the middle, and it often happens due to a hit; you should adjust according to the shape of the breakage and reset accordingly with their natural form. Do this in all possible ways you can. Then sprinkle the shoulder with ground from the mill mixed with plenty of eggs, apply light compresses, and place two cloths on top. Next, place a large, subtle wedge slightly wider than the shoulder, ensuring that there are no gaps under any part of the shoulder; fill the gap with strips of linen to ensure the wedge fits evenly. Then tighten it into one big bend firmly so that the wedge doesn't move from its place and watch each day; whenever it loosens, tighten again making sure the wedge is in line if it is out of place, lay the patient on their side; and the shoulder will be fixed back in place after 20 days or 25. And when this number is completed, remove the dislocation, you can be certain because it isn't bone that easily fits together.
And if a piece of the bone comes forward before the socket and is not under its usual place, you should do this for the shoulder dislocation to ease abscesses that are bursting.
Of the breaking of the foot
The feet are broken at various points once, but this happens seldom; they break often at the ends. And when it is broken internally, it results in descending from above and the patient feels great pain, loss of consciousness, and vomits blood, and opens up the movement within the broken bone, and one can feel well this situation.
And for the restoration, it should be that the patient lies on their back, and you place one and a half cushions between their shoulders, then press the shoulders, and unite the rib cages of both ribs with your hands, and skillfully fit them in all possible ways until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then place plaster and bandages over the subtle salted point, or another light substance, and wrap it in a piece of cloth, and secure it on the broken bone so that it does not move. Then turn the bandage around to fit the back and tighten slightly, and reward each hour with the string, and if it loosens, then tighten; and if necessary, remove it due to corrosion or itching that occurs at the site, or pain or abscess, act quickly and remove it, and dress as you have come with treatments for this situation. Then redo the plaster until it is healed.
On the breaking of ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs occurs only in strong blows to the back and within the chest, and they break due to their flexibility; and one feels this well during interrogation at the side.
And for the healing, if you can equalize the break, as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and press with one hand, if needed.
And if the break of ribs is located inside, the patient feels extreme pain and sharp stabbing sensations, like tears, because the bone presses against the muscle; they have a fever, vomiting and sudden large bleeding, it's distressing health-wise, and the old ones used to apply strong remedies.
And if there are those who say that it is appropriate to administer meat which inflates the belly, in order to drive away the indigestion externally.
We do not follow this advice, for abscesses and pus do not come about, if they have not already occurred. And if it has already happened, then heal it.
And they say that none of us uses suction cups on the body, in order to draw out forms, and this is similar to reason; nevertheless, there's doubt whether the suction cup draws away excesses from the body due to the weakness of position.
And they say that when covering the wound with wet wool in hot oil, and set strips between the ribs to make even the width inside, then do the treatment with the mustard poultice, meat, and medicine.
And if the patients feel great pain that they cannot bear through the bone piercing the membrane, there is doubt in the patient, whether it should cut under their wound of broken rib, and it is necessary to place one.1 instrument to ward off this fluid; and then you must cut into the bone, and gently drain it, and then sew the two edges of the wound if it's large, and treat with plaster until it heals. And if abscesses come out, then put wet cloths in oil on them, and place under their wound; and treat while the cloth should correspond to the abscess, and be mindful on this side or there where it must be, until it heals.
Regarding the breaking of the neck
No breakage comes to the bones of the neck, and there is no bending; similarly with the spine in the back. And when this happens to no one, and you want to know if it will heal or not, take heed: if you see his hands softened, swollen, and dead, and unable to move or extend, and when you touch them with a needle, if he doesn't feel. Know that in many conditions it is fatal, and if they do not move and feel well when restrained, know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and that the patient's health will recover, provided one treats the wound properly.
And if this happens to the spine in the back, and you want to know if it will heal or not, take heed: if you see his hands softening and becoming inactive, and the condition spreads like an eruption on his back causing involuntary defecation; and when they have treated him on his belly, he still has involuntary defecation. And when they treat him on his back and he wants to stand, he can't. Know that it is fatal: if not treated properly in its cure.
And if such events do not occur to him, then it is a simpler matter.
And the treatment is such that you should remove any abscess if there is one, if you place oil on the spine or on egg yolk, until it eases; then place one of the restorative plasters and let it dry, and bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until they are healed. And if any bones are dislocated, it is necessary to cover them with the elbow; and remove the bone, then align the two edges of the wound, if it's large, with a stitch, then treat with an ointment that binds well until it heals; and if there are dislocated pieces of bone, which are called "dislocations of the knee", you should place your left hand pouch over your right hand, and hold them evenly at your power level, then apply the plaster and heat as needed; then compress, and if any bones have been dislodged, place them again, and set them, and treat the wound until it is healed.
From the breaking of the bone of the hip
It happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if this occurs, there might be a slight pain at the thigh; it extends longly, declines towards the knee, comes to the patient's discomfort in their leg, pain, and makes what is broken swell.
And in the restoration, you should extend your hand upwards as long as it is over the broken part; and understand where the break occurred and its shape. If the break happened only at the thigh, apply an even breakage there, until it reaches its natural position.
And if the break extends along the leg or inward towards the body, guide the patient so that they lie on their belly, as long as it takes for you to properly heal this break. And when you have made it even, place it on a plaster, then put on a stick or a reed stand, and hold the wound steady so that it doesn't move; and apply the skin over the ribs until the wound is evenly aligned.
Instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
And if the abscesses drain themselves, do not disturb them until the abscesses have drained fully, and then apply what we have previously mentioned. Then return to the treatment plan, and hold it accordingly without any bad accidents happening; this is the method.
regarding the breaking of the shoulder
The assistants are those that are between the blade and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, you must restore it according to one of these two methods: of which one is that you take a solid stick of medium thickness, according to this shape:
And tie two pieces of cloth together, and bend them up, then place the patient's broken arm on top of one seat; then pour the broken part over the stick until it reaches the elbow, and has made half a turn with the length of the stick, then bend over any heavy object or let assistants hold it downwards; then put the pieces of cloth so that the break is evenly between their hands, until the broken part returns as it should.
And the other method is that you place the patient on their back, and tie their hand to their neck, then command two assistants such that one shaves the area where there is the break with their hands, and the other cuts off any excess at every inch, and extend each person to their own side.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, hold one band over the cut and another above it, spreading each minister to their part. And should the cut be near the head of the shoulder, it's necessary for you to place one band halfway along the edge, and another in front of the knife, close to the cut; and also if the cut is towards the blade, then it's necessary to place a light band without exertion, until the cut is even on both sides, and the top of the shoulder; then make the cut even as needed, and hold the cut, should no pus come from it.
And if pus comes out, do not restrain too tightly for up to seven days, and place wet wool in a comfortable position with rose oil, until the pus at the bottom is relieved; then restrain it, and the way to restrain should be that you place the plaster over the cut. Then join the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or chest; apply the cloth, and hold tightly on the shoulder and arm, so that the arm is in its usual position, without anything preventing it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt whether the bone is moving, use elbows and place a larger and stronger wedge between each cut than the others, leaving an inch of space between each wedge. Each wedge should be large enough to pass three inches on each side of the cut; then hold the wedges in place as I instructed at the beginning of this chapter on cutting, more strongly without pulling away.
And if you see the base of the stakes and their constriction, as we have said, in the hour when you restore the broken limb, and if you doubt about discharging pus, if you let it be bound until a week's time, as we have said; then observe each three days' bond, to ensure that itch does not swell or come near to the body, or that ulcers cannot reach the limb because they are too narrow. If there is an issue, as we have said.
And if no such incidents occur, or if the loosening is only done after two days or more, and keeps lying in bed on his back, with his hands on his stomach; and place under him one cloth filled with equal wool for support, and observe each hour of the day that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or that the bonds do not soften; if it heals through the power of medicine, and he gives meat as we have placed before, in such a manner that the meat is at the first subtle; and when it begins to recover, if it becomes large. And custom dictates that both the brace and the leg should be recovered within forty days altogether; then you must loosen and apply baths and medicines for the body to heal properly.
of the break of the arm
The arm is made of two bones which are called the 'foscile' pair. One bone is small and it forms the socket; the other is larger and it is beneath the small one towards the back of the hand. By chance, only the large foscile might break, or just the smaller one, or perhaps they both break together.
When only the small fosciles break, the restorations are light and the healings; but when the large ones break, the healing is ill and more painful than if they broke together. If it's just the small foscile that breaks, then a slight extension should be appropriate and setting them evenly is required.
And if it's the large foscile that breaks, you should hold them tighter; then extend on one cushion and pinch the hand socket higher than the others, and position the small bones lower than the other ones. Make sure the muscles are crossed over themselves, with an additional cushion in front positioned higher so that they don't endure any strain; next, extend your arms' tendons towards their joint above their hands or at one elbow, and another attendant should do the same on the opposite side. Then place them evenly according to their best form.
And if in the breakage into pieces, you place each back in its position, and if there is none of them that grabs the knee, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut through and the bone, as we have said before.
And if in case of injury during surgery, I mentioned this earlier in detail; take care of the treatment.
And if during the beginning of the restoration, there occur pus pockets, then apply: take a strip made from rosin and white beeswax that is neither too hard nor too soft; and attach this strip so finely that it covers the pus pockets until they subside. And then remove the wax, and place the plaster powder mixed with an egg, and set the splints, ensuring the splint on the injury site is more firmly placed than others, slightly wider than the rest, and remember to have seven or eight splints in various positions: if the injury affects one bone, two bones; and place it more above the injury area compared to other parts; and each day remove from that point further outward, as I mentioned at the start of this chapter; ensure that the strips covering the injury are soft and moist, not hard or abrasive; and use threads made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have stated. And take care of the limb and the joint after a few days. And if any bad incidents occur to the limb, such as itchiness that comes to the limb, it is necessary for you to soak the limb in hot water until that itchiness is relieved; and let the limb not be allowed to rest. And then resume compression, and if the ligaments have been severed and the bone exposed, along with similar things, if you can, address this issue accordingly.
And if precautions are taken so that no injuries can come to the limb because it is too tight, it is necessary for you to soften it with oil, and leave it like this for a few days, until the pains subside, and then resume compressing it.
And if none of these things that we have mentioned do come to the patient, nor does it need to be released up until twenty days or more. Or wherever else, then allow them to use their hands on their neck, and ensure their necks are equal, and take care to avoid movement and stretching, and sleep on their back; and know that this strain has been healed for thirty days or thirty-five days, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and the characteristics of the virtues.
On the breaking of the hand
You should know that on the back of the hand and in our fingers, there are few breaks, and they only occur multiple times.
And when the heel of the hand or finger is broken or sprained, it should be treated by applying splinting, keeping the hand straight in front of them as well; then place their hand on an extended surface and extend the fractured bones, putting them even with each other until they are properly aligned; and put a plaster and bandages if there's no pus discharge, then apply a pillow according to the size of the wound; and wrap it loosely in one linen sheet.
And if the breakage is in between the toes near the belly of the foot's sole, then make a strip of cloth and instruct the patient to apply it to their broken toe; and then wrap it tightly with a long piece of cloth, and place the pillow so that its width matches the size of the hand's palm, and secure it properly.
And if the break is at the front, it should be that you place an elevation above and another below in the heel, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind them all together with the hand, and seal the connection between the fingers.
And if the break occurs at neither of our fingers, if it is in the joint, as is fitting; and bind with the heel, and if you see, place a small upright stick to raise the break, and don't move it; and if the break is on other fingers, like in the index or one of the others, place them equally, and bind with the healthy finger that comes after; or bind all together holding tightly, so nothing moves, or place a stick as you would hold; take care in the restoration and positioning of each wound, and deal with whoever brings it to you, as I have said.
Of the broken thigh
The bone of the elbow is often broken, and one can see this when it turns in front and behind; and the restoration involves binding over the breakage .i., above the fracture, and .i., another underneath. And the injuries lie on her face, then extend each minister his link to his equal part; and this is when the breakage enters the bone.
And if the breakage is near the base of the arm, then one should place his links towards the wrist, and the other links over the breakage. Similarly, if it's near the elbow, then you should place the links behind the elbow, and the extension downwards; then put the sights on the bone equally to his two hands, as long as it follows its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the link, if there's no abscess.
And if there is an abscess around it, let it heal first before returning to your work and treatment; the healing process is carried out in this manner. It is necessary that you wrap around the wound, i.e., bandage it with three or four layers of thick material, and retain excess length. Then raise the leg until the heel reaches the root of the thigh, and insert a thread one meter long between the calf and leg, downwards from the knee to just below it. Then guide the ends of the thread upwards through loops at the top; then wrap around the leg and the calf with the bandage, then place an anchor on the wound edge and another under the bone in the leg; then fill the eight inches between the leg and calf with wet cloth strips for equal pressure application, then start to bind tightly in three or four rounds around the wound. And as you go beyond the wound area, bind less tight; then secure two ends of the thread that you've placed between the leg and calf at this point, tie them together with three loops above them, then return under the thread loop until you're below the ankle bone; tighten it so it doesn't move from its place, then leave it like this, then there's no danger of an abscess forming or swelling or any other symptoms.
And if such a thing occurs, reposition it and guide the treatment according to what we've said many times; and should there be pieces of bone that are caught, cut them out if possible; and if not, you must cut into the wound and extract the force; then treat as we have instructed until it is healed.
And never is the flesh broken when these needles are inserted like in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, no discomfort arises with the patient during this treatment.
Know that the flesh is restored within one day, or somewhat less, or somewhat more, depending on the variety of constitutions.
from the alley of the kidney
Know that in the alley of the kidney there is little cracking, but it bends many times. And if it does crack, it's usually just a crack or two parts lost, and this happens to all injuries, whether visible or not, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is such that one should place equal what is round at its ends, until everything can move together. Then put plaster on it, and you can put a round stick if necessary, and then tighten as needed. Then redo all the preparations we've spoken about in other fractures, whether it's discharging pus or any similar situation; for each incident, use what suits that specific case, until everything is healed.
of the breaking of the leg
You know that in the leg there are two bones. One is called 'right' or 'mustelz', and the other is named 'foscile'; and every sort of injury occurs just like it does with the arm, and for this reason, the restoration process is similar to that of the arm and everything proceeds equally.
And if both bones are broken together, twist the leg from all sides.
And if the delicate bones are broken, twist them in front.
And if the larger bones are broken, one feels great pain and sees it clearly; twist them downwards. Therefore administer extension, and make them equal, binding them evenly; but when the break is irregular or there are multiple pieces, then extension should be more limited and lighter; and align according to your skill.
And when you have completed your task, take two ropes of wood that strengthen the leg on both sides and should be as long as the leg from the knee down to downwards; then wrap these in two layers each side, binding them up and down and also in the middle, and ensure that the leg cannot decline either right or left. It will be well done this way; and no one administers a plaster as long as it is made of wood and placed on the leg to prevent movement. And do this carefully at the break where there is injury; and move the leg each day to see if there are any abscesses or other complications; treat until it is healed.
From bone fractures due to impact
At the ankle it does not come from fracture but from bone impact; there is no once-only fracture and the bones can be displaced. There is only strength depending on multiple positions.
And if there occurs a fracture in the bone impact and you see these bones rise over each other, lay the injured bones on the ground like they want to move away. Also do this when the patient is lying down; then press them as much as it takes until their senses return; then apply plaster and bandages on top of that. Place a small table under his feet about half a foot high, then press him onto the floor up to the ankle bend, then wrap cloths around it, and do other things you need to do.
And when three or four days have passed, if the bandage is removed, because you will find the bones level, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the two broken, repair them, as we said about the fingers of the hand; then place a stick over each broken finger according to their length, and make it slightly wider than that, then put under the foot that board I have mentioned, and tighten the addition against this; and if there are two or three or more, break them, so place on each finger a stick according to its quantity, wrapped in one layer of linen, and tighten the table under this. And stay seated at the top of the table facing the stomach under this, so that it touches well.
And you should not forget the other things I've said about other injuries, as we have discussed; and treat each incident according to how it should be.
regarding the breaking of the bone in the hand
When the bone of her nature is broken, if it causes enlargement, then let her sit and enlarge further. Then incline her towards the back part, being held from behind; fill the cavity that was natural with cotton, also filling it as large as a finger would be; then lay her down again, lift up her back little by little, and then jump out the cotton until it reaches the entrance of nature and return the bone together with the finger; and when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton. When she has urinated, get her back and do this for seven days or a bit more: if the break will heal, take a bladder of goats' stomachs, tie a stick at its neck and fill the whole bladder into nature; then blow through the stick until the bladder is inflated internally: nature will return to restore the break. Then fill with cotton and leave like this for some days, until it becomes healthy.
And when the bone of the wrist or hand is broken, or in a man, if you restore it as we have said for the hipbone; and do not omit these fractures near him who puts his study and practice to use, and listen to my book. For the break signifies more than various positions of the right way of restoration: therefore understand this.
In the case of the penis, if it is broken, take a goose’s throat and fill the penis with it; then wrap it in linen or cloth, and let it be for three days or as long as necessary, and it will heal quickly.
Regarding breaking with injury
It is necessary for the one who has a break with an injury, even if it's large, like in the case of the shin bone or shoulder blade or any similar injuries, that they should be treated now. The procedures we have mentioned shall attest to this.
And if the wound is healed, you can reapply vitriol to it. If there's no other option, then continue with restoring the break in that same hour or day, or even on the same day, provided that abscesses are not coming out.
And if there are abscesses coming out, leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the abscess has subsided. Don't touch it on the third or fourth day either, for you might bring about bad accidents by doing so.
And if the bone breaks and is visible above the uncovered knee, it is necessary for you to place it gently with your hands at a small extension.
And if the extensions are not visible for you to place evenly with your hands, then use this iron tool made of iron that is .vij. or .viij. long inches, and its width should match the size of the wound; for each breakage treatment, it's necessary for the surgeon to hold about .iii. or iiij., depending on what suits him in each injury case; it should be round with a slight thickness so that it doesn't bend under compression on your limb during the work; and may be sharp at both ends, and thick towards the middle ahead.
And it is called "palainche" because the crooked ends should be placed on the visible part of the bone; and you hit them once, until they return, making sure they are even against each other. And if the breakage is thin, and the tools cannot properly grasp the bone, then you have to hold the tip of the bone until the tools can take it effectively.
And if you cannot return the bone back, as we have said, if you have access to an appropriate tool for this task, such as a surgical blade or a small saw, with your strength; then remove what is remaining in the bone through hardness and small cuts.
And when the bone is returned and the patient feels intense pain afterwards, know that it has not been placed naturally in its position. Do as you can to place it there, then apply a layer of one part of black vitriol for every three parts of wine, and properly if it's in an erect state; and do not place wax or any other substance where there is pus, so as to prevent the development of gangrene or corruption; then administer these remedies when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover it completely according to the size of the wound, and be very cautious that the wound is not strained by bruising; and many times people have done this incorrectly, causing injury or corrosion on the patient's part; and let the compresses be softer and more forgiving than other injuries.
And if the wound is deep or large, and you suspect that unwanted complications might occur, as we have said before, and you feel pain in your extremity, it would not be appropriate to apply remedies; but instead cover completely without using compresses. And when after one day or two days you see that the swelling begins to go down at the wound, remove what you had placed with all wine, and apply a healing ointment for wounds, like an ointment from Tetrafarmacon and similar ones.
And it is necessary for you to dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at vespers, until it has healed and become healthy.
And it is necessary that the limb be put together so that the joint moves easily forward.
And if the joints continue to do this for days and it cannot be sewn but remains like that with the joint, know that there are small bone fragments causing this issue. Therefore, you need to work on the wound with a tented method, and remove all these pieces of bone that cause pain.
And if there is an opening at the site or any other form of corruption, it must be treated according to what was instructed in the preceding chapter. And when bone is broken and exposed on the limb, like the bones of the hand or shoulder, or similar large limbs, do not remove them because often this leads to death. However, leave it until it heals; perhaps after 20 days or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, just let it be.
The burns that come from sweat
The burns often come after rubbing with the breeze, especially near the joints. A terrible thing to see is how the limb's shape changes; and by chance cannot perform its natural actions on it.
Take care then when it is fresh: if you administer stictch medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, sarsagot, carageen, and similar others, do so according to whichever of these you desire or all together, mixing them with stictch wine or with the yolk of an egg or with honey; then apply it on a nut in poultices, bind it well, and don't remove it with your hands for days; afterwards displace it, and start another poultice until the swellings are removed; or you bind onto a well-made piece of cork because the properties of cork are such that they remove all swellings from limbs; if the swelling has turned into hardness like stone and needs to be removed, cover it with a paste, making the excess visible; or take it off with no one's help until it is removed, and treat it until healed.
When the breakage of the bone is restored, and after that the limbs are weak and subtle, this happens through various causes: because one was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ties, and could not bring circulation to the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or due to large movements not in their time; or because they have little blood in their body, if they are weak.
And the treatment is that you should eat the herb in him, and make the body tender until there are numerous effects within him; then provide baths for him, and give him joy and rest. Afterward, apply ointment to the limb, so that the ointment attracts towards the main circulation, and washes with hot water repeatedly until the circulation matches the limb; and restores his natural figure.
If a limb is bent after recovery
When the limb is twisted after restoration and the bone is broken apart, though the form of the limb is ugly, it does not lose its natural function: nor should you believe those who say one must break the entire limb anew. And many foolish people have done this in our land; these practices are condemned, causing great harms and even death. However, if the inflammation and torture are still fresh, then it's right to immerse them in hot water, or to cook mollifying herbs such as leaves of basil, roots, and mallow, among similar remedies; and apply one liter of a moistening plaster, such as well-made yarrow extract, and take the basil oil, mix it with tallow or nut oil, and apply the plaster over that. Alternatively, you can take greased figs, grind them with cinnamon powder, and other medicines that soften heat, and then make a plaster from these.
And always, when treating a dislocation, it is advised to continuously and thoroughly rub the affected area with wet hands. And each hour, allow movement of the limb in its place.
And if the dislocation is old and hardened, like bone, and requires treatment with metal tools, then it might be necessary to operate up to the bone, gently on the delicate incision; and incorporate patience and careful consideration in the healing process.
This begins the book on dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, for this reason it cannot move, and the limbs are misaligned, causing patients to experience great pain and severe injury.
When dislocation happens without a cause and if it is about to occur now, you should bring it back without delay.
For if one delays, the limbs swell up and by chance they are put back into place in their original location; because it is not good to move it when it is swollen at that time: it often brings on pus and other pains;
If this happens, if you find the patient in this situation, let the surgeon take care of them until all the pus has subsided; then immerse the limb in warm water and oil, gently move it, and clean each limb as needed based on its place.
And I have arranged the chapters about the dislocations of the shoulder up to here.
of the jaw
Sometimes the jaws become dislocated forwards, and the dislocations of both occur in two ways: either they are slightly ossified at their joints and somewhat soft; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the chin, causing saliva from the mouth to escape that they cannot contain it, nor can they close their mouth, and wrap their tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it can return through several positions.
And if it's complete and fulfilled, you should reset it quickly without hesitation;
And in such a way that the attendants cut the head with the aid of the surgeon, and push one of his thumbs into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth; if the dislocation is two inches long; and the other hand should be free to balance; command the patient to soften, his jaws, and move them in every direction.
And push the thumb until it is balanced, until it returns to its place.
And if bringing it back hurts, likewise when the two jaws are together, use hot water and oil, until you gently reset them; do not overly force their return, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient feels well with mild soothing, then place wet cloths as a poultice made from rose oil and beeswax on it, then bind it lightly with moist strips.
And let the patient rest on their back, and keep their head between two cushions so they do not move to either side nor try to stretch, but please give them light food until the pains are alleviated, and ensure that the jaws are fastened together.
And then taste it lightly, and make sure there is no work to opening the mouth for eating or drinking until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be properly aligned within an hour and are not yet fully restored to their original position, it leads to fevers becoming habituated and recurrent, and in consequence stomach discomfort or even vomiting occurs.
And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times, death befalls the one who encounters this within eight days.
from the fortress
The strength cannot relieve from within the ribcage and the back, and it is relieved once outside, and well can one feel this.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; then press towards your palm with the head and it will return. Then place them on a splint and wrap with a bandage, and support;
And the head near the knife cannot be relieved; if not, and if it relieves once, then reset it to its place as we said; then place them on a splint and wrap with a bandage, and support, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed.
And similarly, bring back the shoulder blades when it has been released from its place.
Regarding the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: out of which one is when it dislocates towards the part of the socket and away from the head; and the second way is at the part below the elbow; and by chance it dislocates upwards, this happens rarely;
And the shoulder never dislocates behind nor within the nerves; and it dislocates from below towards the socket more often, especially in those with little flesh, because they sprain quickly; for those with enough flesh, it jumps to points and returns to them.
And by chance happens to some men from impact or breaking, and the shoulder swells with an acute abscess, and they think it is dislocated due to this.
Therefore, you must prove it, as long as you are certain; then begin the treatment.
And when recognized, a dislocation occurs when it moves towards the shoulder blade, and there's a clear distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their obvious difference. And you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder. Also, from the shoulder blade to the elbow, it's like the shape of an 'O' for the diseased shoulder, and the patient can't bring their hand up to their nose, nor move it with any movements;
And similarly, if it is dislocated upwards but not completely hidden, you will find it clearly at the elbow.
And this way of dislocation cannot remain unless it is new or if the child is ill.
And this method is that the minister lifts the hand away from the ill part at the top, then places his thumbs on the joint and raises the joint to force up at its place; and the minister lifts the hand and extends it upwards, putting it back in position; if it comes quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said on the third day, then the ill person should be bathed in warm water; and administer restorative and soothing treatments, such as decoctions of sage and fenugreek and clover herb, and make them into a wash.
Then wrap the ill person's back with a piece of cloth, and place an evenly soft layer of wool under the joint, neither too soft nor too hard. Then place the heel on top of the layer, and lift the shoulder blade upwards in a virtuous manner, and pull the hand away from the illness.
And another medical minister cuts the head of the limb, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder comes back immediately, and if you see him to reset according to this manner:
And make sure the place where he stays is bigger than the limb; and it faces towards the body side, and pushes the shoulder up against the socket of the limb, and lifts the socket upwards, so that the limb hangs down in an arc; And another medical minister pulls the hand of the limb downwards towards the belly. And if the limb is too light, then place something heavy with it, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And you can also reset it in another way: and let's say you stick a long stick into the ground, such that the head is as wide as a bullet, and neither too large nor too slender; Place something under the hair but ensure it is covered with a skin membrane and let the hair remain as long as the rod. Then extend your hand downward from another side in form, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
And if it doesn't return due to all these things that we have mentioned, do this treatment: take one tournedavain of two large arms and three sticks of the same size, which has a head wide enough to enter smoothly from the front on both sides according to this shape:
Then tie it on the end of the rod covered with skin underneath, so that the rod does not hurt the hair, then place it against the skin from where you are to enter smoothly all around; and extend your arm along the rod from head to toe, and tie the shoulder on the rod, and the arm at the wrist, then put the arm on one of two long sticks about as wide, and keep the hand extended downward, and leave the body hanging from another side: the joint will return immediately now.
And when it is thus, in whatever way it may be, if need be you should put on the saddle a thread that's even, then place the plastered substance with mill-ground powder, along with incense and egg yolk, over the whole shoulder and around it, then remove from the saddle addition, and tie up the bandage onto the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain in such a way.
It is necessary that he eats moderately, until the limbs are reinforced, for it will heal faster; and then eat more after five days or seven, and move them; and if it's firm and not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is loose due to moisture that caused it or for another reason, you should administer four fires of the cautery, as was described in the section on cauteries previously.
And if you do all of this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint doesn't hold, and cannot lift your arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint would never be fixed in its place.
Dislocations in the buttocks area and breasts or rearward, are caused by pushing and stretching of hands, and performed at other locations; and treat until they heal properly.
And if after the healing comes redness to the limb, and persistent movements, then use hot baths many times, until that redness disappears and returns to its original state.
From the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the joint of the shoulder has been dislocated at its points, and returns to them; and if it's dislocated from all sides, as well as in front and behind, and dislocations are not responsive because one can see and feel them clearly; and is dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the shoulder bone with the healthy part, if it's possible to see clearly. For the joint is hairy, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder in any way.
And you must reset it in such a way that the abscesses are closed and heal, for if they were left open, there would be complaint about having to bring them back; and sometimes they cannot be brought back completely, especially when they are at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and by chance death comes.
And this restoration is so done when it can be brought about that you extend its hand to your two hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands are placed in front of you according to the line of the elbow, forward and backward, and hold the joint together with its elbows joined or at the base of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it will return when it doubles its hand to its hand, and raises the bone from the base of the palm that is dislocated.
And if it does not wish to return to its place, administer strong extension; and if both hands extend the arm, and hold them together, so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm from each side, then once you have wrapped a long and wide double sheet around it;
And when you touch the joint with your hand to join it together, if you apply some oil to soften the joint, then firmly set the joint back in place, until it heals.
And when it is in place, set it with dry plaster and egg white, hold it firmly in position, allow the arm to hang down by the side of the body for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is firmly in place, release the bandage, and leave it; and if you notice that the joint does not heal well, reapply the plaster and the bandage, and keep it this way for some days until it is firmly set; then remove it.
And if it feels painful after repositioning the joint, and it moves again, bathe it and scrub beautifully, pressing until it is relieved; or you can place a piece of fatty lamb skin on the joint, then leave it for one day and a night, then apply heat, and have them take a bath. And when he sweats, rub the joint in a timely manner, then place the ice back on it, and afterwards soak or bathe. And thus do this procedure either twice or three times, until he feels better; and if you see that improvement, apply moist cow's milk heated with butter to it, and rub it in; so that it will return to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
The hand dislocation occurs and the recovery is gentle, more so than other joints. Always bring it back to its place immediately upon dislocation, while in the same state as when it was dislocated, so that the limbs are swollen or an abscess arises.
And the resetting process involves placing your hand on the patient's side on a table, extending their arm out, and aligning them so that they match perfectly, thus having their palm placed against the appearance of the joint, and holding it until it resets.
Otherwise, you must check if it is correctly in place; then have the patient support their hand's back on a table during extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then have the patient place their hand's back on the table, and position their hand against the appearance of the joint. If it returns to this position now, that means it is properly reset.
If not, apply plaster casts for abscess drainage and leave them as such without repeating the process.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after several days, then the joint remains twisted;
and does not harm the patient as long as his limbs are immobilized, and cannot strain anything at all: then you know that the nerve is cut, or the artery; if there is no other way except to strain by cautery until the situation allows, and perhaps it has no other remedy.
And when the hands are in place, set them on the plaster that we have described, then strain and leave them for five days, then release and leave them like this.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no swelling, then use hot water, and rub until it becomes warm.
Regarding the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Neither are any finger of the hand dislocated on either side, neither from the back of the palm nor from the belly;
Therefore leave the fingers alone, and keep any potential dislocation from occurring until it has healed, then support the head of each finger, and bend it towards the part where it is separated;
And leave it for two days, and then set it straight on the third day; and do not let it move in any way as we have said, and release the dislocation that day, and allow it to move, and secure it again that night; and repeat this process until it is fully corrected.
And do it similarly if it is dislocated at the wrist of the hand, and do it in the same way that you did before until it is stabilized; and do it similarly when it is dislocated on another side.
The process of resetting the ankle joint and the back.
When the ankle at the back or neck is dislocated, or multiple are dislocated, without any treatment for fear that death would overtake the patient quickly.
And the signs are that the patient's excretions escape without willpower and cannot be held back; many times parts of their body are weakened, or both feet, or either two arms, or one arm.
And many times, the cheek muscle becomes four parts; that which hardens at the back is called 'cheek thickening':
The treatment is that you should reward if the cheek thickening has come from childhood: if there is no treatment or healing at all.
And that which comes from birth or impacts or similar things, according to the old methods of treatment by big words, they did not achieve any great benefit in all.
but I have summarized it according to my intention, and have formed tools in various ways.
I say that when it comes to the growth of hair before the genitals, there is no need for grooming or health care.
And similarly concerning the growth straight to the second ribs, and one cannot cure anything except that which comes to the back properly, as I say;
And it is that the organs should be extended over their belly in one league evenly, and have tension under him, so they do not swell or blister;
Then place one coal at the base on earth, and another at the joints, and tie a band under the joints of the organs, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
And those who know the ligaments, one to the head and the others to the joints, among the two pincers;
And be sure that both pincers are tightly closed, as we have said, and the fingers place their palms on the spine until she regains consciousness.
And if this treatment does not work, take a board three spans long and place it over the chest, and if the patient is lying on her side, support the head of the table against the chest. Then put the middle of the table under the spine; And have the fingers place their feet on the other end of the table and press well until she regains consciousness at her head; and if you can see, do this at the elbow that turns towards the hand.
And indeed you should place two prongs at the elbow joint of one arm and near the wrists on both sides, with each prong having about the palm's length of space between them.
And in each prong place one piece of the elbow bone, or the bend of the wrist, and make sure that the prongs are firmly set in the earth so they don't move. And between the two main prongs place another curved prong, aligned with where the elbow would normally turn, and place two small curved prongs halfway down each bend, to help bend the elbow.
And then tie the strip between the elbows at the elbow joint facing the bend of each arm and the other strap towards the wrists on the other elbow, and each attendant bends their elbow all the way to the strap. The master ensures that the spine is placed evenly as we have described.
And when they are equal, place them on desiccative plaster with plenty of egg white, and then apply a paste, and then apply a talc powder from a tablet of 1.5 inches in length, which purges the area of gallbladder inflammation and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with string as we said, and let the patient rest until they are healed;
And if anything comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the powder we said earlier; and each time administered, use a piece of pork fat.
And if there appears in the lower part of the spine at the back, and take care that it is not dislocation; and this bone opens, so we should not have any assumption about it: by chance, it might bring death.
Dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and shoulder only bring dislocations, unlike others; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, in front and behind; and more towards inside, less dislocated in front and back.
And the knowledge of internal dislocation is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased knee opens more than the healthy one, and the diseased knee cannot bend behind the joint. And it is the limbs that are swollen from abscesses, because the head of the thigh bone comes into contact with them.
And the sign of him who comes to the fever, if it is that this event goes against what was before.
And the signs for him who approaches ahead, if it is that his legs are well according to completion; still, neither doubles nor moves the heel without pain, and if you try to make him walk, he cannot do so beforehand, and holds back his urine, and swells his ankle, and when he walks, he passes over the heel.
And the signs for him who approaches behind, if it is that he cannot spread his heel, nor double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and feels pain along the back of the thighs.
The understanding of this appearance of dislocation is that you should confirm if the dislocation is old and remains in its position, without any treatment; and there should be no assumption about it.
And concerning the one where dislocation is recent, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to reset it, and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, no other treatment needs to be done.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must apply one strong remedy, and stretch the leg strongly with both hands, or to one band that is tied above the knee; and another remedy extends his hand above in such a way that he pushes his hands below his knees, then stretches him with one breath of force to the thigh; and holds his head to the band.
And extend up and down all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground in one go, and stays hanging.
This way of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it's correct.
But if not, the treatment should be tailored to its appearance. When dislocation is at the hip socket, you must lift the patient onto his sound side, then apply a ligament on the root of the thigh, and the one above the groin, then secure the ligament upwards towards the groin, and towards the buttocks;
Then grab another assistant to hold his arms and embrace the thick part of the injured thigh, and extend it upwards in this manner: if it returns to its place now; and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot secure it in this manner as we have said, then it must be that you tie the two legs of the afflicted together with a strong ligature above the heels and above the knees, and let the leg afflicted extend two feet more than the other one.
Then have it hung from the head of a staff, and let two arms' lengths be in the earth; then command one assistant to encircle the head of the basket, and let other assistants with the afflicted hold onto the basket, as they encircle it properly, for now the joint is returning quickly.
And when the dislocation is behind, if the patient lies down as we have said in those with elasticity, and stretches one ligature on the affected leg properly, and around the foot also;
Then place two needles, one at the head and another in a pinch, then insert one needle between the armpits on the patient's back in the shape of an 'X'; and have placed wet cloths around them, so as not to blister the patient, then extend each limb towards him, and you should place their shoulder in an even position relative to his hand for the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good. If not, place him on a table, and press him down in such a way as we have said in the context of inflammation, and let the patient lie on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it should be extended immediately as I have said; and place their pain on the affected arm, then press with the other hand, and extend down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it does not suit to extend the patient's head backwardly, nor to lift them up from the ground, rather, it should be like when their hip was dislocated forwardly, as we have said about lying on both hips. and so on her face, and let the ligament stretch as we have said previously, and one should press at the joint to the table;
and it will be correct when the patient's legs stretch and they are equal; then adjust the thighs, and apply the plaster, and tighten with a bandage so that the hip does not move.
and let them rest for three or four days, then release the bandage and place the plaster again; and if you see that they are equal, tighten it as before and leave it for three more days; then release the patient's movement gradually, until the limb is strengthened.
From shoulder joint dislocation
The shoulders can be dislocated in three ways: this is to say, internally and externally, and behind; and they do not dislocate forward.
And the signs for this are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their knee, and if they cannot bend it up to their knee, you know that their shoulder is dislocated.
And for the restoration of all this, you should make the patient lie straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back against their buttocks, and put their foot on your feet;
Then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee joint. And some other servants extend his foot as far as the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he has moved his leg lightly towards his thigh.
and place the dressing on it, and have him lift his leg to his thigh, and keep them together strongly for three or four days, then release him; and do not disturb the wounds of the leg until the limbs are strengthened.
And if the limbs are not yet right, administer strong extension as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is cured.
From the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes misaligned and not fully dislocated, both inside and outside.
And the signs of this are that the ankle swells, and stretches forward towards the part where it is dislocated:
The reduction should be done quickly; when the ankle is misaligned, you should gently extend it with your hands only if it's out of place.
And when it is dislocated from the very beginning, it must be that you make the patient lie straight, and hold them up with two attendants by their leg, above the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then to your left hand twice, then lift them high, and hold the leg up firmly;
and do this twice, as we have said, pulling and moving the leg; if it returns, that is well; if not, start the process again, for it will return.
and if it cannot return in this manner, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and stick one post firmly into the ground between their buttocks, and tie a cloth around them so as not to bruise the leg.
Then have your attendants soak his chest in the broth, and some other servants extend one of their hands under his feet or at his waist, he ties onto the neck of the foot; Then extend all your attendants evenly, and have the sack placed firmly between the chest of the patient so that it can hold the patient when extended.
Then position both eyes evenly on his shoulders, and have some other attendants soak the healthy leg at the knee, and the dislocated shoulder will return quickly.
And when it is at the right temperature, place the plaster and wrap it around firmly, then tie the leg to the thigh, and guard the nerves that are on the ankle behind, making sure the bandage isn't too tight.
Then let it be for two days or three, and if the bandage is removed, then pull on him; then release him on the third day or quarter of a day, and instruct him to move about for four more days; And even if it goes beyond that point, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if the pus-filled areas have come out, you should soothe them as we have said elsewhere, until they are cleansed.
From these two
When the two shoulders are dislocated, if they suit to be beautifully extended in work, and it is a slight matter.
And if the dislocations are not in any knot of the back or stone, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on his full length or on a table entirely straight, and place your foot where the joints spread, then press with your foot firmly until they come back into position.
And when they are even and do not open anything, place one of your feet on a table with both shoulders, then press firmly, and leave him for three days, then release him; and let him rest until he recovers.
On surgery and dislocations together
When injury comes with the dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times death occurs to the patient:
if you are not modest in your treatment, and if you do not possess knowledge of the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, then do not be rash.
and in the beginning apply soothing treatments to the wound, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope for recovery; And when you see hope, immediately reset the member at its place, so that the pus and wound drain out.
And when the limb is at its place, administer remedies for pus drainage, and treat the wound accordingly, using dried ointments.
And if it involves dislocation with fracture, and small bones are exposed, set the bones, and do as we have said for simple diseases.
And guard against entering paths of fear as I have said, for this befits you according to your Creator, and through knowledge and skill in treating yourself and your body. Amen.
