You, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the culmination of medical science gathered together with its applications, and I have finished it through its explanations and declarations. And in my vision, I came to understand that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is flourishing in our region and has spread far and wide, so much that this knowledge and art have been lost and dissected, and nothing remains from it except for small descriptions in old books that the hands have used. And because of this, errors and vanity have arisen, closing off thoughts and distancing knowledge.
It seems to me that I should revitalize this treatise in a single order following the path of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together with the forms of the cautery tools, and other instruments for work along with their adjustment of declaration and preparation as it is necessary.
And because no skilled masters are found in our times, the art of medicine has been lost. And it is necessary for the one who intervenes in this to ascend into the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as he knows the location of the members, and their forms, unions and separations of the organs, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles, and the number of bones, and their movement patterns and rest positions, and where they originate.
And thus says Hippocrates that with speech it is much, and with deed it is little; and in the art of hands especially.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that anyone who is unaware of the matters previously mentioned risks making mistakes and wasting people's time; just as I have seen many times, numerous individuals who interfere in this field and abandon their studies and lack of practical experience.
And I saw a fool who treated a woman's neck abscess and cut the arteries in her neck; because so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in an elderly man, and the stone was large; he took with it a part of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And indeed, I have already called upon the art of draining pus, and observed the position of the illness and the size of the stone, and if one were to treat it properly they would likely die.
And I have seen another place where the cure was given to one of our country's Duke who had broken his leg, and along with the break there was an injury; and these places were full of ignorance causing the breakage upon the injury in various ways through strong anger, and did not leave any rest on the injury throughout; and thus ended after .i. term (3 months); and they commanded that he not break it again; and waited until the leg was fully swollen and the feet and came to ruin.
I have been summoned to come to him, and I hurried to come to relieve the leg; and when I heard it dislocated so much that he was in peace and did not feel any pain.
But any path of corruption had already been confirmed within the body or member, and could not be cured; and the process of corruption continued through the member until the limb was completely lost.
And see one other site that collapses an incision into an abscess, and then inflames due to the wickedness of its lordship.
For a sore, when it is full of melancholic humor, does not require iron to be touched if it cannot be removed in part so that all the corrupted parts can be taken out.
And for this reason, dear children, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: meaning, where there are dangers in multiple situations; and I will show in each part of this book where there is danger and risk.
Because it is necessary for you to keep this knowledge, so that no one can speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in hand and treat your diseases gently yet firmly, and use the best methods so that through the grace of God you come to healing and become healthy; and abandon the fearsome illnesses of lack of health; and remove from yourself what makes others doubt, and have faith in yourselves so you can go from this world to the next with glory.
Galen advises in some of his admonishments: "Do not take any illness as evil medicine, lest you be called a foolish gossiper."
I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medicine cauteries, and the chapters are arranged from the head down to the stones; and on the forms of instruments, and iron tools for cauteries, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are arranged with the forms of instruments.
The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are arranged from the head down to the stones, and include the forms of instruments.
Just as we remind ourselves of the work, it is necessary for me to discuss the quality and harm of each temperament.
I say that the qualities of aid and the harm, are the longest speech and most subtle science and the secrets answered. And these were spoken about by many wise people, and they agreed with this; and their words satisfy me somewhat, for I fear lengthiness.
I say that the fire cautery universally aids all compositions or where there is matter, for it applies to two compositions: these being known as warm composition with matter, and dry composition with matter.
In the warm and dry combined with matter, there was no agreement and they said that the fire cautery is a great help; and the other ones said the opposite: that the fire cautery only helps diseases that come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be treated with heat or drying for a disease that comes from heat and dryness. And someone who says the opposite, claiming that the cautery provides great help to hot and dry diseases that come into people's bodies, For when you compare the body of the person and its moisture to the character of fire, you find that the body is cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it true on every occasion through experimentation.
And every method, do not interfere with it unless the one who has proven it does, and who knows through long use the art of cauterization, and the diversity of human complexion. And they understand the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the outbreaks and duration; we have no fear for other complexions, especially in cases of cold and moist diseases. And all things agreed with the cautery.
Know this, children, that a fire-cautery contains secrets of treatments, and it brings more benefit than the burning medical cauterizing tool.
For fire is simple, and does not come out except from the member that is burned, and it harms no other member if I name it.
Hot medicines spread from one member to another, causing diseases of poisoning in the body; and by chance they reach the patient.
Fire due to its height and due to the goodness of its substance does not do this, unless there is excess.
And I have found this through experimentation and the length of my service and study in the art, and it corresponds to the truth of things; and for this, I apologize for the length of speech, because I do not want to withhold from you the secret of fire, and its quality, how it relieves diseases of the body, as the philosopher says by demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they determined when the cauterizations should be done, and studied the prayers.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the harms arising are diminished by the aid of the fire cautery; and moreover if the cauterizations are for necessary pains that cannot wait until greater evil befalls the limb.
And never think like the foolish, child; for a disease cured by cauterization has no return; and they say it this way. But it is not as they believe, because cauterizations are only medicine that alters the complexion, dries out the fluids causing pain, and is valued more than medicine for its swiftness in enhancing strength, and due to the virtue of its work and authority.
And it is possible that diseases come at no time according to the complexion of the disease and its place, gathering in him excesses through the acquisition of meats and similar things. If not cauterizations administered within him where there is little excess and moisture, like cauterizations for pain and such things, then this kind of pain does not return; but it happens rarely.
And there are few people who understand why cauterizations are called the ends of medicine, and this is seen; but they do not believe that cauterizations follow after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is said that cauterizations follow in medicine because when we administer methods of treatments for any illness and if they don't work, then we administer our cauterization, and it works. Thus clearly understood, cauterizations are indeed the ends of medicine, not according to the understanding of others.
The old ones said that gold cauterizations made from metal tools are better than those made of iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and its high nature; and they said that gold cautery blades do not cause decay, but this is not true as I have proven it and found out that it is true in some people; and gold cauterizations are worth more than iron ones, just as they said.
And still, when you heat the gold tool, you do not realize that it is heated by the color of the gold, and then it cools off quickly; and if it is heated too much; should be put in the fire; thus there is enough prevention.
And for this, we use our iron cautery that we have equipped for our work.
So I have ordered this chapter on the old shoulder until the elbow, because it makes finding it easier.
wooden cautery
The fire cautery works against moisture and cold on the head, and there are two ways to perform this due to illness called "soda," and because of many bodily fluids that drain from the head as hair, and ears, and due to a multitude of dreams, tooth pain, throat pain, and most especially for all diseases resulting from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The shape of this cautery is such that the patient's body is cleansed by dissolving medicine, modifying the head. Three times or four times, according to how well the properties and heat and habit of the ailment can be endured; and then again after the head of the ailment.
And then place it between your hands, and press your hands onto the sides of your nose; afterwards, place the root of your palm on the root of their nose between their two nostrils; and when your middle fingers arrive, if there is bleeding from this point, warm the cautery which is called 'olivare', and its form is as follows:
And place his head in its usual position with ink, and draw slowly and steadily as you adjust your hand a little at a time; then lift your hand alone, and check if the bone comes into view when you see it is only .i. sol (a small unit of measurement) underneath; if you do not see the bone, continue the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after that, take .i. poc (another unit of measurement) of flour, and place it in a moistened soft cotton inside, then put on his head, and let him keep it for .iij. jors (days); afterwards, put some buttered meal on the wound; and leave until the scalding is gone; after that treat the wound with ointment known as 'tetrafarmaçon', until it has healed.
And if they were told by the old ones that when a wound remains open longer, more pus comes out; and for this reason it moves.
And they were told that we should continue applying the cautery until part of the bone is burned; and then when what is burned from the bone has been done, it should be treated.
And the other says that we must apply the cautery here and press so hard that we lift as much of the bone as one small twig would be by women putting it into their tubes for when body fluids flow out. And should we leave the wound open for a long time; after that, we must clean and heal it.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good in all respects, except when there is a path of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the shoulders are weakened by the continuous drainage from nature, as we demonstrate on other limbs; and even if the shoulder of disease is weak through nature, and my first sign of cautery heals better for me, and I use this method in essence gather together salvation.
Of the old pain in the head
When throughout the head comes chronic pain and lasts long, one must use the patient's herbs and pills which are called 'cochies', and treatments for cleansing of the head and ears and bandages; and if one applies the cautery as we have mentioned before, it is useful.
Take care that the shoulder of the sick is of strong nature, and it should not be too cold; therefore apply the cautery under this one for a bit as we have said above.
After apply the cautery to each horn of the head up to the bone, as we said before, and do one more application in the neck area which is called 'wheels'; and do another application under where suction cups are put; and move your hand so that you don't go past the bone: the patient feels too much pain in this cautery compared to others, I will speak about it elsewhere; and it's necessary that the horn applications are more subtle than when applying to the middle of the head, and this is its form:
For the fire cautery, When suddenly pain comes in one part of the head,
The medicine cautery involves taking a spoonful of vinegar, and using the peel and its residue on both sides for about two inches around each head; then apply this vinegar mixture exactly where the pain resides in such a way that you can spread it under the skin; and when it has spread well, press it tightly like that for 12 hours; afterwards remove the vinegar bandage and let the wound heal naturally for another two or three days; then put on a clean bandage with butter until a scab forms.
After the treatment of ointment until it is purified; and if you notice that you are applying any of the burning medicines I have written about or the first volume on burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat up the cautery as depicted here:
And call it "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a bell or has .i. point of curvature, and in the middle there's a small appearance; put it over the painful area, and hold your hand and gently move the iron, until half of the thickness of the flesh at the knee is burned; then lift your hand to prevent the artery from burning, which has been exposed, and allow an abundance of blood to flow.
After placing this in the area to be sewn, leave it on the affected area for three days; then change to cotton soaked with butter and apply it. Continue treating the wound with ointment until purified; if you wish to cauterize this migraine using the cautery known as "cultellare" at its tip, take care not to cover the artery in this migraine that is not old.
Regarding the treatment of headaches,
When you treat migraines as we have previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and if it doesn't help, and you find that the heat treatments mentioned before concerning medicine and steel don't work, then you must heat the cautery called 'cultellare' until it turns white; and do this so that your tool is touching one line from half a degree long on the skin, and use your hand once, pulling it so that you don't cut an artery and stop just before reaching bone; and guard against the jaw becoming silent when eating, and make sure only the tongue is to be silent and spasm does not affect the patient, and guard against bleeding from the artery if it's been cut, or cutting with great fear and even those who are unaware of these procedures and have no experience in them; and leave the work halfway done; but I will tell you how to stem blood when an artery is cut, and show you where this is mentioned in this book.
And if you see that the previous cauteries don't seem to help for this illness, and the patients are suffering, use them on the opposite side of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see that they tolerate it, administer the cautery mentioned in us or chapter on extracting an artery, with a two-bladed cautery; and these cauteries are better than the others and more useful.
of the pain of the ears due to cold
When pain comes from cold in the ear, and we have applied solutions of medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and if the pains do not subside, then heat this cautery which is called 'pains', as follows:
After applying the cautery to all parts of the affected ear, or around the two points where the pain is located in both ears, and then move away slightly from the root of the ear after you have marked its location; apply ten points around each ear; after that treat the area until it heals properly.
of the pain in the mouth
Pain that should be cured by a cautery does not encompass those caused by pus, as we have stated in sections on diseases; and no cautery should be applied to symptoms originating from dryness and rashes of the nerves.
When you treat this symptom of pain caused by pus from ears and nasal discharge as well as phlegm in the head and gargle, and if it doesn't respond to treatment, then it's necessary that you apply three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another a bit beyond the temple area, and the third for aligning the two lips; place the cautery on the healthy part of the body, and have the patient receive the application right where pus may be found above the ear, slightly under the head's horn, and in the temple area to a length as long as one inch; keep the cautery over this until half the inside of the ear is burned; this is the form of the application.
And this is the symptom of cuteria which we described earlier, but it's slightly more subtle; so when you treat the hand as I explained before, until it is healed.
When dealing with an old case of apoplexy and you treat it as we have said, if it does not benefit and the patient has a fever, then you should apply three cautery treatments: two on the two horns of the head, and one on top of the head, and one where the neck is called 'vassel' as we have mentioned before. And the fourth application of the cautery is to be done near the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have said previously.
from alchemy
For this illness, you should give the patient large pills that purify the brain; after that, take back the head of the sick person all around, and place the camphor plaster on the occipital area; and here is the way to do cautery: do it as I have said.
If it goes well like this, then it's good; and if not, do three applications of the fire cautery descending from head to collarbone, leaving an interval of one finger-width between each application. And treat it as with the others, and if you see that it has adjusted, and the patient is suffering, do another application in the middle. If necessary, two more on the two horns, and keep treating until it heals; and let the applications called "olive" be those previously mentioned.
from the cooling of the head It is necessary to cleanse the head of warts and what we have discussed previously. After treating the head with the patient, then apply fire cautery around the wart and on each horn, one behind and three on the spine below the collarbone; and if you need more applications, and the limb is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is extensive, then do four more cauterizations on the spine of the back. And leave it until the most sensitive part becomes dry, and raise your hand; afterwards treat it until it heals, and let those applications be called "olive" as we said previously.
Of the epilepsy
The epileptics should only use the cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section where the patient experiences large ailments and suffers from lack of medicine.
And if the child cannot endure it, make them gargle and chew, modifying the brain often with good meats; after that, insert the head halfway in water, and then apply one cautery as we have said previously, and another on the vessel, and each horn; and if the patient experiences pain, apply cauterizations like I have explained for those with paralysis and softness of limbs, on the spinal column and neck area, and use olive wood cauterization according to the method that I mentioned.
And if the ailment is in a child, perform one fine cautery according to this manner:
When due to melancholy the excesses or fluids are corrupted and thickened, therefore apply the fire cautery of the parts like we have said earlier to him who has paralysis.
And if due to the cause of melancholy, these excesses decline into melancholy and leave the body with wet malaise, then let him drink something so that his brain may be cleansed, as was stated in the previous section on this subject.
After removing the head of the malaise; after make .i. linen thread well done, as .i. circle, if you put it around the head; and let the malaise sit in place, and is held well from all sides; after apply the liniment, and use butter from an old goat; and warm the head gently so that the patient can bear it; then empty the circle from within with the aid of the head, and let it cool; and do this to each malaise once a week with different governance properly, until they are cleared.
If you see multiple points being seared while doing the cautery over the entire area, this method of cautering moistens the brain more. Then place damp cotton and butter and gelatine grease upon it.
of the power of the eyes When the power of the eyes first arises through the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and continue to instruct the patient to consume something purifying for the head, and protect it from all moisture. Make him sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
After having him drink after his head, and I have him cauterized near the head, and I perform two cauterizations on each of the two temples once the weakening due to eye power has reached both eyes together, or when only one temple is affected; and apply all the cauterization over all the veins and arteries that are within the skull, and ensure the cauterization lasts as long as the width of the temple; and guard against bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with a piece of material in such a way as you can.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and cutting the cautery site, how to properly conduct it; every time one performs a cautery or ligature operation, do not perform it over the two bones behind.
of the path of tears
When the tears of the eyes have been longstanding and accustomed, and are located on the veins, or over the arteries that are beneath the surface towards the head's appearance; one sees that they are cold excesses of phlegm, thus I apply the cautery that I mentioned at the beginning of this work concerning the descent to the eyes: .i. a cautery near the eye socket, and .ij. cauterizations on both temples, and .ij. cauterizations where ligature is done over the two bones; and if it requires more, then carefully cauterize above the eyelid with every .i. small cautery.
through the eyes from within tears
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it doesn't benefit, then give three roes of wine to the patient. Afterward, heave the head up, and apply a cautery or olive oil in its middle; and make two applications of the cautery which is called "clavilis" on the two ears, just below the hair. And beware not to cover the artery. And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil has become soft due to illness and moisture, then apply it with this type of cautery which is called "olivare". And here is its form:
And if you see that it's been done twice with the fire cautery on each of the two nipples as long as they are there; and don't let your hand go until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the method I have said.
The hair that touches the eye None of the times has it happened that the hair of eyebrows turns into the gums and touches the eye; in this case, you do a cautery according to two methods: namely with fire or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow.
When they are long and even, then command the patient to let them grow in health; after that, on the piece of paper for the eyes, draw a figure so as to resemble a leaf of myrtle, and make its beginning like the sign between the hairs; then place wet cotton soaked in egg glue and garlic paste onto the eye, then heat up the cautery tool which has this shape:
After cauterizing over the figure you have drawn little by little several times, until the scabs are dry in that place; and the signs of healing from the operation are that you see the paper shrinking, and the hairs lifted to the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then place wet cotton in butter as long as the scorching is removed; after ointment treatment until it becomes clean.
And if hairs and the paper become softened after this, then resume the cautery on that same spot as you did initially; and when the hairs have fallen out, cauterize until the paper rises to its natural position, is even, and doesn't stick to the eye.
The fire cautery of medicine commands that the patient allow hairs to grow until they are large and even; then make the form of parchment like the leaf of myrtle. Then take French soap and live coal from a flame, each one of them is an ounce, and grind them together well; and make haste so it does not cool down, then spread it on the form you made as like the leaf of myrtle, put it on the paper under the eye. If the disease lasts for one day only, you must open it in one place, and if in both places similarly; and fill each hole with wet cotton similar to an egg; let the patient's head be in your healthy hands and place your finger showing over the medicine, press once every time the patient feels the irritation of the medicine, as they also feel irritation like from fire. When you have done this for a long time, then apply the medicine to your finger. And when the irritation has passed, then raise your finger from the application site, and if you see that the paper is raised similarly as it would be lifted by the constraint of fire or incision; and if it is like this, then it's well. If not, apply more medicine onto your finger or where the medicine hasn't worked yet, until your movements are even, and your eyes are properly set. Then place wet cotton in butter until your burned skin feels comfortable, after that wipe out the ointment called "dyafenis" and another, until it's healed.
And if you need to guard your work well with great caution so that no medicine sticks inside the eyes. And if the paper becomes damp afterward, and the hair pricks in the eye, then begin the medicine on that part of the eye which is softened by the proper clean paper; do it just as you did before; after that cure until it is healed; this is the form of the mint oil:
And know that the eyes of humans are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints; and do not have the right way respond to him who studies this craft.
Of the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
When you are treating a fistula as we have said in the sections on diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you apply the cautery using this method.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your healthy position; and cut the hair on their head between your hands in such a manner that it doesn't move or shift; afterwards, put moist cotton, akin to an egg's lining or garlic juice, on their eye; next, heat up the cautery which is divided: and while above the head, shape it as you would with a goose feather, assembling it so that the cautery sits there; if you see it, let it be pointed from one end of the head to the other, and if you see it, allow it to resemble a tent; but in any case, whatever is above serves well for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it has been opened, and treat its putrefaction and dryness; and if it is closed, operate on it, and remove from under the bow. Afterwards place the cautery in a suitable form, hold your hand near the cautery to the part of the nose above the eye, so that your hands do not cause mischief; and put the cautery into the grease of the oil, causing contamination.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery until the bone, it would be well. If not, start the cautery again once more and another if necessary, and leave it for three days; afterwards place wet cotton in butter, and the cure of the drying ointment until it is healed. And when forty days pass without it being healed, apply corrosive mercury medicine until the bone becomes exposed; then follow his prescription as he would suggest in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing fistulas that none of the old ones mentioned. Understand what a fistula is and do as it says; afterwards, place one thin camel's thorn into the incision, as this fits its form: And it's made in the amount of three parts of lead; and hold your hand or camel firmly, and don't let the patient move, so that the melted lead doesn't flow out of its place; then, when you apply this to the patient's eye, use wet cotton soaked with hen's egg or oil: the lead works on the fistula, causing marvellous healing.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer pertus to the child and bring back the fistula into the body according to what should be done in its own proper place.
Of lip sores Lips often have sores that are called "whiskers," and similarly on the lips of children.
When you treat these sores with what we have advised about divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat the tip of a small surgical knife according to this shape:
And place them promptly into these openings until they grow just as far; after that, cleanse the area of wax while it is still healthy.
from the boil on the neck
When an abscess comes to the root of the boil or in the womb, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it turns rotten and inflames and gets hardened, becoming a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it doesn't improve: then you must have one cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, make an incision at the base of the fistula, and keep your hand until the metal rod reaches the bottom of it, and further into it; and do this once or twice, after treating as we said in treatments, while it is still healthy. And if you treat it like that, it's good; and if not, you must expose the area and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in your manual.
movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines, when that doesn't work, then put the head of the tooth into your healthy position; afterwards heat up the cautery according to which you will do this in this manner: place a stick under the tooth; and place within the cautery quickly burning embers, hold your hand as long as the patient feels the warmth coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and continue with the cautery according to your wish; afterwards fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and let it sit for an hour before rinsing it out.
And in this manner, the tooth that was moving is now stabilized, and the soft gums are restrained, and the moisture has been corrupted and dried.
from the pain of teeth
When toothache comes due to coldness, or there is coldness in the mouth and throat, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it must be done according to two methods: and wax cautery and fire cautery.
Wax cautery if it's like this that you take cow butter and put in a spoon made of iron or copper; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, and make the butter into a lump, then place this on the painful tooth quickly and hold until it cools down; do this often until the power reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see damp cotton and cotton in cool butter, put this again on the aching tooth, and place red hot iron on for as long as the fire reaches the tooth pain.
Fire cauteries if they are like this that you take a piece of iron or copper, and make it large enough so that the fire does not come into contact with the patient's skin; after heating the cautery, from which its heat will come afterwards, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this repeatedly, because the pain will be relieved either that day or the next. And is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter when the heat of the cautery is about, then quickly remove it; and this is the form of the cautery:
When the scrofula is due to cold blood and moisture, and does not respond to digestion by medicine, then prepare a cautery as described below, and use it. Create two openings for the fumes to escape from the other side; and place the heated cautery against the abscess once, or twice, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, position the cautery according to its size, and leave it in that position for three days. Then cover it with moistened cotton soaked in butter until the pus is drained out; afterwards treat it with ointments and bandages until it heals.
When the moisture invades the channels of the heart and especially when this comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary to first purge the patient with solutives. Then apply the cautery at the root of the throat, and make sure not to go all the way up to the throat but just until it feels warm for a little bit. After that, do another cautery at the junction between the neck and the base of the spine, and use the cautery named "clavile" which we will show in front; treat it as explained earlier until it heals.
Of the cautery by fire, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their root, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. When all and the diseases of the prostate are caused by cold moisture, and patients do not have fever or dryness, and it is an old disease, then apply two cauterizations to their force in their veins; and another cautery near the buttocks between the breasts; and let the cauterizations that are called 'clavile' according to the shape mentioned previously.
And if you see fit, apply the cautery by pressing on all the one called "points" whose shape is as described in the illness of the ears; and make the points up to thirty or slightly more. After that, treat the body according to what was said previously, and place the cauterizations at three fingers' width according to this form:
And because of this they use lighter cauteries, as you make three for each person.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder When the shoulder bone is reset due to moisture, and then it's put back in its place but can't stay there, it repeatedly dislocates with slight movements, just as we have experienced; therefore, you should first reposition the dislocated joint. After that, bandage the wounds on his back and sides; after that, lift out the kidney which is inside the testicles with your left hand; and if the joint has been dislocated internally, heat the cautery to a point where it can be used as described:
And burn the thigh until it is pierced to the bone, and let the mark of the burning come together in one. The four marks; and this is done by using a fire cauterizing tool with three needles, because the patterns of the burning are made up of four marks; and they follow the intricacy of a tent and that is the shape of the cauterizing tool with three needles:
And once set on this one nerve, because there are seven marks on it.
After applying the cauterizer, press with force; after that, allow the patient to rest, and do not let their limbs remain in one position for too long until they are well settled.
And if it is reset above, where very little happens, then apply a cautery on the thick part of the bone cautery or to several cauteries when pressing them. For the joint is closed, and eliminates the moisture, and heals the patient's injuries.
Apply a weeping cautery
The old ones said that one should do weeping cauteries using the roots of aristologe, and in this manner: take a long root of aristologe, the longest you can find, make it dry, and make it as thick and long as your thumb; then soak it in oil, light it on fire, and apply it between your elbow and neck for one cautery. Apply two smaller cauteries somewhat down along the part beneath the chin; apply four cauteries between the fifth and sixth rib, leaning slightly behind. Apply one at the navel, another on the stomach, one between the two shoulders, and two more on the next ribs below the cautery that is between the two shoulders; don't squeeze your hand but apply it openly as you would when smelling.
And it is said by no old one that any man uses a fire cautery like to the half of an arm hair, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and once out goes the pain, as we have stated for the pain in the chest. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
From the mouse
When you treat the illness of 'the mouse' in those ways that we have mentioned regarding the treatment methods, and if it doesn't help, then they apply three methods of cautery that are all good.
In which there is a method such that you make .iij. cauteries, or .iiij., drawing according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the heart as we have said before; and do not rush your hand all over the cautery, and let the patient be slightly behind their back.
And another way of applying the cautery is that you heat the cautery with two points, as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; lift the keur which lies at the mouse's position, where the pain originates from the left side, and let the height under which you lift the keur follow the keur itself, following the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After burning the two flaming points until both ears feel it on the other side, then remove the cautery and thus will have three. And if you see fit, cauterize all over with a three-pointed cautery. After treatment when pus has formed over a long period, this is akin to the other treatments mentioned before.
From dropsy
The fire cautery is not effective for dropsy, except when it's called the "asclytes" method. If your treatment doesn't work as per our previous instructions in divisions, then you should apply four cauteries around the belly and one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the kidneys, two behind the back on the spine, and one on a spot near the anus; and ensure that the cautery points are well close to the urinary bladder.
After that, leave the cautery in place to purify for a long time and don't stop treating the patient after the cautery; and then recovery would speed up and both treatments (the cautery and the other remedies) would work together with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is like the one we have shown before; and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what was illustrated earlier.
of the swelling of the joints When the joints swell in someone who is hydropic and full of yellow bile, it's necessary to apply the cautery behind the knee between the thumb and the ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And don't go too far down, so as not to remove the yellow bile, and apply the cautery according to this shape:
After applying two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the heel; and make the cauterizations along the length, one in front of the knee cap and the other behind, halfway down the leg; and let the cauterizations last for a long time without treating them until the bile comes out; after you have treated all the other treatments as we have said.
on memory
When it comes to the problem of abdominal pain due to cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and retaining virtues in the stomach and intestines are compromised and not functioning properly, they cannot be treated by conventional methods; you notice that the patient is suffering significantly and with considerable strength, so apply one large gastric cautery according to what was discussed previously or the gastric cautery, with the circulating cautery; and four additional cauteries around the mouth of finer material in each spot. Apply one fine clavicle cautery and four more on the hips.
And if you see that the moisture is abundant and the patient suffering, then apply a cautery to the knife point, and one cautery on each hand, and two small ones on the stomach near the large intestine. For the treatment benefits when there's good help.
regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the abscesses are located at the base or one more and they are old with thick cold and moist pus, and they are treated as we have instructed in divisions, yet if it does not benefit, then do cauteries: three over the spine of the back, that is all done outside of the large pocket bit by bit in a triangular pattern, and one cautery under the buttocks. Two dozen;
And if you think that the stomach has cooled down and the meat is not cooking, and we see swelling of the belly, then the belly one should apply a large cautery over the stomach as was explained before, and another one on the liver, and yet another on the spleen with the entire clavicle. Leave the cautery in for long periods. After that cure until it is healed completely.
of the inflammation known as 'thelul'
When you apply the hot iron, if it seems to be .i. razed, and then place all of it on fire over this iron; keep your hand there until the heat reaches the beginning of the vein from which the blood comes; do this once or twice, and if there are multiple parts, cauterize each one as we have said; after using beneficial ointments while they are still good; and if you use a large heated iron to treat, it will provide greater assistance.
from improperly treated wounds
When the patient cannot tolerate surgery or opening a wound, as we will explain in its appropriate section, if such sickness occurs that can only be cured through cauterization.
When dealing with a fistula that has aged and is characterized by putrefaction and moisture corruption, one must thoroughly examine it to determine the extent of its depth. Always be aware of knowing the full depth of the wound. Heat up the cautery to resemble a .i raseur size, insert it into the fistula according to the quantity it entered, then re-apply the heat until the infected pus and corruption are burned away. Do this once, or .ij times, or .iij times, depending on the need for heat; be careful not to burn the nerves and large veins. If the fistula extends into the body of the bladder and the intestines, take care with these points and do not apply heat outside them when they are in their natural state. After curing the area until it is healed, and if the pus has been completely drained out, and the tissues have remained long enough, then you can know that the wound is fully healed; but if the tissues haven't hardened by this point, be aware that the pus is still present, and there's corruption at its base; act accordingly as we will explain in its natural state.
On the disease of the kidneys When stomach pain comes from the kidneys and large windiness affect a woman's body, then it is necessary for you to apply the cautery on both sides of the kidneys and with the wrist cautery as we have previously mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in line, and they would provide more assistance.
From the bladder When the bladder is weak and moist due to cold, so that patients retain urine, then instruct for a cautery on the lower part of the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, and one on each side, both right and left. Each cautery should be as long as the width of a finger; and do one in front of the back or two if needed; and let the cauteries be round following the form mentioned beforehand.
Regarding the treatment for Marosis When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers (likely referring to menstrual blood) are corrupted with delayed passage; and when they come, there's great pain: then it should be done that three cauterizations be performed inside the vaginal orifice, as we have said or for bladder cautery treatment, and two cauterizations at the back; and let the cauterizations be round, as we have said.
From the thigh
When the viscous moistors descend to the thigh bone, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that one leg is longer than the other when measured together; and you find the joints at their separation points, then it should be that you cauterize the skin on the thigh bone like one fire cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the joint where the bone turns, so that the bone is within the circle; and let the cauterizations be as those from which we have cauterized the stomach.
And if these cauterizations are not present, make three large olive-shaped cauterizations instead, and let the cauterizations be as perfect as all the others; and treat until it is healed.
The pain of the thigh When pain occurs in the buttock area, it is due to cold and moisture. The patient needs treatment for this as we have discussed earlier on division, and if the cure does not work, the disease is old: therefore, you should cleanse the body of large, thick humor with foul-smelling pills or other good-looking pills.
After you do the cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two methods: this means gathering together burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many ways, among which each one is like this: you will cauterize in the buttock area three triangular cauterizations according to this shape, and do it with good depth and largeness, and leave an interval between each cautery equal to the size of a coin, and may be olive-shaped; never make a cautery in the middle on the top of the buttocks, because there are four according to this shape:
And if you see that when cauterizing with the circular cautery as we have mentioned before regarding the dislocation of the buttocks; but do it in such a manner that the circles encompass all the buttock area, and all parts around the knee are burnt.
And this is how it's done in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and doesn't reach all the way to the thigh or leg. And if it reaches up to the thigh and the leg, then we do two cauterizations at the location where the pain resides, and one above the ankle three inches, on the left side a bit; and let them be cutler's cauterizations, and burn off the thickness of the skin; and if the patient feels that the pain extends down to the heel or close to it, then cauterize there where they feel the pain, three points or four at the cauterization known as 'points'.
And if more work is needed, then do so; and if the pain seems to be spreading from the knee towards the thigh, apply cutler's or circular cauterization there, and ensure good care in all your cauterizations that you don't leave any part untouched, burning nerves and major arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and constriction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who did cauterization on the ankle up to the heel, and left them until the leg swelled completely, and even the foot became infected, leading to all parts of the foot being affected. After this, they suffered from a stomach solution that led to their death.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cautery on one and on another, according to this manner.
And heat it until it's entirely red and gives off steam, then place it on the sore hipbone, and twist it towards the healthy side; and apply this cautery once for each rod and leave it there for three days; and afterwards, make a bandage of butter, and let the wound be open for as long as necessary; after oil treatment until it heals.
Albucasim says that we use very little of this type of cautery due to the fear of his patients, and there are few who use it; however, this is a good type of cautery which can be endured, and leaves no marks.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by impact or from percussion or due to excessive evacuation, or due to any appearance of cold matter spread out, none of these appearances are worth cauterizations, for it is akin to what comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary that after the maladies have been emptied of rotten pills or other appearances, one should be performed on the back, where the pain resides, three lines marked by an incision, and in each line from 5 to more cauterizations according to the strength and quantity the maladies can endure; and let the cauterizations be done as with the cautery called "points"; and if you see fit, perform 3 or 4 cauterizations at the midpoint of the clavile cautery according to this form:
This disease often befalls the young children, and at its beginning it is such that they become pale when they stand up, and fear; and you find in the last spinal cord of the back and within us the appearance that comes upon other spinal cords.
When you see this and observe its cure, if you apply it with a blood cautery in the form described like this.
If you see this and observe its treatment, then apply it with a specific blood cautery to each section of the spine equally. And if you notice this, when cauterizing within the spine use the piercing cautery at two lines or three, and have the points close together. After treating it until it is healed according to what we have said, be careful not to apply the cautery in places that are in proximity to nerves.
of the pain in joints
When joint pain arises from moisture spreading throughout each limb, and when the pain affects the foot, it's referred to as 'gout' properly, and when it's due to cold reasons and can be treated with medicines alone, it should be cured using cauterization in this manner: make a cauterization around the joint of the foot, and let the olive oil cauterizer look like this:
And if you need to touch the foot of the patient, if you make them take a brand over their entire body where we claim "point". And if the pains go up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, if you apply the brand on each knee. Three or four brands per each knee joint, across all the olive brand's usage; and if you need more, make them as needed, but do not remove your hand until the healing is done inside.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then they administer the cautery that we have discussed in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, you make marks inward on the flesh over two lines; and if there remains any pain in the back, you cauterize each joint and on every hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to elbows or shoulders, you cauterize each part, and take good care with the patient and give medicines. For if you treat them well and purge phlegm, they will be healed by God's aid.
Regarding hernia repair
When rupture occurs in anger, and the bowels descend into the crotch which is new, it must be that when you see them being cured, do not let him eat that day; and use things that relax the stomach so that his intestines descend from his belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to shave his pubic hair until the bowels are repaired, then take it with your fingers, and test for any movement over the rupture on the bone under the knife, and at all a sign that is similar to half of a circle above the navel; then heat up the cautery as described here:
Until it's white and emitting fumes. Then take the bowels up to their place; and let the servants cut her hand so that they don't turn back; and work well on his legs against the patient, and put one cushion and one surgeon on his thighs, and another near his anus where your hands are cutting; then place the cautery at that mark with all your hand, and keep it straight and steady until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, try again once or twice until you get there; and carefully watch so that the bowels don't escape when you apply heat; do not burn them; and make sure that neither the patient nor any other harm occurs.
Know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is useless. And it should be that the children's cautery iron should have subtlety according to their size, and likewise for the larger people; after three days cure his thigh from the cautery of butter until the scorching dies out; then apply other ointments until he heals properly, and let him rest on his back for forty days so that the wound is well healed; and it should be that his wounds are not irritated for a long time, so that the intestines do not escape when he wants to get up in bed.
And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, he should have a well-made bandage and wear it for forty more days; and with good rest, he should work little and guard against over-consuming food and drink, and not raise his voice too high; and when he follows this instruction, he is completely healed. And I will speak of the treatment of surgery in my chapter afterwards. Regarding the rupture of the stomach
When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, if you observe that they are no longer growing, then apply fire according to the quantity of the rupture using a cautery, taking one-third of the cup's content; after this, follow the treatment as we have instructed. And none of the old texts advised that the affected area should be treated with three angles of heat in the shape like this:
But the first sign is to make an incision and draw a line across the width of the tear, and another below, and firmly hold your hand with all the fire cautery. But the initial cauterizations are lighter and more fluid.
of old age in no limb When pain comes into any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts long, and medical cure does not help, then it is necessary for it to be cauterized with the cautery called "point", and perform cauterizations according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and strength and location of twists and pain. If there is healing in the first cautery, that's good; if this doesn't work, do another one on top of it, because these practices are such that they must move towards the part of the body that is closest to it, so you must make cauterizations until the patient feels better.
In mixture
The mixture must be heated to a high degree by the cautery's aid, and similarly for the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. If you see it being cauterized, take care lest the disease is in its beginning stages, and if it's treated according to what we've said in the division, so that it doesn't spread or remain, and you fear that corruption might pervade the whole body, then do this: .v. applications of cautery on the head: .i. near the forehead at nine o'clock, and the other towards the forehead at the end of hair; and .ij. on the .ij. corners, and .i. behind at the neck; and let your hand remain so that the cautery reaches up to the bone, and until the scabs come out fully allowing for the evaporation of the excess fluids; and cauterize it on the mouth according to what was done before.
And if the mixture is spread everywhere and it becomes obvious that it's spreading, you should cauterize using these cauterizing methods we've mentioned: one on the nose, and two cauterizations on the spine at the neck, and seven cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one large on the sternum and another underneath, and two each on the shoulders; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the heels, and one for each joint in hands and feet, and on the creases of the palms; and be careful not to burn any nerves under the heel, do not cauterize anywhere on the bone of the fingers, and one on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that when I do more cautery, I give him more help, and he benefits from it; and know that the patients do not feel pain during cautery as the healthy would, because their bodies are already thoroughly corrupted. And you should have large and small cauterizers according to limbs and joints, like what you will find in instructions for iron tools. After treatment, wash with flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
To swell
When swelling appears in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, and it doesn't heal, then you should make cauterizations on the limb according to the size of the limb; and let the cauterization go slightly into the red part of the flesh; then treat with ointments until it heals. And do a cauterization at both hands and feet and back, at the exit point of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and in this way, the swelling is removed; and still, no one should interfere if they don't know about limbs or how nerves move within the body.
From burns
When the disease known as "albaras" is matured, and medicine does not help at all, then use a cautery to treat it slightly for some time, according to the amount of blood in the wound, until the pus is removed and its color changes; then cleanse with flour mixed with lentils and rose oil, and leaves from the plantain plant, as well as chicken blood and quail urine, each using one part of these ingredients. Mix them all together, wrap it with a cloth, and leave it on the wound until it heals.
The treatment for the sore by cautery
When the sore begins to appear, and you want to stop its spread, then use a cautery that seems like one circle, searing around the entire circumference of the sore. And still, some argue it's better to apply cautery also in the center of the sore; but I do not find this advisable at all, fearing it might lead to an ulceration and putrefaction, which is something I have already avoided on numerous occasions; a more straightforward approach would be to cauterize around with the "circular" type of cautery, as we explained in our discussion about different types of cauteries.
Of the swelling which cannot perish
When someone has a disease which is called "adubelati", and it takes time to die, either due to the excesses that it causes or because of old age in the body when it becomes decrepit (meaning too old) and it has little blood, or because of tension; and you see it hasten towards death: then cauterize internally with several small cauteries by pricking; afterwards leave it like this. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see that it is pierced all through the cautery, then heat up the cautery as described here:
And place your hand in the middle of that disease which is called 'adubelati' as long as the cauteries have pierced through the flesh, and use those cauteries such that the patient feels relief in such a way that the course of decay is alleviated. After cure until it is completely healed.
The treatment with fire using a hot iron
Another method of disease is called 'corrodens', and it's nothing else but a member lesion, for it consumes limbs just like the fire reduces dry wood. If you can apply a cautery with fire to this disease, then shape your hot irons in various sizes small and large, according to where on the body or where the illness is; after that cauterize from all sides until you remove every corruption, leaving nothing behind so that all that has been corrupted is removed. And let it be for three days, and while the burns from the fire heal, bear with suffering from the oil, removing all infections and corruption. After this treatment of ointments causing injury.
The text "des porrelz qui vienent as piez" translates to "the stones that come towards the bones" in English. This seems to describe a medical issue related to stones or deposits moving towards bone structures, which could be a description of gallstones, kidney stones, or other similar conditions in medieval medical terminology.
Sometimes it happens that within the foot develops a sickness which is called "gout" according to our understanding, and it's a large hard thing causing pain in the foot. And for this type of disease, there are two ways of using cautery. This means fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery involves heating one tool like a feather from a chicken, making it similar to a needle, made of good iron sized so that it could pierce all around the nail, and having small margins; after doing this, heat up the entire tool on the nail until your hand gets red while holding the needle right at the end; then leave it there for three days until pus begins to form; afterwards, make a plaster with crushed garlic mixed with oil, apply the plaster overnight over the whole area, and the nails will fall out from their roots. Then treat the foot with an ointment that heals the flesh until it's healed.
And if they are located within the body and occur in hands and feet, it's necessary that you use hot water cautery; and do so like this: take a spider hair or iron rod, or a feather from a chicken, place them on the nail and around it; this is for warts. Place the rod such that it burns all around it, then add some hot water, keep your hand firmly while applying pressure in a circular motion until the edge of the rod reaches to the root of the nail and manages to penetrate deeply into the hot water reaching up to the root; allow the patient to tolerate this for an hour with mild burning sensation. Then leave them like this, and they will all be pulled out from their roots. Repeat this process until you've treated all those in the body, then apply ointments that heal the flesh afterwards.
The treatment involves shaking.
When there are trembles due to cold or nerves, or fever of the fourteenth day or other similar conditions, it is necessary that you perform 4 or 5 cauteries on each of the spine points of the back. One cautery between each spinal point; and one on the chest under the olive cautery; if this continues, hasten the patient's recovery from the cold illness.
pus-filled sores
Whenever pus-filled sores or pustules appear due to the bath of corruption, or from large rotten materials, it is necessary that they come from decayed substances. When they first show up, it's appropriate at once for each head of the pustule: a fine cautery made from the bark of myrtle, where the tip is heated by fire, or from the long root of aristolochia, or with the lentil-shaped cautery. And one should not cauterize them when they first appear according to this manner; instead, it discharges the excess that causes them and renders them healthy. But it's necessary for this to be done after blood has been evacuated.
When the artery is cut Many times great hemorrhages of the artery occur from where it is cut in the wound that reaches to the opposite side, or at incision of the abscess, or with the cautery on the limb, and similar situations; and it is a very grievous thing to occlude.
And yet, when this happens to any person, if you quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein and hold it firmly until the pulse becomes quiet under your finger, and no more drops escape; then heat several olive oil cauteries of various sizes until they are all red. Then take one, or a larger or smaller according to the size of the wound and the location where the artery is located, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your index finger, and keep the cautery there until the pulse becomes still again.
And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are off the fire, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are on the fire.
And never stop doing this one after the other until the bone is fully healed; and be careful not to burn the nerve that's nearby, and that no harm comes upon the patient; and know that when there is a break in an artery, it can't be mended very well by itself when the artery is large, unless done through one of the four ways we've mentioned: by cautery, or extraction if not already treated, or with strong stringing, or with medicines placed which have power to mend blood; and then tie and hold in place.
Who will provide for the mending by tightly binding with cloths or by putting heat sources on, or other similar things, if they do not benefit unless so prescribed.
And if this happens to anyone and they have no medicine or remedy at hand, should apply their finger on the wound site as we said before, and spread it well until the wound and the vein are mended upon it; and do not move his hand but keep it moist with cold water often till it becomes very cold until the bone is frozen, swollen, and mended. And perform cautery and medicine preparations for what needs them.
We have explained in the first chapter all diseases where it is necessary to use a fire cautery or hot medicine, and we discussed their causes, instruments, and forms. I put that chapter up until the foot, and I will proceed through this chapter using the same path as what seems easier for those who want it.
And as I begin this one, you should know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first about the cauteries, so it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to embark on foolishness. For many ways of people come into treatments. Some come from those who are so afflicted by their illness that they die lightly because of the absurdity they find in their sickness, and the horror of their disease; and towards these one should have fear. And concerning these I give you their meaning, and say: "wait, I am a physician"; illness is deceitful. It would not be proper for you to agree with those who come to your aid in this manner, but rather place more caution on your honor than on your greed, do not act foolishly but wisely of those whom you are certain of, and have taken care of; use prediction and indication in treatments for the health that is converted from your patients; and this will help you gain good reputation, glory, and long-lasting memory. And it will assist you to acquire a valuable renown.
Dear child, Our Lords give us good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or I have arranged this chapter in devising by chapters, according to what is before or the chapter on cauteries, which I have devised from head to feet, because you will find it more easily of that which you will need.
at the head full of water
Know that this disease comes very often to children at birth, and when the mother constrains the head of the child too tightly; and sometimes it occurs due to a response reason that one does not know.
And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than children, and among all those I have observed, their death hastened; for which reason it seems to me that it would be better to divide the work of this chapter into these cures.
And I saw a child of this, the shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day so much that it could no longer bear it; and believed to such moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled under the bone near the elbow, between the chest and the bone; and the muscles are like these when moisture is between the chest and the bone, and abscesses are small, that you cut in the middle of the head a wide crack; and let it be so long as two fists, as long as the moisture flows; and see this form of the syphilitic:
If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in a manner like an X, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see that the edges of the head are opened from each part, and the water spurts out when you press it from your hand inside, and this is not relieved: then you must make three cuts in the middle of the head according to this manner:
And after making the incision, remove all moisture. After stopping the cuts from bleeding with bandages and powders, and applying wine and oil, let it be this way for up to five days; then reset the dislocation, treat the wound with different methods and applications, and allow the head to be held in place equally until the limb is reinforced and healthy. Then give the patient dry meat from a source free of moisture as long as the limb remains strong and healed.
And another way of making an incision is that you look at where the opening of the abscess is, and place the hot iron; for it is never in front; it's never behind; not to the right; nor to the left.
Therefore, make the cut where the abscess opens, and place the hot iron, and perform the incision according to what you are able; and be careful not to damage an artery; watch for a flow of blood, so that the patient dies due to bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
On cautery of fire commands the diseased person to let their hair grow long and even; and if they poke at their origin, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When it happens to anyone that a disease is called "catarrh" with the eyes or at the bottom, and this disease is old, and the medicine treatment does not help, then the last resort procedure should be the cautery, using which one would cut off the two major arteries.
Therefore, you should cover the eyes. After that, let the patient lie on their back; rub the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries are visible. Then pull the diseased part of the neck to the entire length of one cloth. Next, observe where the vein lies and determine the position of each eye after the ears, ensuring they have returned to normal. Then mark both eyes with a cross, then cut each of them with an extremely sharp knife until the size reaches bone tissue, and do this by going across the width of the neck.
And if you see it, pinch the pus near the artery and the vein above, cutting also as one inch through.
And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow out continuously from high up.
And if the artery doesn't open upon touching, it is necessary to measure the length of the space of three inches and then cut until reaching the bone; what needs to be done with the blood that should be expelled is two-thirds (and by chance a bit more or less) according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery. Then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone slightly, or if after incising we don't find the pus, then tighten the wound and bandage it, and apply ointment treatment until it heals.
In the treatment of a fire cautery, instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and evenly; if they prick at their base, hold them still so they do not move until they fully grow.
As the old age comes with and experiences acute inflammation and congestion, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and lower back areas from past illnesses and similar issues; medicine treatment for these is done through methods of medical cure techniques. Yet, none of these treatments are effective, so we remove the arteries in the temples and apply fire cautery, as we have detailed.
And the method for extracting them is such that the patient feels behind their temples, and listens to the artery which opens up at the temple, as it opens well through its pulsation, and responds only in some people who are too cold; if it does respond, then cool the neck of certain cloths, then rub it with a rough cloth, and raise the head under hot water until the artery appears clearly. Then take the sponge that is shaped like this:
Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach an artery, then direct it upwards with forceps, and remove well all webs that are from each part; and if the artery is subtle, cut at the tip of the hook, then shape that section according to the amount of two joints. For if it's not cut properly, it will neither rupture nor pierce completely.
And remove the blood from two to three; and if the artery is large, it should be tied with two threads of a strong silk thread, so that corruption does not occur in front of the healing of the wound, nor in subsequent bleeding; then cut off the excess between the two threads at this moment. And if you see, then apply the cautery gently until you reach the bone as long as the joints are cut; and this is the completed work, if the patient doesn't have fever and has warm complexion.
And the cauterization helps to finish off infections: because it provides more assistance against infections. In order for the removal of arteries, fill the area with old cotton and place it on well-made gauze; when you separate them, apply dry medicines that produce heat and gauze until they are clean; and should you cut into the artery as you work, quickly use a cautery or fill the area with vitriol and press your hand against it so that the wound is sealed; and if you do not have this present, place ice on the area instead until the wound is frozen, then rinse with cold water while keeping the wound from moving; and treat it as necessary. The one who moves faster during artery extraction when using a cautery should cauterize the blood vessel by cutting it in half across, but ensure that the cuts are deep enough to retain more of its heat for longer periods. For when the instruments are too tight, they retain less of their heat. And must have a gap of one large finger between the two knives, and then when you prepare to apply them both at once, and place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, and cut the blood vessel in two; and keep them apart from each other with the shoulder joints because there is no welding effect throughout this cautery technique; and this is how a cautery should be formed:
Of tears
When the tears of the eyes are flowing from veins above the testicle of the head of strength, and no medical remedy benefits, and you see the reddening action of the patient, and feel or front pulsation as if gasping; and at places they are tenacious and moist such that the hair of papers falls, and the papers heat up, and burn from the intensity of the tears, then it requires this treatment.
And they called the old one 'healing for injuries', and do this to the patient with this disease by making them let their hair or head, then I make three cuts across the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and make one cut as if two out along the forehead downwards until it reaches the nose tip, and the other ones two at each side above the papers, and be careful not to incise the arteries that are above the papers; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and each wound should have three inches in depth perpendicular to the joins.
From the incision that is made below the temple up to the second incision; and burn all the kerf that is between the two gaps throughout the entire sinus located above the bone. Then cut further along from the middle incision up to the other second, and then remove this pus-filled space.
If there is a tool placed in the first gap which is called 'cultellaire', and it has very sharp edges on one side, but not so on the other, it forms this: And place the cutting edge of the tool towards the fatty part in the kerf and the flat edge towards the bone. And insert the tool until it reaches the middle gap. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision continues up to where the incision opens into the kerf, then cut further on the middle gap up to the other gap; and then drain the blood evenly, and pour out the pus; then place a piece of old cotton in each gap, and apply a moistened cloth with wine, oil, and saffron. And make sure that any abscesses do not appear. And on the third day, remove the stitches and apply a large amount of watered vinegar, then treat it with basilicon balm mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds, until it heals.
of the eyes
When there is a sudden onset of thick expectoration and you see the eyes withered and small, and weakening of vision, and burnt paper; and the hair falls out, and one sweats in fullness from fever, and the patient shivers, and the body is racked by fevers. Then know through these incidents that those substances and this mucus come from many veins, and the wet treatment applied, if it is correct, then this is how it should be.
And you instruct the patient to look at their forehead again. Then make a large incision through the forehead, and another one wide. Now start from the left temple incision to the right temple incision, and ensure your cut goes until it reaches bone; and hold your hand away from the temples nerves that move during eating. And when the bone is revealed, drain all blood with an sponge. Then clean between the two lips of the incisions and insert old cotton wool and linen cloth; then cover with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, making sure not to expose any abscesses; once the bone is removed, it's important you rub the bone until you see new tissue start forming, then apply desiccating substances that promote healing.
In this manner: take two parts of the wheat flower and four parts of comfrey, and make them into a paste; and apply it to these wounds to promote the healing of flesh throughout.
Regarding ear piercing.
Everything that passes through the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or mine stones or similar things like iron; or seeds such as beans, peas; or any flowing thing like water and air and similar things.
When they pass through the ear piercing or any other form of thing that does not fit with the ear and does not grow in the ear, you should expose the ear to sunlight. If you see the piercing, if you apply a few drops of violet oil or saffron oil, then proceed with extraction; and make them sneeze with consin (a type of ointment), when the sneezing comes, insert pieces of cloth or wool into the ear, and keep the ear above. Many times this cure works; and if it does not work to relieve pain, you should extract using fine tweezers, which is described as follows:
If it jumps by force like pins, that's good; if not, proceed with the extraction using a fine needle of slight curvature; and if it doesn't jump through this, make an araneus (a type of tool used in surgery) and take hold of the head of the tool or the ear pinna firmly, and stick it into the waxed part of the tool until the wick cannot enter with the tool; then apply force with your hand as we have stated many times; and if force does not come out in this manner, grasp the tool at one end and take hold of its handle, place an instrument suitable for that task on either side, and insert a little cotton. Then press the wax firmly onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull with force. And if it does not jump through all these things that we have said, then hurry to pierce the ear as though an abscess would burst from wax, and convulse. And the method of piercing is such that you first make a surgeon's incision in the tympanic membrane and drain blood according to its extent, then place the surgeon's hand between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and create a small incision at the base of the ear where the fat hangs down; and let the incision be as round as the moon until you reach the bone, then operate according to your ability, and suck it out quickly into your mouth; and treat with care when it is clean. And if it's granules that are inside and they are swelling, proceed with extraction; and if they cannot come out, proceed as follows:
And make an incision of that grain. But do not perform this when you think the grains are moist due to ear moisture, until you have done many pieces; then extract them with fine forceps and suction, as we said before, so that the extractions are clear.
In water then, if one vomits in the ear, let the patient use the discharge of cold water first, and fill up the ear with old cotton. And be standing next to that ear where the water is. If it splashes out through this method, it's good. If not, take many pieces according to their length and gently, then heat them slightly on fire; and place one or two of these inside her ear, and pull away from one foot from another part, and pull off with another piece from the piece that is in the ear; and do this continuously from piece to piece until all water comes out, and thus completely vomits. And if you see, take a small reed, and insert one of the shoulders into the ear, and the other shoulder in fire until the hottest part becomes charred; then redo several times until all water is expelled, as we said about the piece.
In the removal of the beast, if it is small in size, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, perform the extraction with forceps; and this is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from ears, when you treat it as we have said in division and dealing with distillations, if the treatment does not benefit, you must observe the ear to sunlight: if there is no worm opening, if you extract them using fine probes; and if nothing appears, take the form of this:
And make the opening narrow at one end and wide at the other. And insert the finest probe into the ear according to the intensity of the pain caused by the disease, then gradually extend the whole length; do this repeatedly until all worms have emerged. And if they do not want to come out, stuff a cotton swab inside as I mentioned in the part about piercing stones; and if they still don't protrude like we said before, administer worm distillations that ancient people tested during worm extraction, and you will find it under treating distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, following the shape shown here as you can see:
And make it of silver or an earthworm with two small holes at one end and a wide opening for distillation; and to press the essence within during distillation use one well-made araigne's tool fit for this purpose. If you see a rasp and wrap tightly around the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the swab, and place that swab inside the ear; then stuff all the cotton into the rasp, press your hand gently until the oil is fully distilled or until the ear is filled; and sense the disease internally, and let the essence boil for a while when distilling it inside the ear; and make sure it isn't too cold because the medicine would not be as good.
On the cauterization of ears
No child is born without a perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens to those who have ear injuries or dead bodies inside the ear. Such injuries occur none of them within the ear if it cannot be seen; and they do not appear twice to expel the perforation, yet one can see well.
And that which comes from within but cannot be seen is due to infection in various dispositions. And according to what you see, it is necessary for you to place the ear under the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent opilation, if the work has produced this pus of which I speak:
And cut and scrape all around front and back so it doesn't hurt the ear; if there's a thickening due to dead tissue or a bump on the ear, use sharp tweezers and gently pinch, until all the hard parts are removed.
And if the operations are inside the ear, take one subtle and light rasp, then heat it up a bit with the fire. Place this in the ear. If you feel the operation causing pain to the ear, make a slight incision, making sure not to damage the ear's nerves; afterwards put in the ear something that fits the size of the opening, and fill the rest with Egyptian ointment.
Continue to do this every day until the wound heals, or take a bandage and dampen it with rose water, then add powdered vitriol. And if you notice swelling in the ear, it is necessary that you change the bandage and use another one soaked in a wick made of rose oil and wax, until all the swelling has been removed; then treat it until it becomes healthy.
And if bleeding occurs, dip an sponge and soak it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which include remedies used for distillations.
Of the wax of papers
When the hairs come out on the papers when they are wet and then dry, it is necessary that you spread them with forceps and prongs, and cut from its roots with a spit bowl; then place under the sulfur crucible.
And if you don't peel them, cauterize with a small lens cautery, and after the incision, let it burn; and many times they are repaired, so that nothing remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Of the gravel
Many times in the papers come certain things that seem greasy by their shape and hardness, and because of this is this disease called "granulation", and it's a collection of moisture in large amount on top and below the paper. The operations are as follows: watch if the granulation remains motionless from one side to another, which is an easy thing to know; then make them wide, then scorch each part slightly, then pinch them, and cut them out. If you can't cut it without piercing a bit of the paper or causing any pain to the patient, do not force much elsewise; and if the tear is large, if there's an opening seam, treat until it heals; and if she's small, don't exert any strength for that matter since ointments will soon restore her and promote tissue growth.
And if the granulation descends within the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and cut out the granulation with one or more pinches from both sides; and should the paper be moved away by the incision, it doesn't cause any pain. And when the granulation is cut, remove the salty water, and treat the area until the patient's tissues heal.
From the grease of the ulcers
Extraction is an oil that accumulates on the sheets of papers, and this happens more often with children than adults, causing great annoyance to their eyes. It comes to them in tears during mornings, and they can't look at the sunlight because tears rush into their eyes; thus they rest on their sides immediately after waking up, sleeping right there, having their paper sheets moist under their eyes. And then the oil and appearance are covered by the extraction that opens in the eye. And when you press your head with your fingers and feel the extraction between them.
And the way to do this is that the patient places their head into your healthy place. Then take one linen cloth, and set up a tent in such manner as a circle according to the quantity that contains extraction from each part; then put it on it; press with your fingers from both sides, so that the extraction is gathered within the circle; then cut in the middle of the moisture using a sharp blade for a crack of some size, and not bigger than the wound one makes when opening veins; and let the leather fit all around until you see the extraction through it. And in various positions, extraction comes out from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Extract it then into one piece of linen cloth between your fingers at the front, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered; and make sure you don't stick in the slit, that you don't come up to the whole blade up to the eye, that you do not hurt it.
And if the incision does not open at the start of the cut, increase the cut slightly gently until it opens; then pull it as we have said, then moisten with cloths and water, place on the wound, and stretch with bandages.
And if there are people who grind grain and place it to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then treat them until they are well. And if an abscess forms on the wound, then treat with ointments until they are well.
"Des poilz des papieres" translates to "Paper hair" in English. However, this phrase doesn't seem to make much sense contextually and could potentially be a typo or an error in the translation. If it's referring to paper made from hair, then it might mean something like "hair-based paper". The precise meaning would depend on the broader context of its use within the text.
When hair grows out of place other than its natural position and ages, they harm the eyes and bring on ailments such as familiar infections and degenerations of paper-like tissues, as well as albugine disease, all because these causes lead to destruction of the eyes; and one must cure according to four methods: or with a fire cautery combined, or by using medicine in accordance with what is stated before or concerning the chapter on cautery, and this can be done either through incision and suturing or by ligation, depending upon which I will explain.
It is necessary for you to place the eye's main part in its health. Then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it turns, that is good. If not, then insert one needle through both layers at once. And do this either inside or outside the paper edge where hair grows from these hairs. Then pull two threads upwards across all the paper and turn them on a seam. Then cut along part under the paper, under those hairs in place, from the large tear up to the small; then remove one thread, and insert between the paper a little cotton tent, and on top of the paper make a figure like an asterisk, as if it were the leaf of a myrtle tree. And be sure that the figure matches the size of the area you lift where the paper is folded down to all.
And if at this place you need to prepare a large amount of paper according to how the paper is softened. Then start the entire area from the large tear up to the small; and if it's one of the natural hair gaps in thickening by about an inch, then insert the thimble into one of the two corners of that keyhole, and then scrape off everything; then assemble both lips with a stitch using one needle through both fine thread strands, and clean out any blood, and make sure no excess thread hangs on the two eyelashes in any sticky way if you see fit; and if not, then don't bother with it, just leave the stitches and threads for up to three or four days. Then treat the wound without stitches using dried and binding substances, because the paper heals quickly from the wound's direct contact and the assembly of the parts. However, stitches become moist (as old ones said), and this is work without fear;
And if you have another way: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure which be as like to the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at three inches deep according to the form which is here:
Then cut those that are at the top equally according to this shape:
And if you don't have the ability to hold the forceps, and if the object isn't equally formed, take one needle with two threads, and place it on the shape; then place another thread below the large seam, and the second thread below the small one. Then join between your fingers the threads equally; lift your hand equally, lifting all the skin from where you marked it, as we have described, then sew both edges of the wound together by cutting stitches, and treat until it heals completely; and if pus comes to your incision, soothe it with ointment and other healing substances.
And it often happens that the paper hair is converted: so it is necessary for you to use what we have said about incisions; but the stitches in both are more artificially made.
The treatment of canes follows this form: and it is that you should convert the paper and cut inside according to what I have said, then create two stitches by art, and also two fine threads as long as the paper width is; and take two parts of the thread; then assemble each one delicately on top of the paper's oil opening, and tighten the two cane stitches from both parts in a formed manner; and leave it like this for some days, and the skin that has been tightened will shrink and heal until it flows out by itself.
If it lags behind, and if the process takes time, then treat it until it heals properly; and when the wound is healed, and if the paper is removed, and no longer will hair grow; and this is the form of the two stitches that you make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
The procedures are as follows: you need to take a delicate needle, and attach two strands of fine silk thread to it; then align the joints and tie them precisely together with these threads, making sure they're about the length of one hand in total; next, weave another short piece of fine silk thread through this process briefly, and secure each end of the joint. Then place the sickens' joint at your healthy position; ensure that sunlight can reach it because this procedure involves intricate details and precision, then insert the needle into the root area where the hair is attached until you pierce paper as you pull upwards from the natural hair; next, extract enough hair up to the insertion point of the thread, and secure each strand in place if there are two or more strands. Finally, withdraw your hand so that all hairs protrude evenly from the sheet along with their natural hair.
And if the process of extraction is done and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the thread from underneath all the way to the end that you have ordered, until the extraction point goes beyond the part you can see with your eye; then once you remove the thread and the hair, let the wound heal for two or three days. And if the hair is small, accompany one long horsehair along its natural length, and raise it together with that or leave it as it was, until it becomes long again and then raise it.
Regarding eye infections
When this illness, which is called "aleacrati" or the putrefaction that occurs in the eye, happens there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. It can manifest suddenly due to an injury, from surgery, or with similar incidents.
And the way of the operation in this is that you cut through that seam, and open the eyelid, and place linen wads inside it, and keep them until it heals; and it should not be that you use remedies for it that dry out and restrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first one; but work with things that soften, like fennel; and pour in water or vinegar and linseed oil, and dissolved garlic ointment into no oils, and cover it with a linen wad, and treat it with these.
And the treasures of your treatment are that you must be cautious not to seal it according to its original form; and these operations that we have mentioned do not leave out remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to its original form.
from the matter that comes in the eye
This disease which is called "axacrati" really and truly is natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds, cracks, cautery, and similar things; and the way of the operation in this situation is that you take a needle, into which there are two threads, and you insert it into the flesh, and make cuts on the left tear腺 just above, so that the threads go through .ij. fibers of the flesh; then the flesh comes up to the whole length of the needle, and the hole is made wide at .i. spatium large.
And if the figure of the paper returns according to what should be, it is good; if not, take one of these tools and place it in the crack, then turn the paper around, making two cuts inside the paper. Let there be the ends of .ij. cuts at both corners of your incision, so that when they are joined together, the figure resembles a letter from the Greek alphabet with no 'j'. Then remove this flesh according to how wide its edges are and how much there is before it was cut out, based on where the paper was placed, then adjust the two parts which were removed using the stitches of wool; then apply the cure that we have spoken about for softening medicines and antiseptics until he/she recovers.
And if the disease comes from a wound or stitches or cautery, it is necessary that you cut a full opening across the hairs of the papers, and in accordance with what was said before; then cut between the two halves of a tent, as I have said; and must do the work according to the shape of the disease, for she varies greatly in form, and the surgeons prepare tools everywhere so they know how to bring the figure back to its natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what is appropriate for action and instruments in various positions.
quickly from the paper
When this stitch occurs using the hands in such a way that the paper is fastened with the white of the oil, and it cannot move or do its natural tasks, then you must therefore take the tip of a razor under the paper, and lift it upwards; and set it at the pinholes, as long as you manage to reach the fine wisp of wax that is not too hard nor too sharp, so that the patient does not suffer from the wax being too hard and causing irritation in the eye; and make your incision, which you scrape the gathered together part slightly, so that the paper regrows according to its natural shape; and heal all that assembled together, and do no sharp cut within the eye, but instead lift it with fresh water and vinegar; then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put damp wool on the eye. And after three days use a colander and other tools continuously until it is healed completely.
From the eyelash of the eye
Know that the eyelash has two ways: it is nervous and resembles a single hard thread, and another which isn't nervous but resembles white moisture that is frozen. When you touch it with iron and treat it around like needles, you cannot; both similarities start near the large tear ducts, grow little by little until they cover all vision, light, and movement of the eye.
And the way of incision is such that when you treat the patient with their healthy head, then release their eyes; lift the eyelash using your hand, then pull out the nail with small double-folded scissors, and place it above; take a needle, and attach one horse hair or cow hair or ox hair, along with a strong thread; double the needle's tip slightly and insert it into the nail, piercing it completely through. Then bind the nail to the thread and place it above; burn the entire length of each hair on both sides of the nail that lies under the eyelid membrane and the silk-like hair until the root, then cut off any remaining at the root beneath the tear ducts while preserving fine tissue and using gentle force, leaving the natural tears unaffected by the incision process. Then, when the nail has been removed to just its base and thread, as we have said; burn away all excess hair from this area as shown:
And see to it that the cautery doesn't touch the fatty skin and damage it, and that the needle doesn't pierce; and after incision pour a bit of powdered sulfur into the wound, and create a collar with mercury paste, and leave it until another day; then treat as necessary for as long as the person is well.
And if the nail isn't nerve-filled and you can't push in the needle, and the small nails cannot enter it, this is often treated by applying medicines to resemble a nail; and proceed as I have described in division, and if you see it become swollen, treat with an ointment that the patient might apply lightly pointy according to this shape.
Remove the nail carefully upwards, and if you see that it is thinning slightly and its base has compressed, then apply a collar made from mercury paste and a red collar with powdered sulfur to the eye, and keep this in place until another day; then proceed with the next operation according to this same process until all of the nail is removed.
If nothing goes against your sight, like an abscess on the eye, then proceed, and first clean the abscess as long as it is healthy. Then restart the operation as described previously, until it's healthy again.
And if there's the appearance of the eye tissue damaged by considerable harm, then suspend treatment with the onion, and apply only part of it not all at once, making sure tears don't come in contact; then instill red collyrium made from litharge into the eye.
of the flesh that grows on the pupil
From some individuals eyes birth only red flesh, and covers the pupil and restrains over the eyelids and gets to the outside surface, making it seem like a rose of baluster; and in such cases you do as follows: when your patient’s body has returned to health after illness, then treat the eyes, and with this entire amount of flesh use onion slices that suit its size, and hold them in place with the force of your hand; then remove the first layer of flesh, and shave everything smooth until reaching the end, and make sure not to damage the eye during surgery. And perform the incision as we have mentioned for incisions on the fingernail bed, following similar small techniques shown after this chapter; when you remove the yellow nail, so as to leave behind a white one, just like what this chapter demonstrates afterwards.
And when the incision has been completed and all the pus removed, use oil of sulfur or distill it with red clover leaf medicine and other similar corrosive remedies. Place a cotton ball dipped in oil on top of any remaining pus; if there is no fever, and you notice signs of healing, then let the oil be and treat any pus-related inflammation. If nothing remains and there's no fever, but you still suspect an abscess, leave the oil and apply remedies that soothe abscesses. Then return to your task until it has healed properly, and thus create as many incisions as necessary in this manner within the oil through these procedures.
However, it is necessary that you treat each weak oil in the natural way; and also the accidental path, in iron work; and do not let your hand enter any of these works until you see that this limb endures that operation.
of veins and eyes
When the veins are red and covered above the eye, they obstruct vision of the work ahead and weaken sight for several days. Therefore, when you first look at the eye, examine this condition carefully; there is no other disease besides this inflammation; then handle it like this: instruct the patient to align their head with your healthy position, then suspend those veins according to every ounce of their wisdom, and have the ounces thin yet double in size following this form.
And let there be two ounces by degrees at each side according to this form:
And then continue to gently displace those fine veins, and expect the blood to drain for another hour, until you see those veins leave the eye; be careful not to cut into the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this operation at midday in front of the sun, and take great care in your work so that you do not remove more than just those veins. And when you have done this, apply a garland of green and red oil to disintegrate what remains from the inflammation.
And if you do not have the power to complete all this at that time, then apply a plaster of things that soothe the pain in the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and assured of the extraction of pus, then restart according to this manner which was before until it is cured; and this is the form of force:
Of the ear canal
The method known as "arissati" ear fistula: when you cure it using cautery and hot water according to what I have said before, and if it is not cured yet, then open into the pus pocket in the area where it should die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is discovered, and you will see the corruption and the darkness, if you take out all the tool used as described; and call it "hard head", and be made of iron in the shape of half a dozen heads, and be sharpened like a sawblade just like its current form:
And place on it the part of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your hands, and press your hand a little until you know that this corruption is removed; and do this once, then restore the area with medicinal desiccants.
When the limbs are joined, and the flesh begins to grow, and the body of the wound is joined, and remains like this for 40 days, and does not heal or become an abscess, and no bad events occur, know that it is healed; if not, then there is only another remedy of bringing back the fistula to its original place according to this form: and when you expose the bone again with iron and medicines, and once it's exposed, take one tool according to this form, and make the iron head in three angles, and the shaft should be narrowed down like a sawblade just like what you see here:
Then place it on the bone near the eye socket, and keep your hand away from the eye for .i. pox (a unit of measurement), then continue with your whole hand until it pierces the bone and feels the pain through that area if your breath is in it as you hold your hand over his nose; and afterwards restore the arm with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the child has grown and hardened the joints, let the matter go to the nose; so there's a lighter thing for the patient.
from the opening of the eye
When the eyes have fully opened and there is no disturbance to the neck or diminishment, it's necessary that you tie the patient. Then heal them, then place suction cups or hatel (a type of dressing) without piercing in order to suck out excess fluid, then put on an eye patch made from acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolle paste, and then strain the eyes, and plaster it with bandages and cloths; and the way you use the cloths should be that you take cloths that are quite soft enough to double each one in half twice (.iiij., four times), and then place them one on top of another according to the amount required by the eye. Then strain it from above using a stiff bandage, and repeat the suction without piercing; then remove the suction cups and leave the eyes strained day and night, and if the bandages disintegrate, do strain as much as necessary; then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see that the eye has healed, it's good; if not, start again with the plastering, cloths, bandages and suction cups until it is healed.
from the breaking of a veined cloth
When disruptions occur in the veined cloth, then open it and comes to pieces like small grains of resin, which are hard to see; thus when you see them covered, the works are such that you poke one needle into the base of the part below until up to halfway above, then poke another needle or with a double thread from the part behind the eye; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its placement; then cover with the double thread and tie a part of the membrane inside, and squeeze it well, then remove the needle and place wet linen wool on the eye with plenty of egg; and let it be as long as the thread is consumed along with the membrane, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound heals; and in no way should the wound be restrained by the membrane each part from a circle of cloth until it has healed.
And if the eyes then show a large appearance, pierce them at the delicate spasm that comes from under the eye and corrects the moisture albuminous and lowers the eyes, and enters quickly; then remove it until it has healed.
From the flow of the eye
This disease which is called 'alcunnati' does not originate from flow in the eye that appears like tears flowing down; it is not real tears; and the way its symptoms become visible is when you make the patient sit upright and straight, then take their head between your hands, two by two, and move them until you see the tear come up to your eyes; then place it back, don't let it descend and remove any remaining light, observe the patient's condition as usual; if it doesn't descend immediately, know that there is a tear, and when the tear's descent isn't apparent in this way as we have said. Then situate the patient between your hands, take the delicate spatula and make cuts along the corneal tissue at one point, following the continuity with the corneal tissue and the crown until the tear comes out; and once it has come out, apply hot water mixed with honey to the eye, or water boiled with fenugreek, then after that application is done, it will be treated further until it heals.
Regarding tears from the eye
In our experience with operations involving the eyes and what needs to be pierced; so when working according to health principles. You should have the patient sit between your interlocked hands away from sunlight exposure, and hold the healthy eye firmly tight. Then place the piece of paper next to your left hand under their eyes if they're on the left side or under their eyes if they're on the right; then take with your right hand (when they're on the left) or your left hand (when they're on the right), the tool called "almagda," and place the tip of this tool just below the cornea by the thickness of a hair along the tear duct, then forcefully thrust the "almagda" tool into the corner of the eye until it pierces through to the other side of the eye's interior tissue, sensing that almagda reaches the hollow thing. The measurement of the path of almagda should match the size of the space from the lid to the darkest point; this is the cornea area. If you see bone in the paper because of the transparency of the corneal mesh, then place the tool until it touches where the pain is or where the eye is affected by it, and then express through another channel afterwards. If the pain subsides now, you will observe the patient looking ahead with the tool still in their eye.
After resting a little, and if the pain ascends through the second passage, apply force with the tool; and when it's securely in place and no longer rises, gently extract almagda by rotating your hand back and forth slightly. And then, partially reinsert some oily substance like grease or egg white into the eye socket, and remove the eye from this. Then place a moistened wool or oil-soaked cloth beneath the eye area, covering it abundantly with eggs. Now, those of our time, let's apply this treatment similarly using ample eggs.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness (some people have particularly hard eyes), it is necessary that you take the tool called "alberit," which has this shape:
And then pierce only the conjunctive part, do not go too far forward but make it about an inch subtle, then add almond oil as we have said; and upon completion of the operation prepare for the patient one ointment, on which they rest on their back in a dark room for an hour; and stay completely still, and prefer light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and tie him according to his position until the third day; then untie him within that same dark room and check his vision, and show him some things, and then reapply the bandage up until the seventh day; and it should not be done during the curing time or after an incision now, but you should wait with this process because the wound will heal rapidly.
When discharging pus comes out, you should release the eye before the seventh day, and use a dressing for the abscess. And when it has calmed down, then release vision and place two wicks on his face for covering one day, and stay in that dark room. And remain within this dark house little by little, and adjust to his surroundings; know that no pupils should interfere in this situation.
And one person came to us who was from the region of Arach, who told us that everywhere they use almond oil dressing, after which they drain the pus, but still I have never seen anyone like this in our land, nor have I ever read about it in ancient books; perhaps this is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of alum, for he who does not know them sees them; and they are properly of arsenic:
And it is the head of those from this same subtlety, and the last at three angles of sickness.
from the flesh under the nose
None are born or under the nose are jointed in various ways; among them some seem like scorpions with the feet of a pie. And if there is such a one with a jointed char from the color of fux, and if it has a char that smells of good color. Therefore, for those of these chars which smell well and is not adorned, you must have the patient lie between your hands against the sun; work on his nostrils and pour the oncine onto those chars, and drive them out. Then hold what you can withstand at the fine sharp spatumile of one side until you know that this char is completely jointed.
And if there remains no substance we cannot cope with, when you open the entire body with all the surgical instruments very gently, ensuring nothing is left behind; and should there be no wound or abscess rupture, then apply gentle pressure as needed; and if it's an abscess, apply pressure carefully until it ruptures. If they are malignant ulcers, quickly act and cauterize immediately once the pus stops flowing and all edges are sealed, then rinse thoroughly with water or wine.
And if there's an opening due to moisture reaching up to the throat, know that it is bleeding; and should moisture not puncture properly as intended, know that there is new tissue forming in the bone above, where surgical tools fail to reach: thus, you must remove .i. thread of linen, somewhat thick, and hold both hands tightly, keeping each strand apart by roughly .i. inch or less; then insert one end of the cloth into the throat near the nose and pull it out through the odorant so that it passes through from the inside of the mouth; and this process is often done on infants in school settings, and it's a simple task for those who wish to perform it; then hold the head coming out by the nose with one hand, and the other head coming out by the mouth with the other hand, ensuring they come out one after another while holding onto us tightly. Do this until you're sure that the thread has corroded that tissue, then remove the thread, stop the bleeding, moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and place it back inside again as before; do this for .iij. days or more, until the ointments have dissolved all remaining tissue; and then keep some pine resin in your nose for a few days until it heals, and if you need dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of instrument to cleanse the head, which has distilled oils and medicines inside when used with oil or water.
And make it of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and guide this as well; and if you see fit, make it a closed cane, and ensure your surgical tools are filled to purify the head; and have one hand on the head when heating oil or any liquid.
from the flesh near the nose
Many times, near the nose, a disease is born which is called "telul", it grows and becomes large until one can see it; and for this reason you should cover it at the beginning, and fully remove the bone, then place the cautery or burning medicine in its place; and if you delay covering it until it is large, beware if it is hard, changes color, loses sensation: do not touch it with iron as it contains an embedded abscess, for when one covers it once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is due to cold touch, not due to loss of color, and you see that it can be completely covered, let the patient breathe normally and treat the area with dry and restrictive substances.
When the nose has been cut and sewn.
Understand that when solutions come into contact with one of those internal cartilaginous parts in this chapter, it rarely benefits anyone. Therefore, such occurrences should not happen to any person at all; if their injury is fresh up until the blood comes back completely; then adjust the two lips towards a stitch, proceed with treatment while they remain healthy; and when the lips are already desiccated from both sides, you should scorch all parts of their skin until they heal, then join the two lips together in one stitch, hold them firmly, and sprinkle with dragon's blood powder and incense. Then place a piece of plaster underneath the powders until it begins to heal; after that, apply ointment treatment while they remain healthy.
The method of the stitch is that you join the solution together: either with needles, as we have explained for the stitch in the abdomen; or with thread, which I have already told you.
from abscesses on the lips
Hands should be inserted inside the abscess wound, similar to grains sometimes, smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary that you return the lips, cut through each nook, and take them with forceps and collect in each part; then after the vitriol incision, keep the hand under until the wound dries; and then remove the dressing, clean the lip of dry things until it heals.
from the flesh of the gums
Many times, a piece of attached flesh originates on the gums, which the old ones called "albulus"; you should hold this with tongs and cut it at its root, allowing bleeding or blood to flow. Then put under the vitriol (sulfuric acid) or other retarding and drying powders. And if that flesh returns after cutting, and many times happens, if you cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after burning; these are the forms of tools to use for cutting.
Of cauteries of fire command the ill to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
Certain times are gathered at the root of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, those that are ugly and harsh; and certain times there is a black tooth and citrine one with worms as long as the decay comes to the gum, and they make the teeth stink; then it's necessary for you to hold the ill person between your hands, and let their head be on a pillow, and pull out each tooth or each piece of the harsh substance until nothing remains; and thus create blackness and verdure, jaundice and other colors, as long as they're removed; and if what comes off at the first attempt is good; if not, it starts again from the second day onwards, up to when you have everything pulled out; know that the teeth need different kinds of instruments for pulling them, depending on how the work shows them, because the rasers that remove teeth between the teeth have other shapes than those that remove teeth outside; and these shapes along with others should be prepared in front of you.
It is necessary that when you treat the tooth for its pain, you delay pulling it as long as you can, because this should not be done lightly; indeed, this substance goes quite high up so one must have no excuse for the rasping. Therefore, when the patient is forced to bleed, you must be sure of the tooth causing it. Many times the pain guides the disease and makes one think it's a diseased tooth; thus, one should extract the healthy tooth. Yet do not completely relieve the pain until all the bad tooth has been removed, as we have already instructed our healers; and when you are certain which tooth is causing trouble, you must sear around the tooth with one pinch of strong sulfur for to preserve the gum in every place. Then move your fingers or your delicate tongs into this tooth's first joint and out slowly until it is well extracted, then firmly hold the tongs. And have the diseased head of the tooth between your knees, and keep your hand steady so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth properly without breaking it, and if there is no bleeding, take any of these instruments and gently push them in every part from each side, and move them as you did initially. And if the teeth are pierced and fused together, you must fill them with cloths where they were; and when extracting them with delicate tongs, make sure not to break them during extraction. It's best to carefully open around the gum tissue for removing tooth debris.
And make sure that you do not break it or leave a part of the tooth, and inform the patient about the increased pain from the root due to this action, which can be worse than initially. Also take care not to perform this operation as ignorant healers do, who often break the tooth once and don't follow our instructions, causing repeated injuries by opening the same large disease or breaking the tooth while doing so; instead, they come back with this very same illness due to the roots that remain or due to the tooth they broke. When the tooth is extracted, wash out the cavity with wine or oil and vinegar; and if bleeding occurs after, which often happens, fill the cavity with burned vitriol. If it doesn't work, cauterize it.
The shapes of the tools, to which you first get your teeth into, should be long pointed and have big handles, so they do not bend when you pull on the tooth; and these are their shapes:
And may have large members that do not bend while pulling, and be made of well-made iron, and be toothed for gripping.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains during pulling, you should place cotton that is wet with butter on the left. For one or two days until the cotton turns to ashes, then remove the pliers called "algefri", from which the shoulder seems like a doctor's mouth; and they should also be made as if it were a file, this is its shape:
And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these tongs, then you must uncover the entire flesh right up to the root, and place the tool known as "altalhi", which is essentially a spike, in that manner:
And make it so that neither breaks or swells, and if the root jumps out through this, it's good; if not, use all the tools you have, as their forms come next:
And if help is taken from this tool which has two prongs, as its form is shown here:
and other tools that are in front according to the order of teeth, and this tool which seems like a large pair of tongs, as its form is shown:
And let this tool be such that it cannot break, and know that few tools of bone exist; and also other tools, which are not counted; and the skilled surgeons find their instrument by themselves, according to what their work and disease show them, for there are parts of diseases where old instruction did not teach a tool because of the diversity among others and if it breaks from wear or from the rest of bones, or if it decays, so he searches among the tools that suit him, which I have told you about, and helps with gestures, as is described here: And may they be large and well holding to hold the bone, so that it doesn't escape but can be held and removed; and then restore at its place with medicine suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and if it is small, then use all this instrument.
When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and the shape is ugly, especially in virgins, it's necessary for you to know whether the tooth was born after another one, and wasn't placed straight, and can't be pulled or filed: then pull it out; and if it is together with a tooth, take this instrument described here, which resembles two small hooks, and made of sharp iron.
And the tooth is extracted bit by bit in my hands due to its hardness, and because you do not move others, and if it can be seen that one could grind it out, then I will grind down with one part of the file as this shape:
And it is also like the file used to make needles; and I grind the tooth bit by bit in my hands lightly, so that you do not move until it finishes; then make it flat at the end with all tools, and if it's too sharp and irritates the tongue, then you should grind down the roughness until it is even, so as not to irritate the tongue or damage speech.
when the tooth swells
When the tooth is before the cheekbones, either through percussion or by hitting, and if the patient cannot press upon it so that he/she doesn't vomit after eating, you should have treated it with medicines to restrict, but this doesn't work; then bind it with a gold thread, because silver threads turn green and rot, whereas gold never does. And choose the thread neither too thin nor too thick, according to the width of the space between the teeth; and if you see to straighten the teeth, take the thread and the double-ended needle between two healthy teeth, then place the dislocated parts between the diseased teeth, whether there are one or more than one. Until you can feel them properly touching the other side of a healthy tooth; then repeat the covering until you've covered up to where you intervened before. And remove your hand skillfully and carefully, making sure it doesn't move at all; and tie your knot at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut the threads with pliers, gather them together, place them between a healthy tooth, and set them in such a way as to not irritate the tongue; then leave it like this tightly until it can stay without discomfort, and if it loosens or the threads break, retighten with another thread; if stays in place properly serving all its time, and that is the form of the teeth and the insertion of the two healthy teeth into the diseased ones as you can see:
And when the tooth is lost, you set it back to its place piece by piece as we have explained; and do not interfere with anything that is not fit and endure pain, nor at any time make the shape of a bone tooth from a cow, and put it in the place where the defect exists, and tighten it as we have said, and stays like this serving for as long as possible.
To cover the wound of the tongue
No time comes from within the tongue or nature that we are born with; or by accident of healed wounds; and the procedures are such that you work on the mouth against the disease, have its head in your healthy area, then lift the tongue; afterwards cut out the nervous cord across the width until the tongue is dislocated from its place. And if there's hardness or swelling, particularly due to suddenly healing wounds, if you bend and cut that section of the cord; and be sure not to make the incision too deep as there is an artery underneath; and once done, lift the head from pinkish and watery fluid, then from cold water; then put under the tongue a linen bandage each night so the head cannot stick. And if bleeding starts, place vinegar on the head; and if it doesn't stop, cauterize with slow burning cautery which is good for this situation; then apply another healing method until it's healed.
And if you see that it's of any color or black or hard, and the patient doesn't feel it, don't touch it because it's a boil; and if it's turning towards pus, and there's moisture, then use the hook tool to puncture it with a subtle incision from both sides, and heal it from one side and the other; and if it doesn't stop draining in your procedure, place vinegar on it until it is healed completely. Then return to your procedures as long as you are using force; then lift the head from coolness and perspiration, and apply further healing methods until it's fully recovered.
extracting abscesses of the throat
No disease enters within the throat cavities that are called "godaths", and they're properly named as two almonds. When you treat them, just as we've explained in division, if they aren't healed, be careful: if these are pus-filled blisters small in size and with a white color, don’t touch them with metal at all. And if they’re red and the root is large, don’t touch them with metal either, due to blood discharge; but leave them until they're wounded, then you will remove them, or they might break by themselves; and if they are of pale color and have a thin root, prepare your tool for extraction, yet first check that these pus-filled blisters settle and calm down. Then make the patient face towards the sun, let their arms be in good health, and open their mouth while the surgeons press their tongue under all the tool, as depicted here; it should be of silver or finely crafted as knives.
Can't you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the pus-filled blister? Take one and put it into the almond, then pull it upwards more than you can; remove nothing from the threads, then extract with the tool, as depicted here; it looks like a force. And both the head is placed upright, and one part after another are extremely sharp, and made of iron or silver.
And if you don't have this tool at hand, use tweezers instead, as depicted here:
And make cuts on one side and the other name; and when you have performed one of the almonds, perform the other in the same manner, and after cutting gargle the patient with hot and cold water, as well as a gentle flow of blood occurs, then gargle with hot water or slices from cooked cherry tomatoes or laurel leaves, and similar things, until the saliva is fully cleansed; then continue the cure until it is healed; and no other abscesses are born in the throat than the two almonds, so perform them accordingly like the two almonds evenly.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was born within her throat, namely a small abscess. I had almost completely sealed off the entire throat channel, so she could not breathe due to the obstructed passage and also could not eat or drink, dying if she remained in this state for one day or two. The abscess had ascended quite high, causing it to force out two tears through each of the two nostril holes from birth. I immediately acted quickly, put an ounce in one (of the nostrils), then pulled out the passage and a large portion of mucus; then made another cut near the other nostril hole, and had her open her mouth while pressing on her tongue; after that, inserted the ounce into this abscess, took out a part of it, and only came out with a little blood; and thus opened up the passage in her throat for the woman, started drinking water now and then wine, and did not stop cutting away at this abscess over a long period; and the abscesses were growing back immediately, filling the space that I had emptied until it became quite large; then I removed these parts, and only let God do what was left after me.
of the eye
When the head descends into the eye socket, and it is swollen and long, this is called "perpendicular"; and if it is out of place being large and round, then it's called "eye". When it is cured as we have said in division, and treatment doesn't improve, and you see that the abscess has calmed down and is subtle, then it should be handled; and this one which is round assembled and not long; and if it's bloody or of fusse color or black, then you should avoid making an incision into it. For there is great danger to the patient. Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I said regarding its size and length, make the patient face the sun, press their tongue against the instrument we described previously; then insert the ounce into the eye, pull outwards from there, and cut it with two of the instruments that were mentioned in the division of the two almonds. And you should not cut more than the excess which is beyond the natural limit; because if you cut more, it harms voice and speech; after the incision, use what was said about cutting into the two almonds, and treat until she's healed. And if the patient feels fear upon cutting, then you must apply a tool for cautery sensitivity. And the method of the cautery is sharp. And let the patient put their head back in your health, and then press their tongue against the instrument described or under the title of cautery, and clamp with living force; but not too thick nor too thin; and use the movement of this tool as it's formed:
And let my head have a hair where I apply the medicine, like the movements of a spoon, and place the tool over all the medicine on the eye; and let the patient rest with their head on its side so that saliva and the mucus flow from their mouth to the medicine inside, but not down to the throat or causing pain; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see that it has dried and the effects of the medicine are reduced; and if you see this, take cotton and envelop it with any tool, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the tool on top of the cotton on wax, so that the cotton burns into the eye while it's damp; and do this often until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and wait for four to five days. And if you need to repeat the medicine cautery procedure, then do it again, after which clean around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and clean off anything left of the medicine; and rinse with cold water, and treat with gargling until healed.
This cure is safer than incision or using the cautery; if it's treated with fumigation in this way, take calendula and ipecacuanha and oregano and rue and chamomile and lettuce and similar herbs, and combine them all or some of them into one pot, put them there, and bring it to a boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and inside the pot place two sticks according to this method: And it should be made of silver or sulfur, and until the vapor rises from the patient's mouth through their nose as long as the diseased womb is dead; after that you should repeat this often, until the womb dries out. Make sure not to do this at the beginning of pus expulsion when fever occurs, for many things can happen; instead, don't use this method during the decline of pus expulsion. And if this tool isn't available, take a reed and place an eggshell inside your mouth so that the diseased part doesn't get too hot; because the eggshell does not make the vapor weigh down on the mouth, it is a good combined remedy for salvation.
Many times, you may use the os or spine of a fish bone, with no need for anything else; if so, then it is suitable that you remove what you can see, and press your tongue against the sun on all the tool, until you see movement. For what cannot be seen opening in the throat, it's necessary to make the patient vomit out the diseased part so that the food becomes cooked in their stomach; if by chance this forceful expulsion fails to remove the disease; or if the disease swallows a piece of sponge, or belly button, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread; bind the sponge with thread and then swallow it. And when she comes to your mouth, you will see steam rise, and then proceed to force an expulsion; and if this doesn't come out from what we have mentioned, then take one tool shaped like lead according to this form:
And ensure the tools are adjusted near the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the head raised high; take care not to touch the epiglottis, letting nothing go through or pushing the bone inwards; instead guide the patient when they push the tool, as if they move or if something is too tight; should it be pushed down, or pull it forcefully with all the tool evenly, until she can do so.
from the saliva of the throat
No treatment is made with saliva alone, as I have described in the division by medicine cures; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the sick person towards the sun, and press their tongue with the tool that I told you. And if you see saliva, draw it out to about one small uncia or use fine tongs suitable for this purpose. If this doesn't work, take a hair, insert it in the throat toward the sickness, then apply pressure on its tip with heat like from a red iron and repeat often. And wet the sick person's mouth fully with cold water every day. Then wash their mouth open wide and let the water swallow slowly, and move their head often; and as soon as saliva feels the water, they will vomit it out.
And if she doesn't give birth as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the tool that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye. Do this multiple times, for she will not bleed without it. The method of fumigation is such: take one pot containing charcoal briquettes, cover it partially from inside with a perforated cover and place the tool's head inside its center. Then pour your fumigation into this, and hold the tip of the fumigator in her mouth, sealing it so no fumes escape but only reach up to the nostrils; and now the blood will come out. If she doesn't bleed, start the fumigation process multiple times again. Allow the patient to be thirsty, eat salty foods and alike, do not drink water; then she must leave her body in this manner.
And the shape of the tool used for bleeding, when it can be seen, resembles curved scissors meant to cut into the throat; and it has a similarity to the tip of a surgical scalpel, and it is sharpened like a rasp, so whatever she takes does not slip away; here's its shape:
The chapter on abscesses
No mention of abscesses are made according to what the memory brings forward from one and another in this book, and they differ both in perforation and in size; it is done in two ways where one is similar to its nature, and because it holds moisture. And the second way is for those that are on the body or they are within it. As abscesses at the head are different from those at the base, and abscesses at the fatty part of the head are different from those that come into joints, each has their judgement in operation.
And for abscesses, one should not pierce them until the body is dead according to its maturation. And if there are such that it's necessary to pierce when they have grown and do not mature as expected, like abscesses originating at joints. Because when abscesses originate at joints and are left until rotten inside by chance, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint become corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is within the main member, if you delay perforation until it's dead, it will harm the principal limb. Or if it is deep in the foundation, then piercing it so that it becomes dead; there should not be a situation where you pierce an immature, undigested abscess other than one that has become rotten from its base, and it grows into a fistula; and cannot heal within a large extent.
And it must be known when the time for perforating an abscess that is dead according to its maturation, which is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and reduction of pain and flush, and the movement and firmness of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it should be ensured that you place the perforation site above the abscess or as closely as possible to where it opens outwards, and if the perforation is along the length of the body, and if the abscess is located at hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places where there is no crease.
In those who bend, according to that limb. And when abscesses are within the fatty part of flesh, if you see them burst, let the puncturing continue until it is confirmed by digestion completion, as we have said. Because if you pierce before this confirmation, it might stretch across his body with venom from him and be full of heaps of filth; and might harden his lips and damage the parts beneath him. And for abscesses that are pierced along the width of his body, according to what the limb requires. And you must introduce small tools for smaller abscesses, small hooks; and in larger abscesses, large hooks, and many incisions according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it's necessary to use a knife, and cover them; when it has become as big as two cloths, and is numb, then do as you would with milking: and for those that split into three angles, and those that need to be covered like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses from angles; and for those where a round cut is made, and other cuts and similar operations are done.
Those who have none (of the tools), such as abscesses superficially situated, it is necessary that you pierce them completely; and when an abscess is large, and has accumulated a lot of pus, if you pierce but do not remove all the pus at once, but remove only part of it; then stop puncturing until the other side heals, then leave nothing untreated; perform this procedure by size in order from largest to smallest, until the pus exits entirely. Also, if someone's health is weak or a pregnant woman, young children, elderly and decrepit people. Because their spirits tremble with every release of pus, they might accidentally die due to it. Therefore, be cautious throughout this chapter, when you have pierced your abscess, if there is an opening, then check that the wound from the abscess is small; and if it's a clean cut, use linen or old cotton for treatment; and if it's large and many hooks are used, each must have a tent so they face each other. And if you removed part of the skin in the abscess and sewed it back together, then fill it with old cotton or linen shreds without moisture, and secure it until the third day; then rest, and treat with ointment until healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your procedure, then treat with cold and ease, and moisten with a cloth for multiple times. And if the bleeding continues, then take control and treatment, and use the powders I mentioned in this book, and if it's in an area of water or if the skin around the abscess is very sensitive, then place wet tents and cloths soaked in wine and oil; and if it's in a solid area, and the skin is fatty, then apply moistened cloths soaked in water and oil, or wine and cold oil, until the third day as we have said; then remove and treat and cure properly, until it heals.
And it is necessary to understand universally in the treatments of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here begins this chapter.
of the stones
Or the chief brings out small abscesses, and their ways are like those found on a linen cloth, as with a goose's gallbladder, and many others share similar characteristics. There are some that are fatty and have moisture just like pustules; and there are others that are hard and stony when cut open, and there is no doubt that the artery would oppose it. And the operation of cutting involves using an instrument known as 'entromissoire', the form of which follows this description, containing something within it. For if it contains moisture, it is done from above to its length. And once the moisture is drained, it scalds without leaving anything behind in that containing the moisture; for it returns immediately when nothing is left there. Then dip cotton into Egyptian ointment if it's available; if not, use water and vinegar, apply it to the wound, and let it rest until another day; and this practice continues through the night. And then resume using the cotton as before on the second day, and the third, until you know that it doesn't stay overnight; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it heals properly.
And the size above the abscess stones and moisture, it is lighter because there is little blood. And if in any of these abscesses or roots or there's no moisture, and of these two abscesses that I observed on the roots; and found the abscess just like a soft stone, rough and white, and unable to break; and if one had pierced through it, it would have been treated the same as a stone. In other abscesses coming or such as those that come from children's teeth and from ear canals, the opening is always for the longest possible time so that the pus can exit; and treat them accordingly.
of the scrofula
Many times there appear abscesses at the throat, and near the glands, and in angers, and not once come to other places or organs, they are soft and interwoven with each other. And each scrofula is properly within its node, like a nut and an abscess around a root, as we have said; and there are many appearances of these scrofulas. There are some that contain moisture, and others that do not want to obey treatment. In this one then that you see with good disposition towards the surgeon, and resembles the color of the chest, silent from every part and is not sensitive on either side of the neck nor artery nor conduit, and is not deep; it should be that you take it from above, and scrape off each part, and have both lips around the node if necessary, as we have said for abscesses around a root; handle them little by little, and make sure that you do not cut through the nerve or vein, nor make too much of an incision, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow cutting, place vitriol broil, or any powders that expel blood in the wound; and hold the wound until the abscesses are relieved and the wound is softened, then begins to putrefy. And when the blood has been expelled, return to your work until you finish it; then decide according to your skill if there are no small scabs remaining, remove and cleanse them. And if there's a large vein at the root of the scab, it should not be cut from its root but bind with a double strong thread, let it fall through this without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and proceed with treatment.
And if you have cut the entire scab, it is necessary to assemble the two edges of the wound and stitch now. There should be no remaining excess due to the size of the scab. It's necessary to pay attention to cutting the root of this one, draining fluid, and stitching as we previously said. Those scabs that contain excess, pierce them where they open and drain; and do so in a similar manner as described before, depending on it, then apply bandages with ointment and other such things, until it is rottened by the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply ointment with flesh inside, until it's healed.
regarding obliquity
The old men spoke of how to make an incision in the throat; but I never saw anyone do it here, and this is written down from their words.
For those with squinting vision, it is necessary that the incision made in the throat which is called 'epiglottis' be avoided; and one should not offer aid by this method, because all the veins and the heart are close to the patient who has pus in their mouth or in the throat or between two almonds. When the illness is within the channel of the heart, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to make an incision in the epiglottis, it is necessary that we make it through three circles or four with a small incision across, between the two circles. The size of the incision does not extend into the cartilage;
And these joints can be suitable for the sectioning of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessel is long from above.
And if the surgeons are fearful, it is necessary for them to extend the throat skin all the way down to the navel, then cut through the keor until they reach the neck; and avoid any blood vessels, if you see anything, and then shape the syfac, just as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the flow from the neck which jumps out through the limb that has been broken, and by the loss of voice;
and leave the wound open for a period.
And when the time has passed where one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound as neatly as possible, and all the skin without the cartilage; then administer medicines that create flesh, until it is healed.
Albucasis insists that one should not perform this until the throat is entirely blocked, and the patient is judged dead, and the defect is evident. So cut off the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe normally, and they are breathing through the wound, and this prevents death.
And to command the old man to keep the wound open until the illness has passed, and it has passed after three or four days. And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and treat it until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a maiden took one knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut some of the channels near the heart.
And I was called to treat her, and found her just as if she were dead.
I discovered the wound and found that blood was issuing from it, and indeed, there wasn't a cut or exit for the blood other than the throat, and the wind flowed through the wound.
I acted quickly, treated the wound as it healed, and then I cured it until it was healed completely;
and there was nothing left for the maiden but to regain her voice which had been weakened by illness, and she returned after that to her usual state.
I swear that there should be no need for the surgery of the epiglottis.
From the large throat
Cysts known as "throat hernia" are often referred to, and they are large cysts in a dark purple color, and occur frequently in women;
And there are two ways: natural, and accidents; or natural does not have an organ.
And the accidents are according to two ways, of which one appears like fat in us, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from us through an artery. And there must be fear, and it doesn't suit to make cuts outside that in the one who is small, and the proof and search take place throughout the intervention: if you find it as small as a nut, and cannot cut anywhere, then operate, just like one operates on nuts, and the treatment goes through all its stages, if there is any doubt; And search well first, and treat it as appropriate until it becomes completely healed.
from now on
Many methods exist for us, so I will mention all similarities;
And it is necessary that I tell all the differences between us and issues.
I say that issue is characterized by heat and fever lasting until the body's secretions have passed and putrefaction has occurred; then, the fever and heat subside.
In contrast to us, there is no heat or fever and no pain, it contains a pus of i syphilitic sac, which serves as its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a boil, and becomes large;
And according to two appearances, or greasy, or moist, and none of their colors are as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to treating the new, that you first test and inquire about all the instrument which is called 'intromissor', according to what its shape comes or chapter which follows.
And the method of inquiring about abscesses among us is that you take or more moistened than what you find inside the abscess, and twist your fingers a little at a time, until you know that the instruments have pierced the pus, then according to the size of the abscess;
Then remove the intromissor, and be careful not for it to jump.
When moisture causes a problem, regardless of its nature or how it occurs, cut it just as I have instructed for other abscesses;
And if after the incision no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, so cut it in an X shape and take it with tongs. Gently burn each side of it and place the piece where you found it back to ensure a clean extraction.
And if you can't remove it cleanly, remove it in parts so that nothing remains.
For if anything is left behind, it will recur to us many times;
And if it remains a little, and the patient doesn't suffer much, use some corrosive powders on the wound, and keep the wound clean, and place things that soothe and heal an abscess in hot water, and treat with other remedies until it's healed.
And if the wound is large, then stitch the two edges of the wound together, and treat the one who has been wounded with care.
And if the vein is too close to be treated in opposition or otherwise if there's urgency, then use the site of vitriol juice and let it take its course for two or three days, as long as the wound heals, and rest with the boiling of blood; then return to coppering where some has remained from new.
These are the forms of the instruments for insertion, and they come in three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are four squares which are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb". And among these there are also three kinds: large, medium, and small, to surround the ulcers of fistula.
And they are also like needles that one removes from the spine, and made of citrine quartz, or iron, or silver, and yellow ones are valued for their use, and they are more adept at trapping black tar to seal abscesses;
And there are three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the opening of the wounds.
The shapes of the lancets resemble sheep in appearance, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are pairs of lancets with two curves also, in three different ways.
And if there are lancets with two curves each, they also come in two ways; and if there are pairs of lancets with two curves each, and one-lancets with a single curve, all these come in two ways as well; and all this is necessary according to their size.
The head of this person to whom one makes the incision is sharp, and there are some who do not cut halfway but only from one side. We burn their cheeks because thus we do not cut into the vein or the nerve;
And for these introducers, their handles are put into gloves, so that the patient does not feel them during the opening of abscesses;
And there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and only one should be used in the thigh area, such as legs, arms, and nipples, and similar body parts;
And no other small instrument once is made, resembling whips of surgeons, according to this shape, to which bleeding has been stopped:
And it is placed only once in the healthy part that closely divides veins and arteries, and not according to this large shape:
No man's nipples ever swell when they begin to become corrupt, until they seem like female nipples;
And remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them should do it according to this shape described in line B from b to g: Then strip off the fat, and apply medicinal ointment to the wound, then bring together the two edges of the wound for stitching, and continue treatment until it is healed.
And if the belly sags down, and is flattened due to its size as in women, if they divide it into two sections above, by two similar cuts; From which one holds to the other at the end of each and both, so that the longer line contains the smaller according to this shape, from this line B until the line G; Then strip the skin that is between the two edges, remove the fat, and apply what we have instructed about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, or the incision has not been completed entirely, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood clotting, then you should fill the wound with wet cotton in a corrosive ointment; And leave him until he eats and regurgitates the meat and fat, then treat him until he is fully healed.
removal of abscesses and gallstones
Wounds that occur from abscesses are manners of hard scrophulas, and if there are any containing moisture.
Those which contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from the line b until the line .g.: And when all the pus inside the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment as needed until the wound heals.
And if the abscesses resemble smallpox, then cut them as we have said in cuts of smallpox, and if the wound is clean, then apply the cautery as we have said before.
From the rupture of the artery
And when the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it heals over time, many times pus forms there. And similarly, this happens in veins with abscesses forming;
And if one knows that it's due to an artery, then the pus will be long and straight; And when you feel it with your hands, if you feel this squeezing sensation; and if it is through the vein, it will appear externalized.
And it's foolish to deal with this abscess, and similarly when it is under the armpits and in the groins and around the neck and elsewhere, and it's quite large. So one should avoid iron treatment, and also the one who is at the head, one should avoid this as well, and in the one who is swollen from an artery, do it over the skin until long.
So one should avoid iron treatment, and also the one who is at the head, one should avoid this as well, and in the one who is swollen from an artery, do it over the skin until long. Then work with the twelfth part, and remove the artery from the tissues, until it is fully exposed;
Then take out a needle from there, and pierce it up to the other side, and hold the artery in place with a double thread of two lews, just as I taught you in removing the two arteries that are found in temples;
Then place the lever between the two threads with an introducer until the pus comes out which is there, and release the abscess;
Then administer the treatment that draws off the pus, as long as the thread drains it. Then apply this ointment accompanying this, until it heals properly;
And if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, it's necessary that you color with your hand what part of the abscess you can reach on all the skin, then with the needle from the side you're holding in your hand, pierce it and leave two threads, so that you can pull them on the other side; then tie off the abscess, just as I have instructed you, or tie a stitch with two of the thread ends from each side of the thread;
And if you doubt that the child will endure pain, should you have difficulty with one needle made of all .1 filament throughout the entire abscess incision from the first needle's location, and hold the threads in four places;
Then cut out the abscess as long as the excess goes out, then cut away the excess smoothly and leave that which is tied.
Then place a moistened linen cloth in wine and oil, then administer treatments of bandages and medications until they are healed.
abcesses of the nerves
As with pus that comes into the artery and vein, pus enters the lungs when they are cut, or due to excessive labor, and similar occurrences.
And this happens more often with shoulders and elbows and in all places that have joints, and it is one, pus filled abscesses, and its color resembles the color of flesh, and manifests in various positions without pain;
And when it is squeezed, the patient feels pain, and does not fully match the sensation of flesh but rather within the gut;
And moves in all directions, neither going forward nor backward, neither above nor below, and that which is located at joints does not fit well under iron: by chance it would cause constriction;
And the one who is a head or forehead, causes the skin to blister. If the boils are small, and you have some forceps, grip them at their base;
And if they are large, lift them at their root, and cauterize them, then cut the flesh, and suture the wound together, and continue treatment until it heals properly.
Large boils hanging down No instance occurs in wombs or any other part like this, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" by its appearance, and has a subtle root, and large knots; and there are both small and many large ones.
And I saw one person who had two bellies that were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, and had a small root, and were cut open, and were corroded by moisture.
I dissected them and found that in one there were 16 ounces weighing, and in the other 5. The organs at incision show that when you look, the patient's body is moist, and the color of the fungi is white and moist with a subtle root;
If it is large and full of pus, then let the fire cautery be at your disposal. For the surgeon often experiences too many blood losses during operations, and if you are absent, then quickly take up the task of applying heat treatment;
And if you see the patient frightened and fearful from the incision by the iron, then take a well-made piece of hemp string, and tie it in a knot as we have said, and leave it for two days;
And then keep pulling it tight, and do not cease to pull the hemp string until you reach the knot, and feel no strain; and if the roots are thick, then feel frightened even for the belly, but you should be able to cut half of them.
Then apply heat treatment so that it does not heal prematurely; then treat the wound, and make sure you do not cut into the tender tissue which is of a red color and has little sensation and produces pus.
For this is an abscess, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene next.
When the bile flows freely
When the appearance of bile comes from a surgical wound or a cut in the stomach and is found on some parts of the intestines, just like it happens in other cuts, or blood that escapes from veins or arteries as per its position, or due to windiness;
And if it's from the cut in the stomach and by the outlet of the intestines, then its color is similar to that of a pus-filled lesion, and it is a slight matter without much pain, opening from various outlets. And if it is due to the passage of an intestinal obstruction, then it is more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers if it returns, and then comes back, and by chance if it gets stuck, and expands quite a bit at the entrance during bathing and due to strong labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it's a simple matter and opens well when you press it with your hand, it doesn't get stuck; and if it is due to blood, it will open through these signs large and hard pus blisters, and are located according to the amount.
And if it is due to wind (or风气), you feel suffocation at the throat, and the veins so that you observe whether their appearance resembles blood from an artery, or a vein, or wind. If you must leave the treatment alone. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in chapter on abscesses, concerning arteries and veins.
And if it appears to be near the intestine or the bowel, then you must instruct the patient to bleed his liver and ensure that he lies fully straight, then pierce through all around the belly; then instruct them to lie with their body between your hands, Then go straight to the area where you marked on all parts of the body, then cut half of the abscess above each major curve;
then cut half of the abscess laid out over the binding, and place your index finger in it, and examine the intestine; If you find it has been tied up by the bellybutton, release it, and push the intestines forward beyond the stomach.
And if you come across the kidney, take hold of it at the root, and remove the excess.
And if it goes against the artery or vein, go straight down through them and then come back to your task; take two needles and push out two long threads, and place these two needles inside where you pierced in a cross pattern.
Then pull the abscess up with four fingers on top of the needles and if you see anything, remove the needles; let the wound heal on its own until it dries, and bury the dead flesh by itself. When it becomes subtle and solid, then you should treat according to what is needed, and incise the abscess as we have said.
When it becomes subtle and solid, then you should treat according to what is needed, and incise the abscess as we have said. And remove the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound according to what is needed, and sew the wound.
and the ulcer
We have discussed the appearances of the ulcer and how to handle it with medicines, and how to avoid iron treatment; let us speak of the ulcer that is in the marrow, and there is great caution needed in its treatment, as the ancients said. If the ulcer is in a place where you can scrape it out, like one on the breast or in cooking utensils, and other similar places, then you should remove it entirely when it's just starting; but if it's large and old, don't attempt to touch it, because I have never known anyone to recover from such ulcers; no one ever recovers from them in front of me.
And the works, when it is in place or can be taken out, as we have said, you must purge the patient of black bile only once; then let a surgeon treat him if he shows signs of fullness, then remove the black bile to where it needs to be for surgery. Then wash your hands and hair thoroughly everywhere without leaving anything behind; and let bleeding occur completely while you keep pressure on the area with your hand or nothing else, and if the bleeding goes against the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize until the wound is cleaned; then treat it again until he heals.
Regarding dropsy (edema) We have discussed the appearances of dropsy in division, and how this water assembly is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is treated with iron: it only refers to these two; and should one not use iron in these two conditions: these being tympanites and yposarche, because they are deadly things; therefore when you treat this dropsy appearance called 'dropsy' with medicine, and if the disease doesn't improve with treatment, then check if the patient's condition is weak or if he has any other disease apart from dropsy, such as abdominal distention and similar conditions; if iron should not be used in these cases because there might still be doubt; and when you see that the patient is very pale and has no other disease apart from dropsy, and isn't too young nor too old, then you can proceed: Lift the patient straight up with your hands, and have them press their belly as they drink water at the lowest part of their foot. Then take the thorny spike according to this form: And make it 2 inches long at a pointy end, but do not make it so deep that when you insert it, it cannot reach until inside the intestines upon insertion, and cannot be pulled out;
Then look to see if the dropysis is beginning near the intestines: if it seems that you need to cut through in this area about 3 inches from below the belly button; and if the dropysis is due to liver disease, then make your cut on the left side of the belly button at three inches. And if it's due to gallstones, then do it on the right, and it must not let the patient lie on the cut where excesses might flow into that weak spot.
Then pierce all the skin with the tool and pull it out, lifting your hand to place the thorny spike between the skin and flesh as you would scorch at the size of a fingernail or around that; then pierce the flesh until the thorny spike reaches up to about an inch from the top, this is the width of water, then remove this tool which has been described in detail. It resembles a thin silver cane, made of iron or brass and is light in weight, with one small point on each side; on one side, there are three points; and on the other side, another point and again on another side; and you shape the shoulder as if it were a feather, this is the form of incision that writers describe when they carve out feathers.
At the top is the liver, so that when the instruments come to the water, they now descend on the instrument; empty it then either half or one third, for if you empty more than it should in this hour, by chance the patient might die from the release of his spirit due to the weapon's action, or he could faint, or he approaches death.
but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the virtues indicate in the patient, and their pulse; then move the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held now for the anesthesia which numbs the pertus that is on the syphilitic lesion, as I have spoken about, that you pierce this way; then begin using the instrument again another day, if you see the patient suffering from this one, and draw a small quantity of water.
Do this each day, and refrain from drinking as long as there is no remaining but a little of the water. And if you doubt about the patient, leaving more water, if the treatment for burial or sand becomes hot, and by much sweating or bath and in sunlight, and if it stains with drinking; and treat with drying medicines until he has recovered, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after removing the water, as I said before.
Regarding the stoppage of the penis No child is born without having testicles in the penis, or if they are small, or if they do not occupy their proper place. If it happens that he has to pierce through all .i. very fine spatumile according to this form: then put one .i. very thin clo of plonc and tie it and keep it like that for .iij. days or iiij. days, and when it wants to urinate, if you remove the clo, it will urinate, and then you put it back again; and perhaps this does not happen because the urine that comes out does not leave the clo closed. If the testicles are small, if they use a plonc clo medicine, as we said before, it will enlarge. Those who do not have their testicles in their proper place are blind, because no one is born with testicles at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot conceive either due to the matter being unable to reach the prostate, and this is a bad disease.
And the way to do this is for the patient to lay on his back, then lift the head of the penis and the scrotum as well as large as a feather's tip, so that the bits are spread out in the middle, just like it should be; and beware of bleeding which occurs many times, and if it happens, stop it with the one who stops blood flow, and treat the wound until it heals.
The boils on the penis Many times pustules appear in the penis, and there is a sight of unpleasant appearance; and among them, some are malicious and others are not. It's necessary for you to take .5 ounces of these carefully, extract and cleanse them all, then place moistened cotton with Egyptian ointment on it; after that, cure it with diafinicon ointment until it heals. And if the boil is malignant, changing color and discharging pus, it's necessary that you apply a cautery to it. Once it's applied, and if the boil is in its early stage with the tip of the penis involved, and some part inside the skin and another outside, it's necessary that you remove the boil which is within first; and once it has healed, then treat the one that extends outward. For when you treat them together, it won't ensure the soundness of the penis head and cause blackness and corruption in its tip and around the urinary opening; so it's necessary to remove all that turns black and corrupts, then cover with a dressing made of honey and flour from walnut shell extract and lime, then continue other treatments until it becomes healthy.
And when blood leakage happens, it's necessary to apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cautery should be applied in two positions together: namely, during bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then it's necessary that you use a stick made of opium and make the patient urinate while holding it, allowing the patient to pass urine among themselves. And when the hair is trimmed at the tip of the penis for those who haven't been circumcised or because of wounds or abscesses, then it's necessary that you sear with one tool made of hair until all ligatures are released and ensure that the head of the penis is freed from all sides;
And if it's hard to discuss this matter, then you should sear the opium and one small point at the head of the penis and skin; then cut properly between them, and I place one fine linen bandage in cold water so that it doesn't dry right away.
Regarding circumcision
Circumcision is not just about cutting off continuation like other wounds; nonetheless, when we perform this work of our own will and on infants, it's necessary that we do the best job and the lightest for their health.
I say that the old did not refer to circumcision of their children, for they did not practice it in their laws, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
But I have wanted the majority of the masters and the nobles who practiced circumcision within a day or two after birth, and throughout the entire foreskin; it was necessary that they use two threads because there are two layers, and by chance one might use these above and the other below.
One receives it from the head covering, and the pain is doubled, and at the dislocation where there is a doubt in its direction, the point of the limb; and at the dislocation of the nail by chance escaped the blow, and went off work, and many times grow thus that they do not need dislocation and I have wanted.
In dislocation that is made with force, I found the advantage of experience, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
But when you press your hand, if it cuts equally in .i. all around; but let the threads be well woven inside the skin; and let the method of the first operation be such that you make the child think that you are only tightening the thread inside the penis up to this point, and then proceed to work it in every way possible; Then place it straight between your hands and redistribute the strength between them or under your feet that the child cannot see, nor any of the instruments; then guide your hand to the penis and blow or hold, and pull upwards until the head of the penis is inside. Then clean it well of the debris that has assembled, then tie the head with a double thread, then secure it by .i. inch to another .i. length; and keep it at .ij. inches through the second layer on the scrotum and on the thumb index finger, and place between the .ij. threads, then lift the hold quickly and pull out the head of the penis.
Then place it straight between your hands and redistribute the strength between them or under your feet that the child cannot see, nor any of the instruments; then guide your hand to the penis and blow or hold, and pull upwards until the head of the penis is inside. Then clean it well of the debris that has assembled, then tie the head with a double thread, then secure it by .i. inch to another .i. length; and keep it at .ij. inches through the second layer on the scrotum and on the thumb index finger, and place between the .ij. threads, then lift the hold quickly and pull out the head of the penis. Then let the urine flow slowly and gradually, for it is a remedy; and apply powder here and there on top of the powder, one strip glued with a beaten egg yolk tempered in pink water, mixed with rose oil that is fresh and well-prepared, and leave it like this until another day, and treat with other treatments until it is healed.
The method for performing the operation of purification is as follows: both ends should be held firmly and should cut straightly, and they should make the ends as long as an equal hand.
The mistake of the world's creation happens when the kidneys inside move during an incision; hence it is necessary to extend them up to your nail, so that the kidneys make an abscess; and do it evenly, and if you cannot hold it up to your nail, then use tweezers, and then do it.
And if they penetrate for three days, and what is below the penis becomes swollen, leave it until the pus from the abscess subsides, then lightly scrape; do it as much as you can move, and avoid touching the part of the penis, for that will not harm him.
Then treat the wound with powders as we have instructed in our treatment of powders, and if you move beyond the kidney too far, and it goes above, it will do no harm; thus treat it, as we have said, until it heals.
The retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to stone formation, or blood clotting, or blockage, or a formed mass, which are what we have discussed in the division;
And when the urine is released and you see that there's retention due to the stone in the ureter or at the bladder neck, it is necessary for the patient to have their legs bent. And they should place their feet under the back, and extend their abdomen from above the back part, and restrain the patient so that their lower body can move as much as possible; and then forces are applied to the bladder's neck, pushing the stone upwards due to which urine is released;
And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels intense pain, it is necessary to apply extraction with all the instrument which is called "syringe", of which this is its form: and make it made of fine and light wire, like a bird's feather; and let it be the length of a palm from half its length, and very fine at the tip.
And the way to direct urine is that you take one double thread, and tie it around one end of a piece of wool or cotton at the head. Then put the head into the needle with the string inside; remove any excess wool until it fills up to the top of the needle. Then coat the needle with oil or butter, and add egg yolk, and place the patient on one seat. And you wet the bladder and penis with olive oil and water.
Then gently insert the needle into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis. Then bend the penis upwards towards the anus. Next, place the needle before and around the bladder up to the point where urine is about to flow out, and this must be done according to this order because whoever guides it goes in the wrong direction; then pull the thread out slowly while pulling on each piece of wool one by one, and the urine follows the thread. Then empty the urine and correct its flow.
And repeat the process until the bladder is emptied, and make sure to guide the patient properly.
About diseases of the bladder
When burns or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction has assembled there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, if make all the tool which is called 'clepsydra', and this is its form:
She is closed, and if it has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and let there be a channel through which medicine can properly fill the penis without addition, so that if moisture needs to be treated, it can be expelled when necessary;
And when you see the medicine flowing into the bladder, place the catheter in the moisture and pull it towards the one pulling it out; if the moisture can be pulled by the catheter, then firmly apply pressure on the pulling end; if the moisture enters inside, it will come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
And this is the form of the subtle bladder stone that one treats with catheterization: thus:
And it is made of silver or iron, and the head is higher up; and directly above one kidney or between them lies the urinary stone; then take a lamb's bladder and put in some moisture to be used for catheterization, then tie it between the two kidneys with a good double thread, and heat one end of this moisture on the fire; then place the urinary stone head in the urethra, then press your hand onto the bladder with all the moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it, then puncture it smoothly around the edge. Then insert a strong thread into these punctures, then join the circle together like joining one plate to another, and place inside what you see that is liquid, moisture and water, and bind it in the device; do this as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
from the stone
We have discussed in detail the methods of stone dismemberment and extraction together with medicines; we also spoke about the differences between stones that are small like raindrops and all their signs, and when to open large stones; and I will explain this clearly and briefly for you.
I state that stones which are small like raindrops in the bladder often occur in children, and this is a sign that an infection has jumped into the bladder similar to how it jumps through its delicacy; open the urethra, rub the painful areas of their penis, and let them urinate many times, then rest; and note these urinary jumps; and for a while after these jumps, the treatment of children is light until they are four years old, and becomes much more troublesome in the elderly, being in between childhood and age; and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to clean the body through urination in order to extract all the waste that is inside the intestines. For it does not once try to remove the stone.
Then take hold of the patient by their feet, and lift and move them downwards, so that the stone descends to the base of the bladder, and emerges no more than once from its upper part; then have them sit between your hands with their feet placed below, such that the bladder is fully sloping downward; then inspect and touch it from there.
If you feel the stone in space, now hurry to cut on the stone. And if it doesn't urinate upon touching everywhere, moisten your index finger of your left hand; if the patient is female, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and fully grown; and push into its base, inspect and touch the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, remove it from the neck of the bladder; then press upon this finger, and push outwards along the line where you see to cut.
And command the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to stretch up the testicles with his right hand, and with his left hand hold the skin over the testicles at the part where you will make the cut; then push out the spermatic cord, of which this is its shape:
And cut between those who are between the lungs and foundation, not in the middle but at the edge of the left lung's cavity. And stand straight on the stone, and place your hands either on the foundation or against the stone wall, and make them fit through so that it is broad outside and narrow inside according to the size of the rock, not too large;
By chance if the press is where it's at the foundation, that it can jump out without effort; and know that there are parts of stone with angles and edges: if they're meant to come out; and if in other parts it's under, resemble a hazel nut, and round, whose exit is light.
In the sky where there are angles and edges, make the opening larger; and if it doesn't jump out, then you must force it with the tongs which resemble a file at their end, to strain the stone so that it doesn't escape; or you drill under it .1. small thin curved tool; and if you can't devise this way, then widen by one inch the slightly pointed tool, and if it's smooth, you strain it with vitriol;
And if there are more than one stone, first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut upwards, then force on the tool, and do so with smaller stones after if there are more. And if they are very large, it may be necessary to make a larger incision. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or urine comes out immediately through it that the legs cannot stitch; but nevertheless strive with the force or on the removal tool until you remove them piece by piece;
And when you have completed your work, apply the incision with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood, then tighten it up, and place over it one wet bandage in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water to soothe the hot abscess; then have the patient lie on their back until the third day.
And when you release the tension, make sure to lift it with oil and water well, then apply a diapering ointment and a basilicon ointment until it is healed.
And if pus comes out in the wound and corrosion, and blood clots in the bladder, causing retention of urine, which is known to behave like this without jumping along with the urine: therefore you should treat the wound, extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and damage it;
Then heal the wound of water and salt and earth, and help it in all the ways you know, until it is healed; and it must be that every time you treat him, you tie both his thighs together, and apply the remedies on top of him.
And if the stone is small, and it's located where the penis leads and stuck inside, causing urine to not be able to come out; then treat it as I have described, by cutting multiple times, and excuse yourself for this treatment, because I already know of a successful method in this way.
Take one iron branch according to this shape, and have it fixed at three points on a stake:
Then take one thread and tie it around the shaft of the stick so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the iron branch into the shaft gently, until it reaches the stone; and twist the iron branch with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if urine comes immediately, then press your hand on what is left of the stone that is inside the stick. If it breaks immediately, and with the urine, and the patient feels well;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie one thread around the stone and another above it, then place the shaft in between the two threads where the stone is, then push forcefully, and remove the threads, and clean off the congealed blood from the wound; and treat until it heals.
From the stone of women
It happens that stones are found in women's bodies, and if they occur once, it requires special care, and is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows how to reveal herself through tears, even when she is chaste.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well versed in this art of surgery; and the fourth way is that the stone in a woman's body is more forward than a man's stone, for which reason it requires a deeper incision, and great fear there is.
And if necessity requires this, you must seek out a competent midwife, and on her knowledge lead the way. If she does not find such, rather than one wise woman; and present someone well versed in women's life, or a woman who knows part of the art, and instructs them to do what you command about investigating the stone;
And look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin: then she should thrust her womb or base and seek for the stone; and if she finds it, force her against its base, and advise that she thrusts her womb or into the sickness, and presses her left hand on the bladder in shape.
If she finds it, it is necessary that she move it from side to side as she enters the bladder until underneath, as long as she comes to the root of the thigh; then press against the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the penis, where it becomes a little swollen, and feel the stone in this part; and do not move her womb above the stone or under it, and be careful with your first small action.
Then press the root in the waist, if you feel the stone increase the wound until the stone can emerge forcefuly, and know that many kinds of stones are: that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have grooves. And understand their appearances to know the outcome.
And if you do not find it, place sulfur on the point and hold for an hour until the sulfur is burned through; then return to your task, while the stone remains hard, and prepare with the instruments I instructed you about in the removal of stones within you to assist you in your work.
And if you do not find it, and it is that an artery has been cut, apply the powder to the point and hold firm with threads and needles, and do not start again, but leave the stone undisturbed so as not to accidentally kill the patient; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the limb is restored, then return to your work, while the stone remains hard.
regarding fatty hernia
Gelatinous mucus is nothing else but a gathering of moisture or white pus, which exists within the coat of the kidneys, that contains the egg; and it's called 'pus', and there isn't any proper time when it's properly in the membrane of the egg if one considers there to be another egg. And this is the skin under the kidney containing the white pus we've mentioned; and it doesn't have its own space no.
And the creation of this gelatinous mucus comes from weakness that affects the kidneys, and spreads that substance.
And it doesn't come at all from hitting the kidneys, and that moisture has many colors: or it becomes yellowish like jaundice, or without redness, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more frequently.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is or white and opaque as we have said, then the pus is present, .i.e. long like an egg figure, and does not open through the veins, because there is moisture everywhere inside.
And if he has moisture in the proper tissue, then the pus is present with part of an egg, and based on this assumption it seems that there's another egg;
And if the moisture is between the skin of the veins and the white as said, you will feel it well; thus when you see the color of the moisture, try it on the entire square inside, from which the form was just described. Following this then, who comes after the introduction, judge by what is inside.
Following this then, who comes after the introduction, judge by what is inside. And when we cure it with iron, the patient must be treated according to our ability and the strength of their body; then let them sit on their back, on something slightly elevated, and place wool beneath them;
Then sit to the left side, and command the attendant to sit on the right, stretching their arm out along one of the two ribs towards the kidneys;
Then take the spatula and scrape the skin of the kidneys between them from head to tail until past the elbow, making a straight cut along the skin of the kidneys up to the white flesh, and gently burn it with your skill;
Then make a hole through the moist skin of one and a half inches wide and remove all the moisture. Then put your fingers in it, and position the wet cloth upstream from that point; but do not touch the hair rootlets, only the moist skin. Carefully scrape everything or piece by piece off his chest until you do so skillfully, otherwise the water will return.
And if the egg jumps over your work, then reset it in its place as soon as you have completed the water treatment; then join together the two halves of the hair rootlets with stitches, and treat it just like any other wound until it heals completely.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie up the vessels that are suspended, in case there's bleeding; then operate on the groin until under the suspension point, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said before.
And if the wound is made up of two joined parts, know that they are two branches; if you handle the other part in the same way as you did the first equally, then let the blood out and place wet wool in the wound smeared with rose oil.
and place another layer of wet wool in wine and oil, and apply it over the two wounds, then cover with folded cloths, and bind them on like this across the entire bandage.
Then take two cloths, and fold them with rough wool according to this pattern, having them joined by stitching in the waist of breeches, and one of the shoulders lays on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the arm's part; and the other double head on the two angles, and have everything assembled in the loop of the garter.
And never is this treatment of cautery with the size of iron, and you should take one fine fire cautery, and peel the skin off the joints, and heat it up as we have said, so that the white fluid contained in the water is revealed;
Take the cautery according to this shape, and pierce the white fluid at the joints, and burn it with this fine fire cautery:
And cut the skin in all manners that you can, until you remove everything; and make sure the fire does not touch the egg; know that this work is more beneficial; and be careful of the bleeding from cuts, and know how to manage the opening of veins;
And if no obstacle occurs to you, or discharge of pus or bleeding or any other issue, then treat according to what hinders you, as was said previously.
And if the patients are afraid and do not wish to undergo this work because of its horror, then perform a puncture, as I have told you, and it is that when you are well assured by the meanings we have said that watery moisture lies there.
And make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part under it at the entire pus-filled area, and make the puncture long across the core; and let the exit of the pus be wide enough so that all the liquid can come out.
And place cotton on the site, and secure it, and leave it so that any pus drains out, then treat until the wound heals completely;
And if the white cloth does not allow water to escape from the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary for you to insert a feather or the tool used to treat the water of ydropiques, as described previously; and make the wound wider by about an inch. And know that the water returns and gathers after about seven months or eight, and when she has gathered like before, in this way her days will pass.
regarding the abscess of the testicles
Know that in the section of this branch there are several ways to act, because I believe it's better to leave it alone;
And I will tell you about the operation and the appearance of the abscess.
So, I will say that many abscesses come from horns or in animals; and this happens by chance.
This is to know by excess of sharp acidity and fever which spreads in the animal's body or through impact.
And the color of the abscess is similar to that of the horn; and there is no pain found, it is an abscess filled with pus.
And by chance there may be one abscess filled with blood and pus, and of a reddish hue, and it does not come from the heart or inflame veins.
When it comes from the heart, if you know by the location of the abscess heat, when you press it with your fingers; And it is not right for you to touch it.
That which is made of swelling veins can be known by its position when touched with your fingers,
And can do very well on this manner, and on other similar cases; And you should make the cut of the cord, then place the egg on top, and press hard with white force at this spot, and release the suspension from all sides of the egg.
If the egg is already stuck with these newly born ones, then you should remove the egg, and do it like this.
And if it's towards the white or in that which is inside the veins, then you should release all this tension, and do it round-like.
And if the beginning of life is behind or near the tail, it is necessary for you to grasp it completely and remove the egg, as we have said.
And when your operations are completed, apply greasy oil and rose water to the wound, then continue other treatments until it heals.
regarding the abscesses of the kidneys
This is an abscess enclosed in an envelopment resembling one and a half loops, with the inflammation of the kidneys, And if the patient groans when they move;
And the treatment for this disease is similarly long and arduous.
Yet we will tell you about his work, according to what the old ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated stool, then support them with the ligament of the kidneys under your hands, In every part surrounding the penis, and the glands under their control, and stretching them into form;
Then cut through the deep channel broadly crossing over the veins, until they are exposed,
And then burn from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples;
Then I stick a needle with two threads attached to it, and tie one end of the thread to the first place where the needle has gone in, and tie the other end to another point immediately; Then cut them directly in the middle, according to the length of the body, and treat the corrupted moieties;
Then treat the wound as with others or use a bandage, so that no liquid escapes and allows one of the kidneys to grow.
because with this there is no harm, and if all vessels are affected, then it's necessary to treat the kidneys throughout the vessels. so that the kidney does not lose its growth due to cutting of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot assist each other.
from the rupture of the uterus The events of this branch occur through the division that leads to uterine rupture, or an expansion on the abdomen in the area of the kidneys, because the intestines descend from that rupture towards one of the testicles;
And this rupture is either due to uterine rupture or the expansion of it, and these two methods of animal causes occur: through beating, jumping, barking, lifting the lump with force, or by similar actions;
And when it is due to uterine expansion, symptoms occur gradually and over a long time, not coming suddenly; And it is that the pus is even up to around the front, because the syphilitic affects the intestine.
And the symptoms are when it's due to the division of the syphilitic disease, causing a sudden pain at the beginning, and there appears pus in various forms near the skin, because of the release from the intestine and the body's response to the syphilis further down.
And the glands often descend with the intestine, and are retained within, causing great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
And in these iron cures for fear, because one should avoid them.
And the way of operating is that you command the surgeon to guide or lead the knife deep into the wound where the organ resides, if it can fit inside; then sew it up around its neck. With your hands lift the buttocks;
then stretch out the belly above, and cut all the skin from the genital area as long; then cut through the waistbands with inches according to how you need to open the wound, and make them such that they can easily come out;
Then strip away the scrotum which is under the skin of the testicles, until the white part of the scrotum is exposed completely;
then insert your index finger into the one that surrounds the testicles, into the one that is between the white scrotum which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second testicle,
and remove the one behind the egg, and between the second testicle; and then move with your right hand inside the pouch of the testicles, and position the white scrotum at the top of your left hand, and lift the egg towards the waist; and command the attendant to extend the egg upwards, and release the one that is behind the connection;
And ask about your hands if there is any part of the intestine wrapped or white, thick and hard, and if you find no such thing, hold it back at the stomach;
Then take a needle or it be one large thread made of ten threads, and hold it in the posterior part of the white, thick and hard area, which is after the skin of the anus; after cutting, then clip out the parts that appear from the threads, until there are four threads. Then join them one above the other in a manner of a cross, and bind the white thick area, as we have said that it is around the skin of the anus, with a strong thread of two parts; Then wrap the ends of the threads around them and bind them firmly with two parts, so that none of the needles that are threading through cannot enter into them, preventing any abscess formation; And place the bandage in a straight line according to the first long length of two fists from that point, and after these two bands allow for some space which is about at the center of your chest near the navel, the size of one fist;
And after all else according to the roundness that the egg bears; then cut in the area near the skin of the belly, until the cord and the baby's head do not move, as we said earlier.
Then apply wet wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and apply the bandage that we have described. And once the white part of the belly mentioned has been incised, after the cut, by concern for bleeding, apply cautery.
For this happens many times, and let the string hang until it breaks by itself; and if it does not fall in time, then raise it with hot water, and place upon it what we have said, until it breaks.
Then continue treating the wound with other remedies, until it heals completely.
of fatty hernia
In this branch I never see anyone who dares to perform the iron treatment.
And the old ones said that it is done like a branch assembled together with a twist, in such manner that you tie the vessels after trimming them lightly over the spot.
then cut me too, and treat the abscess of him who works, until the vessels bleed; and treat it in such a way as we have said, while he is still alive.
Never come to rupture within the abdomen, as we said, and open their insides; and do not allow any of the intestines to escape in the process, and if they do escape a little, repair them immediately;
and still, if it stays too long at this point, suspect the wound or the abscess, especially when the intestines start to come out;
This happens through the expansion of the sycophant which is at the angles, as we have said, for it has been expanded, then softened and swelled up his limbs and opened.
And the treatment is done with cautery, as we have mentioned before; and it is also cured in this way by iron:
And if the patient lies on their back between your hands, then lift their shoulder from the swelling according to its size as large as two fists;
Then remove the sycophant that is under the skin where it follows, then take its place and put it in the open area of the sycophant.
And he presses at the bottom of the belly, then cuts the two that appear from the symphysis above the navel, and cuts each one separately.
Then extract the part of the ribs, and do not touch near the symphysis nor stretch the membrane to anything else, just as I have shown you in treating the removal of intestinal worms;
Then treat it using wound healing methods. And when you clean the wounds, if you cleanse and treat the wound until it heals.
The umbilicus is constrained and does not show up in the incision, and the cauterization is practiced in this area, and closer to salvation.
from the softening of the skin around the anus
Many times the skin around the anus becomes soft in some people, due to the softening of the contents inside and it is something to be seen; when you want to treat it, one should let the patient lie on their back, then take off the softened skin from the natural skin. Then join the two flaps together at a suture point, and if necessary, sew the excess softened skin in three or four sutures, or firmly in two. Then cut between the seams, and treat the wound like any other, until it heals, and then remove stitches from the skin that has been treated.
with chastity
Know that chastity is prohibited in our law, and because of this I would prefer not to speak about it in this book; and they are necessary only for two reasons: one being that the master needs to respond when someone asks him about it and how to treat it; and the other because we often need to apply chastity to some animals to help us, such as sheep and goats and cattle and others. Thus, then I say that chastity is done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision. When we do it through attraction, let the animal bathe in hot water until its anus softens and becomes wet; then take hold of it with your hand until it recovers and you no longer feel it. As for the tail whipping, you should mark the animal, press the anus skin with your left hand, then tie the scrotum, and treat each testicle separately when they have been well scraped; and leave no small hole or the subtle hole that is located in the veins; this method of chastity differs from the one done by attraction because there might be something left behind in the anus due to attraction which makes the animal lustful; then cure the wound until it heals.
Concerning hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites can be divided into two ways: one where between the two openings they are as in nature for a woman, having hair, and sometimes excreting urine. And another way is like in women, with something above the wrist resembling a penis and two openings. And in treating them you take all the joined parts, and treat them just like other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of the openings, there's no treatment needed.
Of the pustule
Tentigene is a joined spot on the natural body, such that it's too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this needs treatment. It is necessary that you color the excess of the tentigene with your thumb or underarms, and remove it gently; and don't clean it too much so that bleeding doesn't occur, then treat it again until it heals; and from another spot that arises at the mouth of saliva, and eat, and by chance burns, and resembles a cow according to its appearance, and for this they called it the old 'cow disease'. It is necessary that you remove it like we said about tentigene, and treat it until it's healed.
Of the cautery by fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Erratic is when the nature of the woman isn't fully known, or if there's an excess or deficiency; it's natural by birth, or as accidents happen through illness that has come upon her; or due to bodily fluids being joined improperly, or owing to subtle or thick syphilis, and this occurs in front during marriage, on the ribs, underneath, wherever it may be; and one must understand its conception, childbirth, and sometimes floral reproduction; knowing this requires knowledge of the midwife. When the abnormalities are noticeable and apparent, they appear near your fingers or thigh area. If it's due to subtle syphilis, and it is close by the two lungs, then hurry, do like this: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman on her back, spread out her legs; then form the two lungs until the subtle syphilis is reduced, covering the abnormalities completely. Then take wool and fat in oil, put them over the area, and let the woman rest each day so that it doesn't bond. And if the syphilis is hard and thick, you must cover its appearance as if it were a leaf of rosemary. If the abnormalities are due to born flesh, then suspend her on her stomach and cover; use bandages with blood-stopping medicines such as arnica, dragon's blood, incense, all together in abundance with eggs; then make a plaster wide enough so that the wound can't bond; do this for an extended period, and cover it with a linen tent; then apply other treatments until healed. And when flesh is born during marriage if you need to cover according to this way, provided they aren't ingrown abscesses. For ingrown abscesses in the marriage area should not be touched by fire.
Of hemorrhoids
Wound openings are incisions in veins which occur without due caution and skill; when these wounds grow old they turn septic; we have mentioned in our division the signs, symptoms of this, and I will speak about those that heal through treatment. I state that septic wounds and the pus together, when they emerge from the mouth of the wound, do not show externally except for during treatment with iron. Wounds at the opening of the wound can be felt are those you can treat. Therefore, it is necessary to place the woman in a cool house, then make the pus ready on forceps and the root, then cover the area with medicine that restricts blood flow like cattail and dragon's blood and frankincense, among other things; then bind her feet for an hour, then place them in cold water; should there be bleeding from these, have her sit in a decoction of sumac bark, pomegranate peel, gall nuts and similar substances, then take wheat flour and mix it with honey and garlic, then make one plaster on her back. And if it stops bleeding, that is good. Should this not happen, should she develop abscesses on the back and nipples without cutting; then take wool, knead it into aloe juice or elderflower sap with old wine, and apply to her body.
The abscesses of the womb
Many ways of abscess come in the womb, such as gangrene, puerperal abscesses, herpes, indolent ulcers, fistulas, hemorrhoids and other abscesses I mentioned in our previous discussion. Therefore, it is necessary that I discuss here about the vaginal abscess which occurs in the womb, distinguishing it from those abscesses which harden and persist for a long time; if you see signs of illness in iron operations, observe whether the abscess is hot at the beginning of its appearance, and filled with fever and heat, and whether it turns red when you can see it. So do not rush to pierce it right away, but wait until the pain subsides completely; then have her lie on one side with two small stools under her hips so she is inclined, and support her back and legs together at the sides of her leg; let her knees be spread apart, place her arms under her knees, and bind them well with a bandage; then help the pus spill to the right side of her body, and apply the tool used for opening her womb from which the form comes; it is necessary that when you see this tool applied, make sure it enters about an inch into the womb so that what goes inside does not go too far beyond its place and does not hurt the patient; if the instrument is large, it should be covered with a bandage to prevent it from causing discomfort to the patient; it must hold the nozzle of the instrument above her and cut the instrument. And when the abscess opens up and you can handle it gently by hand, you must cover it with ointment until it dries out; then apply moistened wadding in oil rose or oil green; put the dressing at the bottom of the wound up to the edge of the womb, and place more clean, moistened wool under the womb on her back. Then treat her for another two days with a suitable ointment until she is healed; and every time you lift the womb and wound by enemas of water and honey, or water and cooked roots of lily and long aristolochia, then reapply the ointment. And if the wound has recovered in the womb, it must be treated without iron operations, but treated as we have said in our division.
Of childbirth
The first task for the midwife is to recognize the form of natural childbirth, and the signs indicate when you see the woman's belly enlarge, and desire to smell her: then the child begins to exert force to come out; thus you know that this birth takes place according to its natural form, and occurs from its head, and the second part with it; and when you notice these signs, gently pressing on their abdomen is necessary so that the child comes out soon; for when it descends through its head, the second part accompanies it, and is born free of its excesses by good cleaning; any other birth does not come naturally. For it appears sometimes from its feet, and emerges through force of the body or limbs, or hands, or from her abdomen, or stomach, and is turned by chance around its neck, and by other bad forms; herein it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the forms on how they should be assisted.
When the child comes through its head by natural birthway, and the woman is in severe labor, and her strength is weak, she should be seated on a stool or held by women; then let her rise from this position where fenugreek was cooked, and then have the midwife place between her fingers the small spoon as shown below: And cut the second part, and remove until all the moisture that is within disappears; and pull out the belly of the woman as far as the child descends, and if it doesn't descend, it is necessary to give a woman a catheterization with fenugreek seed oil. Then make her drink and sniff consilium, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: and let the child now come out. And if those two hands force their way out, you should gently pull them in one by one; and if they cannot enter, put the woman on a bench, and lift her feet upwards; then remove the bench from the ground, and cut under the woman so she does not leak during birth. And if the hands cannot enter and the child has died, cut the hands with the knife that was prepared beforehand, extract the child, and pull them out evenly.
from the delivery of the child on her feet When the child comes down onto her feet, it's best to lift her up. and then turn it slowly, little by little,
then place one of the ends and gently extend it little by little.
Can he jump up to his thighs, if commanded, and make him inhale cautiously with the command; if he can jump, may God will it.
And if it doesn't agree as we have said, if you turn it gradually and gradually, until it is according to the natural shape. Because then make it slightly easier.
And if it does not become easier as we have said, take a little of the high quality, and oil from sesame, and ground gum, and melt all together in a single mortar; and place inside and outside the woman's body this ointment, Then have them sit in hot water up to their ribs;
and when they are well moistened up to the waist, give them one spoonful of myrrh, and place it there, letting it sit for an hour; then have them sit on a stool, then make them sneeze and restrain their mouth and nose, and gently rub their abdomen, for the child jumps now. from the position of the child on his knees When the child takes this form, if you place its hands slowly and gradually;
from the birth of the child that comes out with a hand突出 during It is necessary to engineer to bring back the hand: If one cannot bring it back, make the woman stand up and walk;
If she cannot walk, make her lie on a bed for two days, and let her bend her legs at the knee.
then follow the massage I have described;
and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a stool, and then try to guide the baby's hand; and direct the child according to natural form, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to pray until the baby comes out.
From the birth of the child on its neck, it has spread its arms, and its face turned towards the back of its mother's. It is necessary to scrape the baby's hand, then turn it slowly and slowly, and hold it gently;
And when it is level, place it on the natural muscular movement of elevation and oil, as we have said, then command it to move slowly and slowly.
And once you've done this, make her sit on a chair, and command her to pray; and have her sneeze. In this same manner for everything in the second half
In this same manner for everything in the second half When it comes to proceeding in this way through the second half, if you're dealing with the second part at your nail, as long as the moisture is drained;
And if the child begins to suffocate above its face and neck region, start from the belly, ensuring it is not held back, causing the child to die;
Then push the child inside, as long as you have placed it in the correct position, and instruct the woman not to give birth spontaneously at any point.
from the birth of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an unusual occurrence, it just happens. Two are extraordinary things, and they do not live long, if ever;
I know this, when they are multiplied, and are excised by the surgeon who devises them, who is bound to the boudé;
and likewise come out naturally like all beneath, as we have said.
And if they come out painfully, as the treatment as we have said, and let the small parts pass easily, then do what she does quickly. Do it this way so that health may be restored. Of many children
Of many children None are formed in marriage once or twice or three times or four times or five times or six times or seven times, and they are all formed like a child according to the measurement of their glory.
and it should be that the maid knows all this, for by chance something similar has happened to her; do so according to what is appropriate.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman who has lost her unborn child or whose belly is affected, as I explained in the division section, and if it doesn't come out, and you are forced to operate by hand; It is necessary that you know whether the woman is healthy or not, and whether she has experienced any accidents or fears of death;
It is necessary that the woman be on her back, with her hips inclined towards the front, and her legs lifted;
And the minister applies a cure of two parts, wherever it is bound to the bed so that it isn't treated before the birth of the child;
Then rub the mouth of the pregnant woman with oily substances and muskail and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed oil. Then smear her hands with these oils and muskails; Then gently massage the pregnant woman, then knead her for about an hour or as long as she can bear it,
and take care that when the child descends to his head; If they pierce inside his eyes or near his neck or in his mouth or near the palate or under the beard or on the jawbone or close to the ribs.
And if it descends near the knees, then insert or grasp and hold midway along the sides of the body;
It is necessary that you prick the hair with your right hand and place the bend between his forefingers of his left hand, and he pushes with all his hand lightly, and insert the hair into none of these places that we have mentioned until it reaches the empty thing.
Then find another ounce or third one if needed, so that the extractions are equal;
And then make them grow equally by moving on one side and the other, so that they can move out, and let it be that the roots of the teeth hold movement, as shown here:
And if any part remains, if there's a defect in one of his duties where it should be, and you place them in that part, and pull the other part;
And if there's nothing left, place this root or higher up to its place, and do this until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be returned due to being squeezed, It is necessary for you to wrap with one drap (cloth) until it comes completely off;
then apply the paste at the joint of the sole or cut, and thus you should do with the other hand, and on both feet.
And if the baby's head is large and it is stuck at the exit, or if its forehead is assembled in an acute angle, It is necessary for you to push the sharp amniotic sac between your fingers, and make the head and remove the acute angle; when you use the tool which is named 'almidach', its shape comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one;
and in the same way, let them grow to a great size naturally; and then pull out the bones with tongs,
and if the shoulder pops out and is pulled with strength, until it breaks, as long as there's moisture or worse that comes out;
And if she cannot come out, remove it piece by piece as you can.
And if the belly is swollen or under the ribs, it is necessary for you to pierce it so that the moisture can flow out.
And if it sinks in his feet, it is a light condition, and the opening to the mouth of the mare's leg is also light.
And if it protrudes in the belly or on the buttocks, it is proper for you to extract it with about one span covered by your hand; And they empty the belly or the buttocks as long as the moisture is inside.
And if there are other bone-related issues and the head stays in place, So they pull the hand out from under the wound, and guide it until it reaches the opening of the wound. Then he pulls out an ounce or two, and guides it;
And if the mouth of the mare is narrowed by an abscess that has come there, it doesn't suit to work on it, then it is appropriate to administer wet and greasy things; and apply plaster to it, and if there are any moistifying and moisture-retaining substances.
And if the fetus is above the ribs, and you can place it equally, then apply what we have said for the living infant;
And if we cannot do it whole, then cut it into pieces, and leave nothing of the second part.
And when you have done this, apply what we have said about extracting pus in abscesses that come to the surface;
And if blood comes out due to this, then place it in water and restrain, and apply other treatments.
And I saw a woman who had borne one child that died, then she gave birth to another from that same womb, and this other also died. After a long time, an abscess came in the belly, and swelled to such an extent that it opened, causing great pain.
I was called for treatment, and I waited for a long time, and could not tolerate the wound.
I applied strong plaster, and out came a bone, and after some days another one. I was very surprised, for this stomach has no bone.
I thought it must be the bones of a dead child.
I looked into the wound, and by my hands I felt for bones, until the woman was in better condition; And he tended to the woman for a long time like this, and it had improved slightly by her side;
And I have recorded this chapter solely because, when the masters find an unfamiliar thing, they must know how to provide aid.
to bring the shoulder back to its place
Here comes the method of using the presser, which is described in the books; and for each two tornants (a type of joint) you have four ribs, totaling four joints. Otherwise, let the horns be more subtle than the restrainer and make them of ebony or boxwood;
And let the mouth of the fire cauterizer be two inches in width, and the edge of the trees be one inch, and long one and a half palms; and between the two pieces make them two joints of this same cauterizer, which are firm on each side, about half a palm long or slightly more.
And these two joints stay in the edge of the iron by opening when one turns the two horns.
Another form, similar yet more delicate and lighter, should be made of ebony or boxwood according to the shape of the forceps. and arrange them at two shoulder joints, like you see, of long length, and two widths;
and when you observe the opening of the wound with the entire instrument, make the woman sit on one bed, with her arms hanging and her legs spread apart, then fasten the two joints together when assembled in the wound, and hold the tip of the instrument between her breasts; then work your hand on the entire instrument, just like you would with equal tongs, according to how much you see opening of the wound's mouth, until she delivers what she wishes.
This instrument is completely covered and multiplied by its appearances; and when you present them to the work, it becomes faster in execution and taller for their quantity towards people.
If you do not exhaust the instrument that you have equipped, because its necessity is not excusable.
When the second stage of labor is retained during childbirth, it is necessary to command the mother to retain her urine, and then have her inhale through the nose, and you restrain her hands at the mouth and nose; And if she jumps out of this, well done.
If not that, then take two pots, and make a cover or lid for each. Then put in the pots herbs capable of opening the mouth of the wound, such as calendula, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and thyme;
All these herbs, or none of them, be cooked in water on fire or placed in a pot with water. Then put a stick or edge into one pot, and the other into the wound's mouth,
And let the steam penetrate inside the wound until the fumes come out; then make it to exhale, as we have said. If it jumps at the second attempt quickly. And if it remains after this treatment and is not healed, you should instruct her to moisten her left hand with oil of mustard or rosemary extract, then rub the mixture onto herself.
And seek the second bone; and when she finds it, if you ask her to hold it gently and gradually straighten it out, so that none of the joints are disturbed during extraction; But you must move it lightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it comes loose and eases up.
And if there is constriction in the throat of the patient, we have said the treatment for coughing and the fumigation with herbs;
And if it is not of all what we have said, then ensure you do not err in drawing blood;
But it is necessary that the one at the mouth of the vagina, you tie to the thigh of the woman, then apply ointment from the four medicines as an enema;
If it heals and returns to strength; but still, when she is healed if there comes a bad smell in the stomach and head, and discolours the skin.
Therefore it is necessary to use fumigations suitable for this: none of the old have proven that the fumigation of mustard and dried figs works.
The shape of the instrument with which one fumes a woman during retention of flowers and afterbirth is thus:
And it looks like an arrow, and one places the subtle head in the fire, and the ends wide over the flame;
Let there be fumigation above the coals, and let the treatment continue until it is exhausted, then start another one.
To puncture the foundation
Newborns are born who do not have immediate perception, instead they perceive through a subtle sense. Therefore, in the dance, she should perceive through that subtle sense to her advantage, and not perceive it with any sharp sensation, and guard the placement so that it does not touch.
Then place on damp wool in wine and oil, then apply salve treatment until it is sound.
And if you doubt that it won't reoccur, put or insert a piece of poplar wood, and leave it in the person's mouth for days, and remove it when the child begins to walk around indoors.
And no time comes to these sudden injuries of an open wound or abscess; if that needs to be handled suddenly: if you treat it with the method we spoke of for the elm bark.
from the fistula from its base Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are congealed and grow larger; those that come from above the foundation or in the space of two parts,
If there is one fistula or multiple; and when that congealed mass is old, it works and absorbs moisture, yielding white or fine pus,
And there are no times these Persian fistulas; and they're known by the fact that there's either discharge or windiness when the patient discharges, and perhaps in jumping from one place to another.
And there are fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; they reach up to the joint of the knee, and up to the root of the testicles.
And thus one can recognize a Persian fistula at its base, but not necessarily Persian. And you should touch the end of your index finger or base, and insert a slender needle or spider's leg or iron into the fistula when there is no twist.
And if it is twisted, you should hold up a thread of fine wax or one horsehair until you feel the thread or hair at your hand;
And if you don't feel it, and there is no full evacuation of pus, wind, or air, as we have said: Know that it does not harm; if you hasten to heal.
And when the fistula is close enough to the bladder or where urine leads, if it jumps with urine and cannot be sealed by medicine.
If it penetrates up to the knee joint, then there is a vein going up to that point; If there is no winding or the cause of pain is within, then it remains inside and cannot be treated with medicine or ointment.
And for these Persian fistulas there is no remedy but labor, and vain effort of those who interfere with them.
And in those that are not Persian nor ancient, there is hope for healing through iron, as I have found out.
And when the patient lies on their back in your hands; and raise their legs up to their hips, and have their hips tilted towards their stomach. Then insert an arachnid tentacle, or if there's curvature, a diving bell until you know where the tentacle comes from.
If they feel the pain deep inside, it is necessary for you to push your index finger there,
Then you will sense that the tool has pierced it; and know where its entry or the artery or the vein lies beneath your finger, so you'll understand whether it's in an artery or a vein. If there is no disturbance, one cannot examine it.
Yet still, with a little effort, one can often examine some things, but this happens rarely;
And when we assist, if we warm the delicate cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was explained before; and pour heat it entirely in the fistula until it emerges from the foundation; and do this twice or three times, until you know that these heated parts are burnt, which resemble a bird's feather;
and then treat the moistened wicks with grease, until this heated part comes out, then apply ointment to bind and fuse it.
If it is done like that, it is fine. Otherwise, it cannot be treated in any other way;
And if it is attempted to be inserted within, and does not penetrate until the base which is the foundation, and between your thumb and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or of fat, and you can see the fistula in the one who has created this covering deep inside. if the operation is done at the beginning of the fistula, stops firmly before the tent, and then uses the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the tip of the tent.
and removes the tent, and it will fall out; then remove those fat lumps that seem like a bird's feather, and do not leave any remnants.
And if the wound does not heal, cut between you and the organ, then apply fire or an ointment to treat it.
For fire cautery combines two substances: this is to say, the burn of these iron rods arranged together, and the extinguishing of blood and the drying of moisture;
Then the treatment of wet tents involves rubbing or grinding them in butter or on objects until the wax flows out, and it releases the burned parts within the wax;
Then treat the wound with black soldering operations that harden over time, and use dried medicines as remedies.
And when it has been restored, if it is healed and does not recur.
And if a fistula comes just short of the full bottom, and is removed from the body, you should tap on its base or bottom, and inquire about it.
And if you feel the tentacle, and there are two of it or something soft like a string or cord, or it's about to pierce, but there is only a path of entry and hope, by applying one of the three methods:
or you apply cautery as we have said, or you cut it up to the bottom, or if you can feel and remove it like the first one does.
and don't cut too close to the bottom, that you might remove what holds the base, and allow it to be expelled naturally by the body. then the treatment, as we have said;
then the treatment, as we have said; by chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and clean it since it has been cut from under the root, either by mistake or with another instrument pointed. then cleanse that wound flesh which is in the injury as much as you can.
then strive to heal the wound, and keep the hole open in the lower part of the root: if it is easier for the patient.
And no way are fistulas according to this manner: and when you pinch the tent in the fistula, and it's where the base touches the skin above, if you take a tent pierced at the head following this form: And tie one twisted thread in a knot, and pinch the tent throughout the whole length of the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If she is passing through the base in the margin inside, then pull out that thread from the twisted one as you pinch your thumb or base.
And guide the head with thread, and join the two heads together, and hold one against the other, and let it rest for one or two days;
And hold them tight every time until the threads reach these parts that are between the two heads, and keep joining them together.
Then treat the wound until it is healed and clean.
If the fistula does not burst, make an incision in all ways that you can, as long as it is not too deep.
For it is not fitting to do so by laying the patient flat immediately, and then treating them, as we have said, until they are stabilized.
The form of the sharp-pointed needle used for making a puncture is much like this, and it involves cutting; And on another side, no, because you should not touch what you should not touch, as you see here:
Fatigue occurs in two ways: when they are within the foundation, like a piece of tar, and if there are small and large ones, and blood collects at that spot. and one or more of them are outside the foundation and under the root; but those that are out have little moisture.
and also at that spot a little yellow water or a little blood, and they have the color of the flesh;
and for those who have them within the foundation, you instruct the patient to move around in chambers so that the foundations come out and the threads are visible. If you're quick, pinch it with your tweezers, or hold it by your nail, then pull at its roots.
And if the ring can't hold onto them due to their moisture, take them at two inches apart, or with cotton, or from a piece of metal; And pull them off with your fingers, then apply it, and dust it with some hot powders that would be used for a cauterizer; Or you can cauterize them as it is said or as the chapter on cauterization instructs, then treat with other remedies until they are healed.
And if the foundations cannot come out, then direct the patient to perform lithotomy using a sharp and abrasive tool to wash away whatever is on the foundation, so that it can come out smoothly;
And if the patient's efforts are not effective in the opening and if the threads are strong at the foundation, then the treatment should be light; And when you grasp them with your finger or tweezers, remove them, then treat in the manner we have described, until it is clean and it dreads iron incision.
It is necessary for you to suture in this manner: take a twist of thread and put it into a needle, then pull the thread over and make a hole in the needle from another side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle. And if it is broad; and hold the thread in place, then tie the thread, sew with the needle, remove the needle, do this for all others, and leave one out to manage excess blood;
Then place on the base one part of moist lint in olive oil or on a wadding, and place on the base, then instruct the patient to rest.
And leave it until they heal completely, and when they are settled, perform treatment with ointment and other remedies, as long as they are healing.
By drying heat or the base. Many times, there is dryness of bile in the intestines, and due to nature's constraint, and when the illness is old and medicine no longer helps.
It is necessary that you reset at the tip of a spur or on your nail, leaving no moisture; Then apply the heat until it becomes soft as required;
And if it doesn't become soft, repeat the operation with more force than before, until some healing occurs and it is scorched; Then treat him as long as he remains healthy.
with tremor Ants is a small false appearance on the body, and they move everywhere.
And it never lets you feel the vein when pressed, and one also feels its death like a tremor, spreading throughout the body, especially more in the hands than other parts.
And the treatment is that you take a twig from an goose feather or a strong vulture feather and place this stick over the trembling (area), until the reddish circles cover the whole trembling region. Then turn your hand until you grasp the entire stick as long as you cover all of the trembling (area), and place it forward, and root out the trembling from its source.
And if you see fit, do this with a twig of an araign or iron according to this shape, and make it subtle underneath and taut above:
Do not pierce it, for you must hold onto the two ends and apply pressure. And if you see fit, cauterize the trembling (area), as is shown or described in the chapter about cauterization.
of the bladder's structure Never use an argentin or archaut bladder, or one made of melted silver or lead; and never use small or large utensils depending on who they are for.
Therefore, those utensils should be used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, as they are small.
The shape of the bladder is either small or large, just like this:
And there is a protrusion where the belly button is sewn closed, as you can see, and feces are inside piercing it; and on one side of the abdomen there are two depressions, and on the other one.
And let it be that the belly is where I place medications from a beast bladder or parchment, and it should have tiny depressions pierced through it all around.
And place exactly one inch between each depression, then insert two strands of strong, twisted thread into these depressions for ten or twelve times around, and bind the belly as tightly as a goat would. And when the medication is inside, tie it with a strong thread in front of the tool, then stitch it; and this forms a circle.
And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and smear the head with oil or yolk of egg ointment, or something similar, then gently rub it in.
Then, with the surgeons at his two hands together, until he sees clearly, then remove the lump, and lift the patient's legs onto the table.
And if the medicine is to come out, let it escape as much as possible; and if he sleeps through a night, that will be more help.
And if you administer it during a colicky disease of the stomach, and the medicine rushes to escape, then repeat it as long as he is well.
And if bleeding occurs from its root or its source, or from an abscess, even a cyst as small as one child;
and this is the shape of the thin cyst on which the skin is constrained:
of wounds
We have spoken about the treatment of wounds in our division; now we will speak about treatments for hands and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are various depending on how they are made, and where the wounds are made, and why they are made.
The reasons wounds are made include impact from a stone, the size of a sword and a knife, or by a spear or a staff or a mace, or by similar things.
or depending on the location of the body, such as a wound inflicted upon the neck, or the head, or the stomach, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar parts.
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and start with wounds of the head that are simple, because the memory refers to its chapter.
I say that when a single wound occurs or when bone fractures, and the bone is not broken, be cautious if it's due to stone or similar conditions, and the skin has been completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly about abscesses: if the surgeon immediately cleans the head wound even if there is a little blood from the wound, and the treatment goes against the part that was removed;
and encourage the patient to drink plenty of wine and eat rich meats.
And if he doesn't want to undergo surgery, then reduce his food intake, and do not drink wine or eat meat.
And if there's pus coming out of the wound, when you find an abscess, place a wet cotton ball in oil rose water or just oil; or in vinegar that stops bleeding.
And if there's no pus coming out of the wound, when you place it on the wound, if it contains fresh blood throughout and isn't disturbed by air, a powder that I will mention shortly;
And if the wound has been disturbed, apply some ointments until it heals.
And if the wound is large like a cut from a sword and similar injuries, and the edges cannot be brought together by sutures, then join them with stitches, as I will say for abdominal wounds, regarding suture.
If the wound exposes the bone, and there's tenderness, yet it only lasts for a short time when touched, then one must treat; then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh instead of skin. And instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as kidneys and cooked wheat, like chickens, and similar items.
And if you find that the skin is rotting, and it doesn't reach to the bone, then cut out the whole rot, and remove the pus, then treat;
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped with medicine, then cut off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; And if this does not benefit you, then apply cautery to it.
And if the wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should put this powder which joins together like that when the heat of the fire has moved it.
And here is the way to prepare the powder: take a part of frankincense; dragon's blood two parts; powdered galium three parts, and finely ground it. Apply the wound, pressing it firmly until it is well aired and joins with all its blood;
And then it must be properly aligned, and left untouched until it heals, if it doesn't swell; for the medicine is not removed as long as it is healed.
And one should only perform this bloodletting procedure once, not just because of the need for charcoal or dragon's blood, but when the surgeon has cleaned the wound.
And if the surgeon has treated the wound, in that state, one should not apply this powder at all;
Instead, apply some digested ointments, or oat flour mixed with water and honey, until the wound starts to heal; Then continue with other treatments as long as they are healthy.
And if bone breaking comes with the wound, and it is small, treat it with fine tweezers;
And I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
of the wound in the neck
This injury comes from the neck, it is simple if there's no distinction between the neck and the head itself, but if the nerves in the neck or an artery has been severed.
If it's the nerves, then leave the treatment alone and don't put anything that restricts, for it harms the nerves and makes them recede; And don't place anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold and they continue with the head which is among the highest parts.
but use warm medicine instead, such as rose water rinsed with gentle water, and rinse the cabbage leaves also in gentle water, And other stones within according to this manner, and moist applications.
And if the wound is large, one should bend the edges and let it heal until it is clean.
And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, one should pierce them or lower further.
And if the artery is cut and bleeding ensues, one should open it, bandage it, and then cauterize where necessary;
And if the throat's flesh is cut, or the kidneys, and the passage is kept maintained, through which the meat goes, if you make a cut in the kidney over the reed of the throat, and not touch the throat but set it according to its natural form; and then allow for healing, and leave it for some days, then treat with dried ointments until it heals properly;
and if the wound has affected the bone, treat that as well; And if there are bone fragments, remove them all thoroughly if you can, and those that you cannot obtain, allow the wound to heal until it is clean. and make sure the dislocation is corrected and stable.
And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I mentioned. And if there are bones in the wound and it has a sinus, treat it as described in my chapter.
From the wound caused by a spear or knife
If it's from a spear or knife, and the wound goes deep, if you observe that the air escapes through the wound without any resistance from the body: then you know that the wound is mortal;
And if it's not deep and all its blood is fresh escaping freely, then don't delay to put the powder at first hour or don't bind it for fear that the blood might stop flowing completely. And tend to his heart, and rest the patient; but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice daily;
and if you don't have an ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture,
let the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more if necessary; if no convulsions, bad heart tremors, or alone jumps occur; And when you see the good conditions, if you know that the wound is saved. Then cure it with various remedies and other treatments, as long as it remains healthy;
And if it cannot heal properly and heals unevenly, then you will realize that there is an ulcer; treat it accordingly.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut and it's straightforward or worse, or on the back, treat it in accordance with that which comes before.
If it's large, stitch it; and if it's small, use powder, and if it's compressed in the bone, and has fractured pieces, clean the wound, and remove the debris if they are exposed. And if they aren't exposed, leave the wound to heal open, letting ease the extractions;
and for other wounds on other limbs, make judgments as we have said.
about the rupture of the abdomen
The belly depressions are large and medium-sized and small;
From a large wound, once the intestines or the ends of the intestines, through which the invasion occurs;
And the suture is more difficult, and no time matches worse than a small wound compared to a large one,
Because in this way, we can't place the intestines properly inside, unless we put them back little by little. Because when their intestines swell up as soon as they feel the cold, they go back inside more points,
And because of this the patient sweats from the wound, for this is when we move their intestines back to where they belong, like in the case of others two.
Know that there are four ways a stomach rupture occurs:
the two common stitches occur in the abdominal area,
And the stitching of other wounds on the body, and two other types of stitches for their own purposes, are common to other wounds;
And yet, they are more proper with the stitch on the belly, and I will mention each one and explain them.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine sticks out, and when there is something to remove, this can be done in either of two ways: because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm him up in this manner: moisten a sponge or make one part of a cloth wet only in water, when you cook with boiling water mixed with soap and thyme, and let the intestine swell as long as it is perforated;
and after doing this with straining wine, and when it has been cooked, allow it to cool so that the swelling may subside.
And when you see the swelling disappear, moisten the intestine with water or broth that has been cooked and flavored. Because with this there is difficulty at the beginning of things;
and if it cannot enter, they make a small incision with the tool that removes the moirants;
And the first treatment is to have it bruised by the cut, And we should not cut it without great necessity, nor if there's no alternative;
And these are the tools to split them:
if you cut inside the bend and not outside, and see this shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, if you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place, if you can do so, for this requires movement.
When the wound is wide, and it's in the abdominal area, if necessary, heal the patient on their back, And place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the abdominal region,
and also if there is a rupture in the abdomen at one of these two parts. if you understand this, let the part that has been removed be higher than the other;
and thus should practice what I say in large and medium-sized wounds.
For small wounds, use what you are equipped for,
Then have in your hands a minister of pity who heals the entire wound with its hand, And gather the lips; and this is the common method of stitches,
and this is the common method of stitches, and you take one or more needles, according to the size of the wound's width, then leave at the start of the wound an inch in space, and I insert a needle or it has one good thick thread; and pierces the two skin heads with the two bone heads,
then tighten a double thread around the needle of those two parts, then gather together both of the ends of the wound extension,
and then leave an inch of space, and insert another needle; then tie the thread in the same way you did with the first needle, and keep doing this according to your skill with the needles, until all the wound remains restrained;
and have equal needles, both fine and thick, because the fine needles cut all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter well: thus they should be of medium thickness;
And it is not right to pull out the needles too far from the flesh and skin.
And they do not rupture or open the wound before the seam;
Then remove the heads of the needles, so that they do not irritate the patient at night; And place tents or cloths over the joints of the needles to keep them in place; And let them grow until the wound has healed;
And this kind of stitch using needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it involves threading a needle or two.
The second type of stitch is common, And it is that you assemble the two sides of skin and the two sides of bone together on one needle where there is a strong thread in the middle; and when you have pierced these four pieces together,
and when you have pierced these four pieces together, then remove the needle from where you began, in the way one sews linens;
and leave a distance between each stitch equivalent to the size of a small thumb.
This stitch sews up the wound,
and I sew a wound where someone had an injury or stomach issue,
which was caused by a knife cut, and the wound was larger than a palm in size, And if they are of intestines well two palms of great size,
And it was a wound in the middle of the belly. I returned the intestine to him after it had been out for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was healed until fifteen days, and I treated it, and he was healthy.
And when they had judged that he was dying, and this was a miracle;
and did not cure him with ointment, for I was in one place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and changed the gauze on the wound four times a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
And I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing:
Take the needle, and the bottle from the outer part up until it reaches inside.
When she has pierced straight to the heart in the right place, if it hits the head of the syphilitic sore or causes pain or where you have stuck the needle,
and make her pierce from the inner part outwards until she reaches the outer side;
and if you hear that stitch, do it in such a way as the leatherworker sews the skin, And you allow once the stitch on one side, and take it again from another, until the suture is fully completed.
The second method of stitching, as Galen truly described,
If it is like what everyone does, joining the two parts naturally together, And they press one end of the stitch to the other, in this manner:
Prick a needle or take some medicine near the head of the dog, and pierce that spot alone. and let both shoulders move smoothly. then twist the needle, and pierce it from below up to that inner part, similarly with both shoulders being in place;
Then pierce both from the lower part up to that within, in two other dislocated shoulders that are on the other side;
And this is the way of sewing that is moved and the more common one.
The doctors say this word and none testify to it,
One should stitch the abdomen with two needles, or where there is thread in each;
And one must push a needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew buttons;
Know that when the rupture is within the belly, The stitching there is more dangerous than for any other part of their belly.
The judgments about the wound are such as for the judgments of other wounds:
And it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as soon as the art has mixed it, if it comes back into the intestine, and on the skin; then place the powder stimulating flesh,
if it comes back into the intestine, and on the skin; then place the powder stimulating flesh, and if the art has mixed it, apply any available unguent until the wound heals; and clean the thread, and stitch up the cut, and bind it with a cloth. Then treat the wound as usual, until it stops bleeding;
and if you don't have medicine, place some, as soon as it starts to ooze pus, old cotton, and move him twice a day until it stops bleeding.
For you need no other medicines in various preparations for simple wounds;
And if you doubt whether the wound will spread to the main parts of the body, Then it is necessary for you to moisten fine wool in oil that has been heated to a moderate temperature, or in scented oil, and place it inside the joints, and over the elbows;
and if you feel pain or gangrene in your limbs, and such symptoms occur repeatedly, If you use black wine enemas, and particularly if there is already gangrene reaching to the intestine;
And pierce deeply inside, and know that when it comes to the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the smaller ones.
The intestine called 'juvenile' cannot be healed if it is injured, And this is due to the location of the veins and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and its proximity to its nerves.
And if the pus jumps out of the wound, then replace it immediately as with an intestine, while it is still fresh;
and if it is old and turned red or black, then you should bind the part that has become black so that no blood flows there, because there are veins and arteries involved;
then remove the one between the bandage, And have both of those shoulders hanging down from the upper part over the wound up to beyond it for easing the extraction when the thorns pierce through, and the wound heals.
Of the rupture of the bladder
When the intestines are involved, and the wound is small, If it can be restored in any way,
For I saw that someone was pierced or stabbed in the belly with a spear;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, causing both loss of appetite and nausea;
I treated him according to what I knew, and didn't stop refining the treatment until he recovered, and bound his wounds.
And when I saw it fastened [securely], I doubted whether the patient might have pain in their belly; and there was no harm, but remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
and some experimenters say that when there is a small injury in the intestine, it should be bound in this manner: take large thorns, then gather the edges of the wound, And when the bird has opened its mouth, you place it on the two lips,
then place another bird in the same manner as before, until the wound has been completely covered.
And at the wound site. If it burns strongly in the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient,
And one can tie the intestine with a thin thread cut from an animal's intestine,
in this manner: Take the head of this thread-like intestine until you reach the part that is lean, and then tie to the head of this thread-like strand, one inch of fine linen string, then thread the string through a needle and sew the intestine, then reset it in the opening;
and this method of sewing like stitches is solely according to the way of joining and expecting;
And if the wound is big and wide, especially when it's in one of the bowels, if there's no fetus or health issue, because of subtlety.
of a fistula, or where it might be. Know that any wound or abscess, as it matures, is universally called "fistula". And similarly when it is filled with hair and grows inside.
And fistula is according to the white hard bulge of the improperly removed node, or where no pain can be felt, and also has hair like the feathers of a bird;
nor does it ever have clear vision, and at other times thickened vision. neither is it ever too little, nor is there enough at other times;
And I have spoken about it in the section on wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there's no flesh, This is only due to one of the eight causes:
This means, it's because of the weakness or obstruction of blood or pus; or due to its maleficence; Because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, which does not allow for hair to grow; because there is too much moisture; or the joints are swollen, and the substance is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; because corruption is a manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is late for digestion, and its restoration is slow, and it escapes by nature; or there are veins or bones:
and I have shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicine in this section.
It is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistula, which is performed by manual work.
Know that a fistula can occur in all limbs and trunk; because there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the stomach, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs, In the spinal column of the back, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas in this manner are difficult to heal, and there is nothing else but hard work, and lack of knowledge;
and if there is no fistula that does not stop at the point I have said, and you are to complete the treatment, And you will know it, if you take a spider's tent or iron, if the fistula is straight, then touch it;
and if the fistula is curved, look for a subtle snail shell to probe it. for snails bend and move along the curvature;
and if the fistula has no means of hands and you cannot properly search for it with spider tents, if you cleanse using one of the small tubes,
for moisture is limited between one tube and another, and it cleanses;
then carefully probe with your strength, knowing if there is bone or nerve, and feel it all around,
and ask the patient to describe where they feel pain when you press their hand, and determine the exact location.
And when you truly know its location, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the joints that I have told you about, if there is pressure according to what I have told you,
or in any of the joints that I have told you about, if there is pressure according to what I have told you, and when bone has been excavated and the putrefied flesh that is inside; and then continue the treatment until it is healed.
And if the fistula is well deeply opened straight ahead, it must be closed completely from top to bottom as much as you can, Then I apply moistened wicks to the ague medicine, and dab until reaching the tip of the fistula,
Then I apply moistened wicks to the ague medicine, and dab until reaching the tip of the fistula, Until the medicine dissolves what has remained at the bottom;
And then I cover it with clean bandages until it heals;
And if one cannot heal him with this, then apply the cautery as we have said.
And if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then treat it. If a vein or nerves are being harmed or affecting principal members, as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed, and there's corruption and darkness, then treat it until all the corruption has been removed, as we have said; Then the surgeon cuts away the flesh as long as there is sound tissue;
and if it is not sound, cut around it in the same way as before, know that you should stop just at this point:
if it continues and grows to the bottom, continue cutting until you reach the bottom. And remove all the corruption, then reset it;
And if it is like this healthy, that's well. But if not, know that the corruption has gone too far within, and you cannot bring it back; yet there is no other way than to leave it to nature;
And if there is a tiny bone corrupted, you may pull it out with tongs. if you find an instrument suitable for this task, extract it.
and if there are many bones, remove them all, do not leave any behind;
and if moisture opposes this, and there is no fear or danger, If there is heat and moisture and flesh, and frees the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place something that resists putrefaction over the wound, and leave it until the flesh is completely putrid inside the bones,
and then the bones will come out more easily;
And if it's a large bone, like from the leg or thigh, so remove the corruption for as long as the blackness covers all bones, then heal the wound;
and if there is a large part of corruption and it extends up to the bone's surface; If necessary, you should shave and cover it all until decay occurs, and then treat it as long as it is healing;
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in one's leg. so that you can take this as an example and find help for your work.
There was once a young person around thirty years old, who experienced pain in their leg due to an issue originating within the body,
Until the substances reached the leg, and was drained of a large abscess, and there was no reason to open further;
but the doctor due to his zeal opened as much as the abscess allowed, and did not remove much material, and became a fistula, and a great deal of pus was released that all flowed with the body's moisture;
and many doctors spent two years treating him, and there was no wise one in the art of hands,
While I was called to him, and there came his leg and the remedies we thought would cure him, and what ran through the veins with great force; and his face turned red like a child's cheek, and it had a yellowish color.
I set up my tent in one of these veins, and then searched all the veins,
And I found that one was coming against the other from all parts of the leg.
So I hurriedly acted, and made a cut on one of the protrusions until I uncovered part of the bone, and I found it corrupted and perforated; and the corruption was reaching into the bone;
I saw what appeared from the corrupted bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption, only this one that I had taken;
And began to restore the wound using long-term medicine treatments, and was unable to heal;
and then restarted, discovering the bone just as before,
I found that the decay had continued in the bone, and I saw it, and then I took out the bone, and I tried to heal the wound;
but I was unable to do so as long as I copied just one palm of the bone, and I made it go to all its extent, Then he will recover with medicine; and it healed quickly.
and there was no need to start the operation again except for the weakness due to the patient's illness, who could not endure it. and out of fear of death that I had over him. But because of the blood evacuation was frequent, yet he healed completely,
But because of the blood evacuation was frequent, yet he healed completely, And from within the body of the bone comes forth a tough flesh, and it is well arranged and has no harm or opposite effect at all in any part, neither near nor distant.
And extend the head, so that you can pull out the decayed flesh from below. And uncover the tissue at its place where you see silk, making sure the silk does not hurt the tissue; And put a piece of charcoal or a board under the bone to warm up and cover the decayed flesh; And it is necessary to know as much as one can see and feel the decay, and know again otherwise.
And if the bone has decayed, and doesn't open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then uncover the entire flesh; then place one ember over it.
and then apply the healing to each part of the corruption, and make sure the hot iron is long enough to cover the length of the corruption, as we have said;
And if corruption is at the joint, then fix the corrupted joint, and let bone on the other side contain it;
And if corruption is along the continuity of the two joints, then cope it if there's no other way to do so;
And if corruption is at the base of the hand or foot, or in that place near the foot, if it's particularly strong that thing, but still it must be that you inquire about this corrosion, how it has affected you; And clean it in all ways you can, but not if it harms your vein or nerve.
And know that the saw and chisel are numerous, according to the setting of bones and their appearance, and their size and their fineness, and their grandness and their smallness, and their hardness; and for that reason it must be equipped with each kind of tool suited to the work of its craft;
And know that this work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to knowledge of this art. and it will bear witness to the methods of illnesses; so that you can consider the instrument you need according to what is fitting.
with fire The joints hurt either from within, or from outside;
And when you have treated that corrosion by the application of medicines, and if they do not benefit at all, So it is necessary to cover that limb up to the joint where the corrosion occurs, so that the disease does not escape through death, or through malice, which is greater, from the fault of the limb;
so that the disease does not escape through death, or through malice, which is greater, from the fault of the limb; And these are its signs; if the limb becomes black, as though it has been burnt by fire, and after the blackness comes this decay spreading from member to member. it spreads throughout the body; if you hasten with copper,
and if it's due to the impact of certain venomous beasts, such as sea spiders and snakes, etc.
If the corrosion is at the head of the two, then treat it, and do not give it space to come up until the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, if you treat at the joint, so that the corrosion does not extend up to the arm;
And if it goes up to the arm, if you treat with a knife; and if it passes the knife, then it's death. It is not for remedies beyond that of its virtue;
And similarly do so when the corrosion comes or piece: if it comes in the first joint, then treat after another joint;
And if it comes or piece, then treat the entire piece; And if it ascends to the leg, then treat at the knee joint.
And if it comes above the knee, if there is nothing else than for the patient to die;
And the method for covering or sewing a limb is such that you tie it above and below, and stretch one finger with one of the threads down, and another finger with the other thread up, and you open the flesh that is between the two threads to one inch wide, until the bone is exposed;
then you sew or use silk, and place one inch strips of linen from each side, so that the thread does not touch the healthy limb, And to the patient brings another injury and abscess to the feet.
And when blood flow starts as you work, if you quickly cauterize the wound, or you put on some restraining powders; then return to your remedies until the treatment is complete,
then bind the injured limb with a reliable bandage and treat it until it heals properly;
And I will tell you about what happened at one house during my time.
It had a blackness that seemed like the certainty of fire,
And that corrosion came first to his two feet, until it consumed all of his foot.
And when the patient saw the corrosion, they immediately sought to cover their feet, and were saved.
And long after this happened, I experienced a burning sensation in my hand, and it came to me.
And I began applying counteracting treatments after the purification of the body, yet could not stop the corrosion;
and he wanted me to apply my hand to it, but I refused, hoping for a reaction from the substance; I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die. For the strength of his spirit was weak; and he became despondent everywhere, and returned to his homeland. and he raised his hands in desperation, and became sane (possibly meaning he came to a state of clarity or sanity).
and I have only shared this so that one might perform another part if needed.
No abscess ever comes in the inner flesh, and stays for such a long time as to cause a great gathering of pus; And then cut and stab, and have the arrow jump out, and remain with the man's eyes, just like some vessels; And the leather that is above is also as thin as one eighth of a cloth thread. And they do not reach up to the bone or nerve, and such diseases are called "blind".
But if it's so extended that it comes up to the bone exactly, then it is called "fistula";
And in the cooking process, if you peel that skin all over, and similarly when it's delicate, like a piece of fabric; and doesn't swell because of its putrefaction.
And if you have made the skin burn and the corruption hasn't reached exactly, And the skin is thick with flesh, if he treats a catarrh like this:
Look if his breasts are large, and his belly that contains them has a bad smell, Then administer an Egyptian cathartic medicine like this: Take ash, oil, and litharge, in equal amounts, and cook them together in a single pot on the fire, While the medicine remains red, and thickens as much as honey;
And then take of this according to your need, and prepare it in water and honey, and apply it inside the stomach, and keep the body constrained; let the medicine remain for 2 hours, then extract it by rubbing;
Perform this action multiple times, until the breasts are freed and the milk is released;
and not once should you use water from ashes, when this medicine is unavailable, and if you use vine wood ash water instead,
then apply it internally, until you know that the breasts have been fully freed;
And if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water can help. if he uses a syringe of water and honey or has a little beryl mixed in; or you use a syringe of honey and wine that the honey has properties to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes it hot inside;
And when you have done this, and ensured that the chest is well cleaned, if you heat the tool used to cause something to come out in a person's chest,
and when you apply plaster of Paris to it and treat it with oil and wine; or you heat it with some medicines and applications, about which I have discussed the properties or treated of applications;
And if his chest muscles are small, and his throat cannot enter near the bladder, If the opening of metal (presumably a surgical instrument) is slightly widened, and then an Egyptian ointment tent is inserted, If it is made wider like the basilicon ointment, as long as it is widened;
And if the wound is too wide, so that only up to half its length or until the bladder can enter,
And if the point of the arrow is above where it was inserted, then lift it up or down more than it was originally. For when the arrow is straight, let there be no further infection; and if you cannot cover the chest sufficiently as you see, so arrange it in such a way that the arrow goes to the lowest point as originally.
and if you cannot cover the breast sufficiently as you see, so arrange it in such a manner: that the bow moves smoothly downwards, and do not leave anything of the bow hanging; and take consolidative medicines to place under the breast,
And they are on two linen cloths that cover the entire breast; and then place them at points near the ends of the breast, about a palm's width from the first one, then apply some sulfur ointment on another linen cloth according to the size of the area. and place it on the breast to alleviate pain, and do not remove the large linen cloth except after several days once.
And he who is in front of the chest cavity, often removes the bone to remove the organ, Know this about what comes from the organ, whether it's venom or a bit or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not,
And when your medicine has spread in this way and you see the character that jumps towards the front of the chest, If you know that the sickness has already taken root, and approach the health;
and then release it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound, if you change another bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if after many days the stomach discharges an undigested substance, know that the sickness is not cured. And if venomous bites occur after a long period, do not lose hope for recovery of health,
But health approaches. For there are people who delay healing of the heart in their wounds, and others do the opposite;
And if you experience indigestion for several days after taking a potion from the chest, know that the chest does not agree with you;
And if the chest takes longer to open or is far away, adjust your remedies by mixing dry and moist substances according to their qualities; As in transparent softening, because there is a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
Take the ointment diafinit, and apply it with rose oil, and moisten it with old wine of equal strength;
then cook it and use it; and do the same thing for cooked honey that has thickened; when the diafinit ointment is not present,
Take myrrh and aloes and incense, Then add it to gum arabic or leather, and the roots of celestial lily, which is also like cornflour and fennel;
and the roots of celestial lily, which is also like cornflour and fennel; and whether you use simple remedies or compounds: grind them, make into powder, and place it on the honey that I've mentioned, and use it; And if the treatment lasts long, and is not treated with this cure,
And if the treatment lasts long, and is not treated with this cure, Therefore know that corruption enters from the front, and makes impression in the bone, or on hard limbs, or on joints; If the treatment of the wound (fistula), as we have said earlier.
of the abscess under the nail
Pus is an abscess that forms under the skin of the hand's palm. or on the foot, or by chance forms in other parts;
and when it has aged, and if no care is taken, it leads to an ankle abscess, and run and spread as far as the root of the nail, and by chance, it can spread completely;
And it comes to corrosion up to the bone, as long as there is painful stench coming out, and the joint pains in both large areas, and shows a fugitive color.
And when you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit at all, Then you must proceed to the second stage: scrape off all the excess that remains of the nail, Then, after cleansing the wound, apply a cautery to it. The cautery tools are very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the joint is sound;
and when the joint tightens around the muscle, begins to prick it, and irritates it; so you should place the hot tool near the joint so that the heat touches the muscle. and place the candle at the top, gently applying heat to this delicate muscle tissue, And place on the area to heal from the wound medicaments that are hot and corrosive to remove all;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut and treat with force, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed;
And if you see that the thigh bone has decayed, cut and treat it with one or two pieces as was said before, And he heals as long as they are clean;
and if it is infected, and swollen, and it causes great pain, then you should first heal it. then cut the nail near its root diagonally from above,
and be careful not to cut too deep until you reach the flesh beneath the nail, for it would cause too much pain;
And if this happens, place something above what soothes.
You must adjust what is born in the hands of some men by chance and are very muscular, and sometimes it has bone or it doesn't have any nail at all,
And none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in no way due to anything necessary. Whoever is born from any point other than its true origin will not move, And he who is born at the true origin of the joint may indeed move;
The size of that which is well-muscled is so light, in such a manner: Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
The bone that starts at the root of the joint is problematic to cure: hold onto it gently with your fingers.
In the case that arises or should be at the back end, it is necessary for you to prepare the soft tissue up to the bone first. Then, cut the bone with a suitable tool, then treat it until it is clean.
The joints that come together are born or they are suddenly wounded by injury, or by the application of fire, or through similar actions.
If it is necessary that you treat this wound, so that it may be repaired according to its natural forms; Then place between two wet cloths or rags in oil with rose water, so they do not stick together. or you should place between two thin pieces of lead, until their ends are joined, as it should be.
When we are fusing any of its digits with the palm, if you fuse that seam as it should be.
Of low origin
Their veins are thick, wavy vessels filled with superfluous melancholic substances, which affect many body parts.
And more often occurs in legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry things, compared to others.
It is necessary then for you to administer once a purge of gallstone, and then heal it by basilisk.
The treatment with iron is according to two methods: one way is that you prick them and draw out the black blood; And the other method is that you open the vein and drain it completely.
The bathing process is as follows: immerse the first leg in very hot water for a long time until the large vein becomes thin. Then hold the leg against the disease, from above the knee until under the groin; Then cut the vein into one part, or two parts, or three parts, with a width that is substantial,
Then lift and lead the black blood to your hand from one end to the other, as long as enough blood can flow out as much as the disease's virtues can endure;
And then place it (the treated part), and instruct that it be rubbed with meat juices to stain this blackness.
And start evacuating and cleaning when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
The method of treatment for this is as follows: raise the leg near the patient, if there's hair on it, Then immerse it in water, and raise the leg in hot water until it turns red, and the veins will swell;
And if you don't have water, heat it on fire, and then apply it along the vein from its long part at the leg above the knee, or in the ankle area;
Then open the skin with an awl, and burn the vein from each side, until you notice it when you touch it;
and it appears red and black, and when it enters or seems like a white string under the skin;
then pull out the thread until it is raised above the skin, and then pull it with the awl gently,
then apply another layer one third above three inches; then burn the skin near the vein until you notice it; Then lift the bony prominence, just as you did before, and move to another hook, just as you did initially.
Next choose a different size; or more if needed, then lift it and adjust to the second joint of the foot.
Then guide and lift until you reach the second size; then stretch gradually from one size to the next, as long as it can fully release, then adjust.
And if you cannot guide and lift it, insert an awl through all one thick doubled thread, And the practitioner and their assistant prepare for action, and they thrust out a span away, and turn your hand from one side to another, until there's progress; And ensure it doesn't stick, for if it sticks, then one can neither drain nor raise her, which causes harm to the patient;
And when you have drained it completely, place wet wool in wine and rose oil over the wound area; and treat until it is clean.
And if his body is twisted and tangled together as a whole, and he is not laid straight, just as we have said, It is necessary for you to cut it forcefully, but do not cover it; treat it as we have previously described.
It is necessary for you to cut it forcefully, but do not cover it; treat it as we have previously described. The shape of the iron tool used for drilling has a curved edge, and does not cut, to avoid piercing the vein;
And it has a large curve, for if it were slender, it would pierce the vein, but being thick as we have said, this is its form:
From the common vein
This vein is found on legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil without moisture;
and may sometimes appear elsewhere than on legs, and this happens due to rot that comes from beneath the skin,
in the same way that it emerges within the body as worms and snakes, penetrating between skin and flesh.
And if there are signs of the beginning of this vein such as a severe inflammation in the leg, Then it changes the limbs, and begins for blood to start flowing out, like a root of a plant.
When the shoulder is separated, it's necessary to wrap around an object of one and a half spans up to two spans in the middle, and tie it.
and let the leather hang down on the leg, and every time it runs out at the front, you should wrap around the remaining leather and tie it. and if it's too long, cut off a part of it and wrap the remaining leather back on itself, and don't cut its root until all of it has been used. Because if you handle it, it enters into the flesh, and brings about pus and decay or infection at the site, and causes a harmful disease;
By that thing it must be treated gradually step by step until completion, and nothing should linger or continue afterwards.
And in no case when this vein is treated to the length of one handspan, or even to ten times that length. And one man came to me who had it treated over ten handspans in length, and when you handle it, if it takes up a breadth of one or two fingers or is thinner than that, then pierce it until the bottom.
And let everything come out; and make the material inside empty, and apply to it healing remedies for a day or two, then treat it as with abscesses.
And once at this vein apply your hands, and equally when it opens in the joint of the foot, or if the foot, and much is lost, and which goes away quickly; then treat accordingly as we have instructed previously.
Worms that are born between the skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "Bovine Illness", because it often affects the cows,
and a small worm is born between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body going up and down, and it can be felt all over the body when you touch limb by limb, until it reaches the skin where it went, and jumps forth;
And is infected with pus from certain fluids, if snakes and worms and roundworms or pinworms come near the abdomen;
And there is doubt about its illness, for when it travels through the body, and ascends to the head, and comes to the eye, By chance it enters, and destroys the eye; this happens many times.
When you see it being treated and drained, one can only wonder as to when it will end:
So then, it is necessary for you to tie the arm above and below with a strong bandage very tightly,
Then cut upwards and pull forcefully, and if it is correctly aligned in the flesh, you won't find it, If you apply fire cautery there, until it heals;
And the greater discomforts that it causes, are when it goes to the eye, as we have said.
And if you see it approaching or its head near the eye, hold steady over it with both hands, then lift up, and apply force.
It is necessary to use the application of purgative remedies for ailments caused by humoral disorders,
And if there is corruption in meat due to rot.
Of pain that comes from windiness. This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it's a pain that comes to any limbs, and spreads from member to member; and I have seen what I told you.
I was summoned to help a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, where I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and about an inch later, it rose up as high as a worm on its shoulder, Sooner than any other thing, just like quicksilver when it is cut off from another;
The pain leaves the affected area and enters the shoulder,
And then a little later spread throughout the entire body, until it reached the other arm;
Then I noticed that it was spreading within the body as well, just like when I observed it.
I was marveling greatly how she moved from member to member in such a way, for I had never witnessed this disease in such manner before. Nevertheless, I have seen many times that well often moved pain from one limb to another, but I had never experienced it myself, as I see in the case of a woman;
and I thought that was because women have a wet body and their veins are exposed, And through this appears that constrained wind;
and do not become evident according to this reason in those who are delicious, and have moist bodies and responsive veins.
And when you see the treatment of this disease, and if the patients feel pain, if it appears to you in the way we have said, if the wound opens up and down quickly, and then stops until that constrained wind at the body comes out; And apply the cautery to the area; and if you cannot see it at your eyes,
if the treatment for those who dislocate the windpipe, such as stinking pills and pills of sarapin, and similar others.
From arrows
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and the location of their impact on the body.
The variety is such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and spiny, and soldered; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those where there are fragments; and the one that urinates in no member but does so according to two ways: or in the main member, it streams,
or like the brain, heart, liver, kidneys, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When it happens then, indeed, at no place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, becomes apparent: it must be that you are cautious about the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in various conditions; and when that bad sign does not appear and the arrow has not fully exited, then remove it, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow penetrates through bone and strikes the fluid reservoir above the brain, When there is a surgical incision and tension and swelling around it, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and convulsions and confusion in understanding, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes affects the nose or ears; and sometimes impairs speech and voice. and there is moisture around the wound that appears white like pus, and it also seems burned like charcoal.
And if this sign is seen, hold on to the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it's still there.
The sign of the arrow when it exits or pierces through the heart is that it's close to the left breast, and also feels as if it has been stuck into something hard, not empty. And by chance the arrow also moves like a pulse, and there is black blood, and coldness comes with cold sweat, and fainting: Therefore, without doubt, know that death approaches.
And the sign of an arrow that never pierces is that bubbles do not jump out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face changes color, and they sigh loudly with coldness.
And if the arrow stops in the thigh's covering, it pierces the small bones; and causes great pain and severe suffering and sighing; and moves all limbs from the shoulders.
And if the arrow stops in or near the stomach, by chance it jumps out of the wound with any undigested meat.
And if the arrow stops in or near the stomach or abdomen, and it jumps out without any meat passing through the intestine, there is no hope for treatment, nor for extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow stops in the bladder, and the urine jumps out, causing severe pain for the patient: you should know that this wound is fatal.
The other limbs, such as the arms and the neck and the throat and the shoulder blade and the auxiliary (shoulder) bone and the spine in the back and the ribcage and the hip bones and the legs, and resembling limbs, are protected according to many arrangements. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it's not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because when you do something else.
It happened at one hour that an arrow hit him on the breast near the root of the nose: I tried it and conducted it from there through the fat of the ear, and was without serious harm.
And try to pull an arrow out of a game where it has fallen into the oil grease underneath the paper underneath, and the arrow had been returned, yet one could only reach its tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, having a weight of only one feather without any bells; the game was healthy, and it did not come to any bad accidents.
And try pulling an arrow from the neck of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with bells:
Cutting the beard, and trimming it as I moved along, left the Christians clean.
And extracted an arrow for about one inch, where it was in the back or belly, and I thought it would kill him;
And then after he had passed thirty days, if his position did not change; I cut into the arrow, and set it up, and pulled it out forcefully, and there was no bad incident.
And if you see one arrow that falls or hits, and there is a wound stitched together;
and lets the arrow remain inside, without changing its natural position, nor does it find harm in any of its natural works.
And observe another person who was hit by an arrow on their face and the wound has been stitched shut;
And thus he stays suffering great pain; and no other similar phenomena.
And took an arrow from one hundred to the king's bodyguards that was embedded in his left side, and was leaning slightly towards the right side; and the arrow was fully inserted.
I was called to treat the wound after it had been embedded for three days. I found the wound very tight.
I pursued her all with subtle attempts, and did not feel her; and he would feel a burn and pain around his right ear. I thought it was the tip of the arrow causing this.
I put on a plaster that helps in healing and digestion for the sake of the ear not swelling; And I saw the head of the arrow.
And I saw the head of the arrow. I applied the healing ointment for days, and quickly resolved the wound, and so I let the afflicted person rest long enough.
Until he felt the arrow within his nose; and he told me that. I applied corrosive aqua regia medicine to the wound for days until it was opened up,
And I tried, and felt the tip of the arrow which was penetrating at its base; then I adjusted during the opening of the wound through that medicinal agent, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me;
and pierced deeply into the inner parts for three months,
then I eased it out so that I could grip the tip with my forceps, and pulled from both sides, but couldn't remove it;
Therefore never stop refining and designing ways to construct instruments, until I had one day made good pliers, Following this manner towards the end of this chapter, as long as I continue to do so and restore the wound.
And those who judge believe that the cartilage under the nose cannot be restored: I would then heal it, and the wound was joined, and the patient's health was completely restored.
You have been told about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you apply your method to what I do not say, for books cannot take in everything;
but listen to my master brothers on a few important matters, and those that are current and lacking, prove nine works, and the ninth instrument, for the expulsion of foreign things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not come from any part of the body where they are stuck, according to two ways: or by their head where they enter, or by another part;
And the one that jumps out or enters at its head is an arrow entering the body's flesh, and it jumps out only once now.
And if it doesn't jump out now, let her stay until the body is cooked internally, and wait for its release;
And even if it's embedded in the bone, and it cannot come out, if you leave it like this for several days, and remove a little each day;
And then it breaks out, and if it does not break out, if you pierce through with a thin needle all the way until the bone is broadened, and then remove it.
And if the arrow is returned to its place within the body so that it cannot be seen, then one should seek for it with all their might. And if you feel it, then try to guide it with any suitable tool;
and if you cannot find it due to the constriction of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve or vein, so you make it as large as possible; and try to pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears attached to where it is lodged,
and try to pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears attached to where it is lodged, if the bone sticks out from two parts at its tip that you can push, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can pull it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can pull it out; do so carefully to ensure that you do not break the arrow and make its removal more painful.
And if you cannot do it in one attempt, until the shoulder is properly aligned within its socket, then move it. For the extraction process is made easy. And if the blood flow is against what it should be, then follow what we have said about treatment in our chapter;
and guard against the incision near the nerve and vein, and use skill to pull out arrows without risk,
either quickly or gently, either firmly or moderately; and place the patient according to their form when they were hit by the arrow, for this is the greatest help that it can be, and if you cannot do so, then lay him according to what the sign shows you.
The arrow that comes from another direction, or if there is no sign of it in the body, or if the skin is swollen at a place where you can see or feel it obviously:
Thus raise up high, as long as the tongs can seize, and then grasp: if it jumps now.
And if it's held in the bone, twist your hand round as long as it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then pull.
And if it can't come out, leave it still, and then start the extraction again until it comes out;
and if it's from the arrowhead that is stuck in him, push it all along the shaft;
And if it is closed, and you see the administration of a hot application, then administer one tool heated, and when the tip of the arrow enters the hair of the tool; and then apply force,
and if the arrow is hooked [in], then I use one pointed tool to enter in [the wound], for easing the extraction.
And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you remove all the flesh around or where the wound enters, if you can. Then treat the wound as appropriate.
And if an arrow enters or pierces the chest or abdomen or bladder or rib area, and it is close to vital organs, you should cover it immediately, assuming one can do so.
and beware not to cover the vein and the nerve, then extract it, and afterwards suture the wound; this is a task that requires skill. And treat the wound until it heals.
The shape of the pincers used for extracting arrows resemble an eagle's beak, and here is how it looks:
And they come in various sizes: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
of veins similar to those common ones The veins from which we cleanse are thirty-one, of which there is a head of sixteen.
This means to say: two small ones that come after the ears, which are called 'the sweet herbs'; And the two arteries which are in the two temples visible; and two veins that are in the two eyelids of the two eyes, which are called 'whisks'; and the vein that is within the forehead; and the vein that is on the head below the nose; and the two jugulars which are in the neck; And the two veins that are above the mouth on the lips, and these veins are called "augeherich". And the two veins that are along the tongue.
The veins we usually treat are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic vein, and it runs along the left rib, and they call it "the head vein"; And the main is called "blench", and composed of the cephalic and the basilica, And they call them the lay people "vein near the heart"; and the basilica is either on the left side or on the right side. And they call them the lay people "vein near the belly", and it's above the flanks. And this is the one that heals, which opens clearly over the abdomen.
And the veins are the ones between the thump and ring finger, and if you have two of them;
And in the leg and at the ankle there are three veins: one is below the bend of the pocket on the left side of the body, And the second is deep one which is on the anklebone on the right side of the body; and the vein that is called "the knee", it is in the anklebone on the other side.
And in the other leg are three veins beneath those.
The care for veins located behind the ears is something the ancient cathartics helped with, and also for migraines; And the qualities of a surgeon, as I've told you, and that you release the head of the patient,
And the qualities of a surgeon, as I've told you, and that you release the head of the patient, And rub the neck where the veins are with a rough cloth; then pinch the neck's opening tightly with your fingers. Until you can see both two veins protruding behind the ears in two loops dependent from the head: Guide them to your side, and where you feel the pulse on your side, if you know how to listen;
then take the scalpel, and press it along the vein towards the bone, then lift your hand all up to the vein upstream; and cut and remove the skin and the vein well two inches through, and let blood flow out until you see it;
then tighten and hold [the wound] tight, until it heals;
And I have already spoken of incision and cauterization, or first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is akin to ancient inflammation, and also, and habitual eye pain, and in the body of the weeping fever's eyes;
And the quality of the surgeon is such as I say: And it is because the patient pulls their neck, until the two veins appear clearly; and feels the hair under your hand, and then declares they've found something;
then lifts the skin over the vein at the top of your hand near your index finger, and holds the scalpel there; then lifts the vein at the top, and cut it, just like you did with other veins, and do whatever is necessary according to the amount of blood needed;
Then release the patient, place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place it on cotton;
and then have the veins healed and leave them until they are cured; and we have spoken about this and their extraction, or where to begin with the book.
The treatment for the veins of the forehead is just as valuable as that for the occipital veins in treating ancient diseases of the face, and migraines, and redness;
And its quality is such that the patient tightens his throat by twisting it, until the vein appears; Then take the tool which is called "cautere", as described below:
And place the tip on the vein, and apply force with your hand or something else, and allow a small amount of blood to flow according to the quantity you see; Then relieve the patient of their collar, and tie the vein until it is tight and healthy, ensuring there are no slippage or wide openings.
For any vein, it is not proper for the flames to be too close or large; and the healthy tissue should run across rather than down, because the bone is near, and by chance the flames could break when they are delicate.
The healing of the two veins that are in the nostrils serves the eyes, and the nose, and the reddening, and at the ear inside the eye, and diseases of the face;
And the quality of their healing is that the patient twists their neck by tightening a certain ligament, as before;
Then heal it, and let the healing pass through, a bit long like the flame, a little wide, for there is no flesh.
And if the flame is thin, perchance it breaks; then make it correspond to blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind with cotton, and bind it well.
The treatment of a neck injury near the nose involves an incision, and is separate from surgery, and also deals with diseases of the face, If it's like migraines or reddening that comes to the face, and similarly when she becomes old;
And the quality of this treatment is such that the patient narrows their throat, then presses their nose to your left hand, And take the slender flame long, and insert it into the lip at the space which is between the two nostrils, For the vein does not open properly and the wound is now beginning to heal;
and does not progress too quickly below the wound, and let it bleed gently according to your need, then give her a night, for she is very soon restored;
The health of the two kidneys helps with narrowing of the arteries, and the beginning of infectious diseases, and many illnesses, and in congestion, and corrosion, and herpes, and abscesses;
And the quality of health is such that the patient restrains his throat on both sides, as we have said; And may it be that the master stands above the head of the patient, and the patient lies down on his side,
Then let the blood vessel be opened long but a little wide, then drain off the blood gradually, or as much as is necessary;
Then sew it up in the other vein, then release the tie, and partially restrain the blood vessels. That the sick person is not strangled; and let them stay until morning, so that the wound heals.
About the surgery of the liver The surgery for veins above affects the mouth and causes gum decay, and cuts in lips, and nosebleeds and inner cheeks.
And the quality of this surgery is to have the sick person sit in front of you, and restrain their neck as I've explained; Then turn the mouth, and look at these two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left, And one knows them by their being black, and by the fact that inside they have small black veins: So then handle both of them, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt,
So then handle both of them, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, If you take the largest of each part, and do exactly the same with the two veins that are above and below, because it's the same method.
From the cure around the tongue The cure around the veins that are below the tongue aids after the treatment of the head, and this is done near the throat, and for diseases of the lymph nodes, and for diseases in the mouth;
And the skill of the healer is that when the patient's condition improves in your hands under the sun, and you lift their tongue, and look underneath on each side, there appears a black vein:
Then heal both of them, and do not overdo the treatment, because near the arteries they are.
The veins in the arm that we commonly heal are treated according to two methods:
They are cauterized either by applying one large hot flame, or by using a subtle olive oil if they resemble the veins of a butcher's knife, and these are called 'anise'. And their width and fineness correspond to the width and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the flame is greatly esteemed, and it appears wide as you see:
And one must open the veins filled with large visible blood, and those containing large blood and disturbance; and it is the shape of the olive-flame:
and it is more subtle and pointed; for it aids in cleansing the fine veins or has delicate yellow blood.
The healing of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat, and the neck, and the abdomen,
And it's fitting for the surgeon to heal carefully, and he should be aware of the artery that is there. And if it cuts the artery, and bleeding occurs, then it's fitting to staunch the bleeding; as I have said. And it should not be held by the flame, but cut so like a hare.
And if it is not clearly seen when the basilic vein opens, then you must extract it and change to another one; You want no pain from this, or you sever the vein instead of it in the arm: it opens clearly; and cover the wound with a bandage before, as we have said.
And if you know how to find the location of the wound, then it is appropriate that you straighten the arm, touching the place until you feel the pulse; Then mark the place of the elbow, and then bind the arm, and cut open with the flame cautery before it.
and be careful not to cut into the artery when you see the elbow inflamed, for that is where the artery is: listen out for it then.
And if you see it protruding up like the urine of a child, and the veins are red and fine, know that these are veins from the artery: So hurry up, place your finger for a long time, then remove your finger when it has stopped bleeding, as this happens many times.
Tie the arm down, and leave it like this, and do not move the patient's limbs; place them under fear, and do not move them until they are healed.
And if the bleeding is not stopped, and it takes time, and the medicine is unavailable for you, if you must open an artery when it appears, because the head of the wound retreats; stop the bleeding on the wound.
And take a bark from a willow tree, and cut it, and take one of the halves and bind it tightly until the other side.
If the wound stops bleeding, that's good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that stop the bleeding.
And the dressing is not chosen among many preparations because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's joint.
The healing of the vein in its middle is helped by treatment that reduces blood flow from above and below, and Because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said;
And it is important for the surgeon to be cautious when operating on it because there is a nerve beneath, and if he doesn't go far enough down, and he finds the nerve; And it inflates and health is harmed, and by chance cannot heal;
And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any places due to its subtlety, then it is necessary for you to have the organ removed before. And listen carefully as you feel with your finger.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it long.
The treatment of the forehead helps, since it leads blood to the head, and assists with pain;
And it is necessary to treat by fire with olive oil or by the fire of myrtle, for this is the safest of all veins because there is neither injury to the nerve nor artery.
In every case, it's best to seek the lightest touch and not be discouraged if one fails the first time, and then try again; And perhaps some limbs swell in certain individuals even when one tries for the first time, but it causes no harm. The quality of treatment depends on your thought or consideration.
The first thing you must know about healing, it is that healing should be practiced only to preserve health,
and to avoid future diseases; and let the healing be done in one of the three veins that are or cut: this means, the cephalic vein, the femoral vein, and the basilic vein; And it is necessary to start fasting when prayers are recited at the beginning of Lent, and in autumn and after meals during winter, when the sign of fullness becomes evident;
And it is necessary to fast on the first or third day, after four hours or five days.
Fasting for the treatment of diseases does not have a specific time limit, but it is done according to need on any day or at any time;
And fasting should not be applied to children up until the age of twelve years, nor to a woman pregnant for only a quarter of her pregnancy duration until seven months. No one who has surpassed sixty years of age should undergo surgery.
And when anyone wishes to be healed in any way, if it is necessary that they cleanse their intestines with a gentle catheter, if he has retained some urine, so that the veins do not draw off the unnecessary substances harmful to the principal members;
No one should be healed if they are too full of meat, or if they are drunk, even if they have strength, or if they have dropsy;
And if the healer intervenes after colic pain, and vomiting, and stomach emptying, and frequent urination in a woman, and labor, staying awake and working hard, and whatever expels the virtue, or through actions of tools or body injuries;
Then refine the bodily fluids. If they are abundant, due to meats and beverages and medications, if you have the means;
Then take a bath, if no obstruction exists, to refine the blood,
and heal from the vein down to the third part of your buttocks, as we have said;
And guard yourself that day of work, and pain, and excess, and similar things;
And tie yourself tightly and joinably, and let the heal be higher than where it is being healed, and rub the arm twice or three times.
Then gently loosen the bandage in the middle, for when it is too tight or not enough, then it cannot heal properly;
And then rub your arm with your hands until the veins swell, and you can feel them;
Then moisten the wick of a small amount of old oil, then place her duty of her left hand on that vein directly above his shoulder a bit or where she wants to ignite. so that the vein does not burn and break due to being pierced. Because there are veins that behave like strings when ignited, and some of them are filled with windiness, meaning that when you place them over the flame, they draw towards the flame and cannot open the vein, resulting in one being among those.
And if it opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, because in these matters the surgeons need to be knowledgeable.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it's good; and if not, it should be tried again slightly near that place or on the skin quickly, when the limbs are not swollen.
And if the limb is swollen and the body fluids are escaping, then it should be left for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: In case there are pus-filled blisters, do not enter or bathe in water; then try to clean again if it suits.
And if the artery is small, or the vein slightly more difficult to identify and you doubt that there isn't as much blood leaving as you see, so pierce it directly within that very same artery all the way through.
And work a little hastily, so that the veins swell up; for this happens often, when the wound is small.
If you see the vein swelling, do not restart the treatment immediately, and place a little oil on it, for it eases the body of blood, and heals in this area where the oil is.
And apply the oil when you are treating each vein treatment, to stop the flow of blood;
And this same thing happens with treacle and wax when you place them on the ear; their subtlety is such that they expand if they are too large.
And when it comes to large abscesses that often occur, this happens even if the person has not been able to bleed enough times or if the opening of the vein is small. If you are in haste, soak an earthen sponge with water and a little warm wine, and keep it on the ear for an hour;
It is necessary that you do this after the bleeding from the vein, and if it remains in the ear for several days without any darkening or discoloration, then it does not harm it; And if you see it, place on any thing of aloes or of myrrh dissolved in the juice of calamus, monster, or alike.
Many times there would be pus and appearance at the site of the basilica: so then place your hand on it, and if you find the area soft to the pressure of the hand, this is the sign of an ill condition. Hear then that you should not apply anything of what we have said, for by chance on the artery; but let him wear one damp plaster until it hardens the area, then treat with another treatment, until he is healed.
And direct each person's blood according to the amount of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the sweat is black, let it drain until it turns red; and if you see that it's large, let it continue until it becomes fine; and if it's too hot, allow it to cool.
And for the one who is full and lacks, needing blood extraction, let him have a larger wound, and make his flames wide;
And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and suit him with carefulness and often, and he should be treated by being cut across, not straight;
And this way of treatment saves from the spread of blood and nerve entanglement, and it's better than long cuts over wide ones.
And for the one whose body needs healing, it is fitting to give them a potion made from the juice of pomegranates; if they are heated, let them drink three times or four times this potion.
And if they have a cold constitution, let them taste before healing a potion made from molasses in syrup, or with aromatic honey syrup that includes spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, along with a very fragrant syrup.
And if they lose strength during healing, after the release of blood, it is fitting for them to inhale a broth of flesh and a subtle-scented syrup,
and use the other things that we have mentioned in the section or chapter about syncope for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wants to breathe in his arm and heal again, should it be necessary, when he is weakened by extensive healing, that he heals little by little, according to the amount of his strength continuously.
And if one wants to breathe deeply in his arm after the first healing, and they have much strength, then they should heal seven hours after the first healing, or after the new hour.
And if one wants to be healed on another side, it must be healed on the second day or on the third.
For there is much blood within the body that has already heated up, and it causes fever; if one needs to drain a large amount, and expand the wound so it heals properly. Since you fulfill all the conditions for health, and place your hand on the pulse when it is normal, so that death does not come to him in lieu of good medicine. And this happens many times, when the healers are negligent;
Nor is it right when you see the arm being pulled outwards, and blood coming out a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press hard upon; Nor if it's twisted, to extend the arm immediately, because that would be badly done;
but let it grow until it heals for the second time; or you touch its tip to the flame's end, until the ice inside that has frozen off the vein melts. and place one pinch of ground salt in water and press it gently.
And if the vein has swollen, let it be without pressing it, until the abscess is relieved.
And if the need is to draw out blood a second time, let it heal at its original location, or in another vein, or on the other arm.
The vein runs along the arm in its place of the neck due to the fact that it is composed there.
And the method for treatment involves bathing one's hand in hot water, as long as the pulse is red;
Then tie it moderately, so that the vein becomes visible, then now cure through it, neither too wide nor too long;
and make them as narrow as possible, and cure well near the wrist joint, and if it cannot be released, then immerse your hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the water, until you have enough;
And if it's like this, you mustn't put your hand into hot water to fix it, because putting it in winter is better than in hot weather;
And the healing of this vein is safer from all other veins, for there are neither artery nor nerve.
The recovery of the preservation of the right hand is worth more than all illnesses concerning the liver, and this is the method:
Stretch the hand, and immerse it in hot water, until the vein appears, if you can see it; And if you align it sideways, and if you touch it from all sides equally, then there is no harm;
and do not press too much downwards either, for the nerves are completely bare of flesh,
Then place the hand in warm water, if the limb was frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, place on the vein where it is cut and seal it quickly, and do so with each case.
The treatment for illness in the left hand is akin to that of mice sickness, and do everything as I've instructed you for the right side.
The cure for scrofula applies to all diseases located within the body, such as diseases of the breasts, and accumulation of pus, and disease of the kidneys, and those affecting the thighs and old legs, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of this cure is that the sick person bathes in hot water, and rubs over the wound until it heals, And above the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot it goes into many veins.
Then heal that or more widely in the vein, or at the ankle where it bends.
And if you heal over the foot, watch for the nerves that are nearby, and heal from across in a similar manner to stitching; let the flames cool afterwards.
And if it cannot be removed, place the foot in water and allow the vein to drain properly.
And if it's the first time treating them, if you start again on the second one a bit above, because the legs are salty; Never doubt about nerves, as we have said, and do similarly with the other side in equal manner.
The leg of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle bone on the side (right), and its pain corresponds to the ache in the hip when it's due to hot blood.
And its quality is such that the patient sweats or feels hot baths, and tightens above the ankle by three fingers when twisting.
For otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, you heal it in all possible ways that you can, and even when crossing through; And be sure to take care of it, for the lung is intact, and it responds very well to manual treatment.
And be sure to take care of it, for the lung is intact, and it responds very well to manual treatment. And if you fail to find it, heal none of the lungs that open or at its back foot, and towards the small intestines; be cautious about the nerves;
And make sure the blood flows as you see fit, and then release the tie, and place cotton on it and tighten; now it is healed.
Extracting the blood with suction cups
Suction cups are made of horns, or spiders, or leeches; and blood extraction is done in two ways: by piercing and drawing out blood, or without piercing.
And this suction cup method that involves piercing is done in two ways: either hot or not using heat;
And the other two are in both sides of the neck; and the windpipe under the chin; And the windpipe above both shoulders; and the windpipe at the armpits; And the windpipes inside both arms; and the windpipes in both legs; And the suction cups on the two ankles; and suction therapy does not treat blood, for it deals with small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
And because of this, one doesn't weaken oneself, as one does in the practice of bloodletting; And it should not be administered, nor at any fire or without fire, in any disease that comes from excess, until all the body is emptied.
And if by necessity of the diseases suction is needed, or as a habit, if we administer it every hour at the beginning of her period, or at the end, and during and in each interval;
for there are some who, when they have the need to perform suction, if they weigh heavily on the head;
and for those who find congestion and redness in their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and dimness in their eyes;
and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and spit out blood; and there are some who think, and see through the blood and confusion and death-like things.
And when we see these signs, and indeed even during the month, we instruct to suck after three hours of the day.
The healing of the mouth helps with the infection in the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of all through the body;
And this suction is part of the treatment for the condition in the head,
And it should not be used by someone with a cold constitution, or who has an excess of wind, for this causes a great amount of harm.
And because of this it is not suitable for him to use them, nor those who have or suffer from cold diseases.
And the one who uses it frequently becomes forgetful; thus, because of this, it is necessary to place the suction cup somewhat further down due to the forgetfulness.
Lung suction is found in the vicinity of the heart and the basilica, because it's useful for narrowing the heel. And for cutting in the channel of the ventricles, and at once, and to be full;
And it is good to hold lightly, because if you hold too firmly, it can cause paralysis or stomach issues and heart problems.
The ventilation of two ribs under the collarbone relieves pain in the head and eye area, and earache, and toothache, and in stridor, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
And it's in the location of cleaning the basilica; and you should instruct the surgeon to press his hand upon it when he places it there, so that he doesn't compress the artery, and let no bleeding occur.
Ventilation around the chin relieves diseases of the mouth, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that affect the mouth; it is in the area for cleaning the two lips.
The wind movements of the shoulders correspond to illness that comes from heat and filling.
The wind movements of the elbows equal as many as three veins in the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins;
and orders the soldier not to cut too deep, for the muscles are bare of flesh, and it knows next to nothing about nerves and arteries.
The suction device on the back is effective against hemorrhoids from the bottom and various diseases nearby. It is necessary for the suction device to be large and made of iron so that it can handle treatment well; if by chance, they were slender, they would break; I cause great injuries doing this work.
The leg suction cups cleanse effectively because they attract blood from the entire body, and are useful against old pains in the kidneys, bladder, and uterus, and help heal ulcers; they are located at the two shins and ankles, and later weaken the body after long use, causing weakness in various conditions.
The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you should place it first in a state of being empty, and apply steady sucking pressure, and position it quickly, moving it evenly, and keep doing this until you see the area turn red and swell up, then stop when you perceive the color of blood; then remove it, and reapply the suction cups, and take care regarding the disposition of the body parts. Indeed, there are some with thick skin and clear pores: for these, it suffices to pierce once, and create wide wounds, with a bit of depth; and suck lightly.
And if the clot is large, it's necessary to puncture twice: once to delicately clear out the larger blood clot.
And if the clot is very thick, it's necessary to puncture three times; and when we wish to delicately drain some blood at a time, then we should only puncture once.
And if we wish to remove little blood, then do it often; and if the clot is thick, pierce through completely, and make sure that the vein is punctured sharply.
And it's necessary for those with thick and tough skin who have constricted pores that you apply grease to the sites of the suction cups where stimulant and dissolving substances are seen: If it's in health, from which oil, from almond oil, or from the oil of sweet seeds, or from the oil of cucumber seeds;
And if it's in blood, from mustard seed oil, or from lily, or chamomile, or any similar substance.
And if the excess is thick and cold, take thyme oil, or balsam, or fir tree oil, and similar substances.
And if the one being treated has tender flesh and large pores, it should not have any oil applied to it at all.
But it is necessary to wash after the evacuation of pink water or cold water or water from a rose, or water from a cucumber, or water from a porcelain dish, or any other similar.
And this person who has some moisture, if they use myrtle water or sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large excesses disperse them with old wine or water of wormwood or a decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar remedies;
and it is not suitable to use the suction cup in a bath or during bathing, but after the bath for one hour or two; and do not sleep afterwards.
And it is necessary to know when one must suck and when it has been sucked. Watch out for this one who is being cured and has a hot temper, and if they are too fiery and inflamed; It's necessary for them to consume cold things, such as apples, endives, and lettuce with broth, and similar items;
And eat small pieces, and meat of castrated animals, and moist meats.
And for the one who has a cold constitution, if they wish syrup made from honey, and fragrant half-way wine which is between old and new, and a small portion of stewed meat, and stewed veal and small birds and baby doves;
And on the day they start vomiting, they should drink more than eat;
And it is necessary to give some people neither treacle nor muscat wine before or after vomiting, in order to strengthen the main limbs; And fowl the broth is suitable, but it's not good for those who are feverish.
The suction cups that are used to pierce are those placed on the liver, and on the lungs, and in gout, and on the stomach and intestines and kidneys, for this limb does not endure being pierced by needles,
and it is only done for the purpose of drawing blood from limb to limb, if like we place them on the nipples when the nose is bleeding; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, or like we place suction cups on the stomach and intestines to reduce the size of the limb.
And when there is pain due to an obstruction or stone, if it attracts the obstruction by its attractive power, or removes the stone from its place;
And thus it acts when placed over the heart and lungs where there is a retained wind.
And these suction cups are applied empty solely for the extraction of fluid; and they are never used combined with fire, nor filled with warm water.
In diseases like pleurisy, and in such manner one would fill the suction cup with hot water, or with water that has cooked medicinal herbs useful for this.
The shape of the suction cup used for fire is as follows:
And have two and a half palms in length by width, and has or lacks at its middle one small notch, as to pierce an awl,
and let it be made of iron, so that when it is placed on the body, it does not burn the skin;
and have in the middle a rod across from iron or aragonite, so as to put a candle holder on it.
And let them be large or small according to the illnesses and age of those who take them;
For the suction cups for children are different from those for adults, and those that are skinny compared to those that are fat.
And one must place this suction cup on the member:
Take a wax plug or one line of thread and put it inside the suction cup, then insert the end of the thread through the penis which is inside the suction cup, If the clarity of the suction cup is at the bottom, so it does not burn the patient;
And then place it on the same limb, and you should either at the spot we have mentioned, so when desired, if the vapor goes along with the suction cup, remove the suction cup;
And apply the lotion in the same way as before, and repeat it often, if you need to.
In the suction cup that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, there should be neither a ridge nor any part at all, and it is administered only when it is full of water, and placed on the limb merely;
And it's this form:
Without suction cups are used only in limbs where one cannot put suction cups because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts; and on the naked areas of meat cuts, like a pig's foot or a dog's, and other similar places;
And when you find veins that are clear and sweet water without pus, if you take them;
and immerse them in sweet water until they are familiarized, and have nothing in their stomachs; and then bleed and apply suction cup medicine until the limb turns red, and place them on the veins.
and when they are full and bleeding, if it's possible to place a suction cup, do so, because that is much better afterwards.
If not, raise the limb with ease, then water, quite well, and then incision;
and if the limb is raised too soon after the body of the abscesses, get wet. Take one and a half yards of linen in cold water, and place it on, until the abscesses are hardened;
and if there are multiple abscesses, then put on ground glass or garlic and similar items until they harden;
or you place half of peeled beans on the limb, and let them dry on the limb until they stop bleeding now;
And if you need more expertise, take other instructions.
And if the veins are not to be taken easily, rub with a fresh blood clot or insert an awl until blood starts flowing. Then place them, and as soon as they feel the flow of blood, they should start working;
And when you see that they are bleeding, apply a little aloes and ground oatmeal or ash on them; now they should start healing.
This begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and for restoring fractures and dislocations.
Know this, dear son, that the leaves of this chapter were scattered from it, so no one saw any of the old books or read a letter.
And for this reason, the knowledge has been removed from our land, because I never found anyone good in it;
And I know nothing of it, for by the knowledge of old books, or from which I have studied so much that I dealt with this science, and through experience, and through the custom of my life;
And I have described in this chapter what is contained, and abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I did in these two previous chapters.
Therefore, it is necessary that we outline or introduce this book's contents and chapters where the senses apply their understanding, staying true to reality. This way, those who have experienced it will know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twists or sprains occur to any part of the body, it is necessary that you quickly treat the patient from one side and then the other, without causing anything else to happen. This includes things like weakness, children, or elderly people;
If the place where you're holding is too tight, or too cold; and eating cold foods, that means cold meats, and liver and buckthorn, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not overfill on meat which fills veins with blood, until you have doubt about pus formation in an abscess, or leakage of substance from the body part; if the patient begins to feel better after your initial treatment.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that cause abundant nourishment, or have a viscous quality, such as cooked wheat in water, and onions, and chestnuts, and peas, and beef stomachs, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, among similar things. For with this nourishment, the injuries are healed more quickly and the breaking [of bones] is overcome.
And know that bones broken in old and weak people cannot be healed or sutured according to their nature due to the drying of the limbs, nor those also which are too tender, such as children's bones;
but do not hesitate, reset the broken bone. With large thorns which pierce and unite the limb together, until it is as strong as before; and do not finish his work too quickly, for this requires nourishment from large meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures come in many different ways.
For a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the foot or leg, and in this chapter I will tell you all the ways of fractures. For there is breaking that would go to war, and another when sharpening, such as the size of a feather for writing.
For there is breaking that would go to war, and another when sharpening, such as the size of a feather for writing. And if with breaking due to injury, and breaking with a small crack in its entirety.
And each way has its own tool, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings to its place;
and by this one knows the breakage of the bone through the fact that the limb is twisted, and opens well outward, and is at the pressure of the hand;
And when there is no twisting or curvature in its location, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no break;
but it can well have twisting, or crack, or a small fracture. But if you cannot move it by hand, then apply the remedies that follow next, and then gently manipulate it now.
And know that when the bone is broken and the two parts are disjoined, now you should put them at an equal point so that abscesses can form on either side.
And if pus forms during this period, if he leaves it for any day, until the abscess subsides; Then place it at the same level as you can slightly and gently squeeze, and know that restoring it is easier than when he has pieces; then you restrain him, just as prescribed below.
And if there are pieces in the bone, if it is split into two parts, whether they be hands or feet, or at your hand if it's a small limb, or into two strings, or one string and your hand;
And place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the member are healed, you tighten all around using whatever means you can, and guard that in your work no injury or pain befalls the patient;
And correctly adjust the two shoulder joints according to the best shapes.
And feel well with your hand if it doesn't seem to be perfectly located: if it is dressed beautifully, and not strained too much, without squeezing as those who bring out abscesses by their work do, just like we have wanted many times.
And when the limb is in place, carefully restrain the patient so they do not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, neither upon turning, nor in any other manner; And see to it that the limb is secured enough so that there is no feeling of pain. For when he feels no pain, if it is not at the exact spot, and it should be placed in such arrangement that he does not feel any pain;
For when he feels no pain, if it is not at the exact spot, and it should be placed in such arrangement that he does not feel any pain; and keep him straight, so no twisting occurs when he is restored;
and the quality of the limb broken is according to what I am telling you.
Know that limbs broken are various in size and extent, and in shape.
For there are small limbs such as arms and legs and alike: it is necessary to envelop them with soft and fine linen cloths;
And those that are larger, such as the buttocks and calves: it is necessary to envelop them with a broad and firm bandage; for wide bands wrap around the entire large limb, restraining it evenly from all sides, so no bulge remains;
Then wrap in light bandages, three times or four times depending on the limb, and press your hand slightly along the entire bandage, then go over the breakage and tighten it less, so that the breakage moves a little away from the wound.
And gradually soften the tie a little by little, until you grasp a large portion of the healthy part, then take another tie, and return to its original position on the broken limb;
Then return to the broken part and gently tighten it, neither too hard nor too soft, as we have said in our first instruction above;
Then place between the linen straps or bandages evenly, until it is completely even, then tie everything above with two belts, and then put your well-made pins on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something soothing on it that relieves the abscess and reduces the swelling, leaving it like this for a few days;
Then hold onto these poles, and they should be half as wide as a narrow reed bent straightly, or from the shaft used to make darts, or from the branches of a palm tree, and they should follow this shape:
but it is necessary that the pole which one places at the break be slightly larger and wider than the others;
and let it be as long as necessary for small or large limbs;
then hold them in place just like you did at the first instance, then tie an additional thread on top of it, similarly to how you tied at the break in the first instance;
The cautery should allow the hair to grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
For if the threads are thick, like those used in folk works to twist their linen cords, and this is a great mistake, because the twist cannot be uniform if it's too thin, and it doesn't suit having less than one and a half inches of space between each thread.
And if the limbs are bruised by the joints of the sockets after reduction in their healthy positions, then apply padding with linen or shredded wool on them, so that they do not blister.
When the wound is due to piercing (or stab) injury, and the ribs are broken, I will instruct on its treatment thereafter.
Know that it's not suitable to fully stretch all the broken limbs right from the first day. For when the limbs are large, it's not suitable to place them in splints straightaway; rather wait for at least five days or seven, or longer according to your judgment as each case arises.
And here is the method of the old plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: you take flour that remains on the walls of the mill, mix it with enough egg until the mixture isn't too thin or too thick. Use this concoction, and this is the common way of using plaster to restore fractures in various ways, as well as for women and small children, because there's no risk of being too hot or too cold.
Another method for setting breaks and dislocations and twists: take three parts of garlic and dill and wormwood and asafetida and Arabic gum and mastic, in total. Use five parts of myrrh and aloes, also in total. Add seven parts of alechil. Grind all these into a powder, then mix them with the yolk of an egg; if the mixture is warm, use this plaster as it has a good composition, and quickly heals broken bones, proving beneficial to many people.
Another plastering method that is good for twists: take mastic and vismarrow, in total ten parts; myrrh and aloes, in total eight parts; acacia six parts; Armenian galbanum ten parts, grind them well together, then mix with water or the yolk of an egg, and apply it.
Another plastering method for joints and broken bones, to alleviate the pain that comes with them, and to cut away bone fragments: take new wool, cook it in grease and oil until it softens, then apply it onto the affected area. This plaster does not heal completely but is better for soothing abscesses, and properly relieves pains.
Another method of plastering that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and terrestrial oak leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method of plastering for restoring bone fractures and facilitating the removal of pus. Take root of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of beeswax; from each take one part; grind it together, mix with wine, and if your limbs are warm, mix it with moist coriander water or just water, and then use it.
Another more effective method of plastering when pus is being restored in the limb. Take roots of valerian, linseed, balm, linden and thyme, as well as violet and chamomile flowers; from each take one part; grind it together, mix with salt water, or sweet water, or wine according to the warmth of the limb and its rest period.
In his book, Hippocrates instructs that one should apply to the broken limb for strength restoration using a paste made of wax and oil, and nothing else, more. He says it should be neither too soft nor too hard between two states.
And it seems that Galen suggests one should apply to the broken limb for restoration dry things slightly warm, such as mire, aloe, incense, and similar items, as we have said.
Another way to make plaster useful for injury and pain: take mussels and pigeon meat or bird feathers, and basil leaves, and equal parts of wine vinegar, grind them together, and then make a plaster with it and use it.
And then after a little while, take care to ensure that the patient does not feel any pain and that there is no movement of their bone in its place; or if the injury is treated by hand during the day.
And if pain comes to the arm, or itching, without rest or swelling, you should act quickly, and release it, and apply plaster now; and take light cloth and a moistened sponge from the sea, immerse them in water, and cool down the arm until the itching stops, and the pain is alleviated. Then let the member rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool, moistened in water or oil from the rose bush, and secure it with a bandage, until you are sure of removing any pus.
And let the inflammation settle on the member, and relieve the pain, then resume gentle treatment, and a little plaster, but do not strain it as much as before; and be gentle until it heals.
And if you see that pus and redness, pain and swelling are present throughout the bone, and you need to plaster and bind it, then repeat as you did initially.
And if there is nothing of what we have said on the limb, or if it's released only after three days, four days, five days, or seven; and leave it for twenty days each time, according to this until healing progresses, and approaches bone setting in place;
Then increase the bandaging more than at first, and let it grow its flesh, just as I said previously. And if you see that the body dries excessively beyond what is necessary, know that there will be no improvement; The first sentence translates as:
Through this work then correct the deformities in the limb, and remedy it quickly as what men do, that restore the member forcibly: this is bad, and such actions lead to useless procedures, and I see nothing else but to leave them and treat them correctly.
Of various methods of fracturing Many ways of breaking exist, and various forms, and the causes are destined;
For it involves injuries caused by striking with a sword, and the neck bone all the way to the syfac which is under the bone, just like in an axe or staff; and because of this, this kind of injury is called 'axe break' in this manner.
When the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing it, this kind of injury is called 'absolute break'; and it refers to the wounds resulting from these two types of breaks, whether large or small.
And if there is sequential striking, or crack, or from the stone itself, or impact on the stone, or other similar incidents.
And if there is a partial break, which approaches until it reaches the tissue under the bone, or above the bone, and this injury can be large or small.
And if there is a wound that has healed within the bone as thin as a hair, and has a small crack, and because of this it is called this kind of fracture "hairline";
And if there is a wound made or by piercing of stone, or by falling, or by similar things, and it lets the piece of bone in from below, and has cuts next to each other like candle makers when they make holes on the candles; so that the stone enters inside.
This happens more with those who have wet bones below, such as children's bones;
It occurs in all these ways of fracture where small pieces are dismembered, like fowl's bones; and I will speak about this in its proper place.
And we know all methods of fractures through their dislocation upon them, and the examination by prodding, and through the decayed flesh that is on them.
Hair loss is known by those who when an osseous fragment has been revealed and rubbed together, if it exposes black fracture.
In the treatment of fractures, be cautious about malaise incidents, and if you do not see any ill-omened accidents such as vomiting, loss of understanding, expansion, paleness, fever, or if the eyes start to come out and turn red, or show other symptoms in various conditions, there is no certainty that it can heal.
And if you do not see any alarming accidents, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the bone comes to you first, and it's in winter, if you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day after your arrival that you can.
And if it's in summer, you should remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh around the bone becomes rotten, and accidents as we've said occur.
And if the fracture reaches to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary for you to split the fractured part like this: and take hold of the bone from the patient's arm, uncover over the bone in all manners that you can, and expose more of the wound according to its shape as much as you can,
And if blood flow starts to reveal the bone, or an abscess appears, assist with what is necessary, and make sure you fill the wound with wet cloths in oil rose. And have the wound rest until the pus discharge is calmed and the blood can freely flow; then begin working inside the bone, and this is done according to two methods of work: one method is that you cut at a narrow angle in front, and it's called:
And then make another cut, which is larger than the first one.
And the second method is that you have several different cuts, some narrow and others wide, all sharp, and made of iron; and work with light hands, making sure not to pierce the head.
And if the bone is hard and beyond piercing, you should pierce it through, ensuring that you make cuts with steady hands, not all the way through so as not to penetrate beyond the bone by mistake, and there should be a margin or circle of about an inch above the tip, preventing the tip from passing through the bone; and you should have several of them, so each touches its length of the bone, ensuring that there are tines for both sides; this is the form of the three methods of piercing.
The quality to pierce inside the broken bone is that you place one wick on the bone and turn with your fingers until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then put the wick elsewhere a little after, and do this throughout, then cut in between the roots of the teeth where the bone exists, and do this more subtly than you can, gently, just as we have said, till you pull the bone to your hand or to none of the instruments that you have such as pliers, forceps; and make sure not to touch the brain nor the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced and removed the bone, it is necessary that you prepare what was left of the bone with another tool similar to a tooth, but this tool should be more sturdy and more subtle than the other tooth;
And if there is nothing of the small bones or no scales left, you should gently scrape them with an instrument. Then dress and treat the wound as we have said earlier.
And another way of treatment is this as Galien said, which is more safe; and the needle is very strong, and it's his word. Firstly, you must expose a part of the bone where the fracture opens and moves. So when you have exposed that part, place underneath the edge of this lens-shaped incision, as depicted here:
And do not cut from one side alone, and make the incision halfway through two ribs so that when you cut it is towards the bone. Then strike with a small hammer from above, gently removing all of the bone and being careful not to damage the membrane which is underneath;
If she presses against the bone, gently remove it because you will feel no harm and little fear.
And if the break in the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, then after that roughness, it's necessary to remove the scales with a sharp shaver of which you should have various quantities. To administer each one as most appropriate according to the manual and the appearance of the break.
If you appear before great shavers, and then even finer ones, and don't stop doing this until it is well done.
In each of the other hair-cutting and finer breaks, you must administer care according to its direction; and this matter is not resolved for whoever has devoted their study to this craft.
And if the shoulder's wound is revealed, it is necessary that you take one and a half linen cloths according to the size of the injury, soak them in rose oil, and place them on the wound; Then take another double linen cloth or two, and soak them in wine and rose oil, place it on the first linen cloth; do this more lightly than you can, so as not to burden the shoulder blade, then apply with a second bandage, but don't strain it too hard that it only touches the wound.
And leave it like this for one or two days until the abscess softens, then remove the bandage and apply remedies such as lily roots, flour of myrrh, incense powder, and aristolochia, among other things; prepare a powder from these and apply it to the wound, then continue applying gentle healing medicines without causing irritation.
And ensure that the wound is clean right away, do not leave pus behind, and do not allow any fluid to assemble there either, because when fluid assembles on the brain's membrane, it circulates and spreads, causing great harm to the patient; for when one places something biting on the tongue, it bites from above.
Therefore take care, if nothing happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if only that happened because of the medicine we put on, assuming it has such a virtue, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix them in a spoonful, and put this on the tongue; Then follow the method of treatment until they become healthy.
Know that neither of the two parts under the nose or even just one, because these are two bones; and this lower part is made of cartilage, it does not break, nor will it take to bend or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must bend your little finger or over the nose, and make an equal break inside to your second finger, and through the tip outward, until the nose revives according to its natural shape; And do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your operation.
And if the fracture is in the area above the nose, and cannot reach the nostril from below, it should be positioned evenly to the top of a small stick that's a bit thick.
And if the fracture is in two parts, redo the procedure and try to restore on the first day, if you can;
If not, after the seventh or eighth day when the abscess has subsided, apply to the top of the nose a bundle made from linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you should apply a bundle on the other side as well, if the fracture is there too; and make them large enough to fill out the hollows of the nose.
And it's said that one should moisten the tents with butter and change them each day. I do not think this is correct but rather they should be moistened during the preparation of a mixture of egg white and powder of grinding stone; then leave the tent until the bone is hard and the cartilage tough.
And sometimes one uses goose feathers instead of tents, and if it's mixed with one egg white, and if there is a wind, and the air goes among them; then do whatever you see fit.
And if abscesses appear near the nose as you do them, then put wadding or moistened cotton in oil of rose, or a pinch of salt.
And if abscesses do not appear, then apply a plaster outside, made of ash powder and incense powder, mixed with yolk butter. Place it on light bandages, don't tie them tightly around the nose;
And if the nose breaks into small pieces and it is broken into many parts, then use tools suitable for this task, then cut along the wound, and clean all the fragments of cartilage and suture them. If there are applicable plasters or ointments for this situation, use them;
And if there is no wound within the nose, then treat with tinctures and apply linseed oil until it heals.
Of the rupture of the jawbone
When the jawbone is fractured internally and there is no external wound,
It is necessary; if the fracture is in the right part, you bend your index finger into the patient's mouth towards the side of the injury. And if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then bend your index finger of the right hand towards it, and gently apply pressure on the fracture internally, and perform this action with the other hand externally, making sure to do so evenly.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is separated into two parts, then it's necessary to administer an extension for each part until they are even.
And if the movements of the teeth occur, or rupture, then restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk. Place it on the broken mandible and place one double piece of cloth; and put another large tent on the cloth well made, or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the length of the mandible, and bind it up as tight as you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you notice that the figure changes, let it shift to its position on the third day and then adjust what has changed; cover with plaster, using powder from a mill combined with plenty of egg or ground oyster flour after removing the bandage; place a layer of wool on top, and when the plaster hardens, and the patient's condition doesn't change, let it be until they recover. Many times recovery occurs within three weeks.
And if pus-filled sores appear, then apply what we have instructed many times.
And if there is a fracture combined with a wound, it's rewarded by none of the bone being extracted; if the extraction requires instruments suitable for this task.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there is nothing left, if the wound is wide, place one layer of plasters suitable for it to accelerate healing until it heals.
By the power. The strength breaks many times before, around the shoulder, and the breaking happens in three ways: when it breaks and divides into two parts, with fragments, and is easier to restore; or when there's a break accompanied by an injury.
And the treatments are as follows when there's breaking without an injury, where you have two assistants, so one marks the shoulder that feels the broken strength; and the other stretches up to the neck towards the affected area; then equalize the break with your hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there's no visible or movement.
And if you need to extend further, then place a round piece of cloth or wool under the shoulder towards the body; and make it as large as your need requires; stretch and lift the strength, hold the sphere in your hand so that you can equalize the break, as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the strength away from the front due to its presence in front, it is necessary that the patient lie with their face towards their shoulder and place a half-collar under the shoulder. Then you should press the shoulder down, while supporting it, until the bone of the strength is raised.
And then use the break at your hands, and if you find debris there, it is necessary that you cut it up; and gently pull the pieces, and if the bone cannot join through any pressure, cut into one of the incisions you have made. But place this instrument on the strength, to prevent fluid from flowing out:
and make it resemble a spoon, and not be present in any way, and be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two points if you see fit, with one being wider and the other narrower, similar to the cut made on the wound when treating the bones;
And when you are certain of the extraction of pus, if you stitch up the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt about the extraction of pus, then cover the wound with bandages and tents, according to its size.
And if there is pus being extracted, then moisten it with oil, rose water and honey, and place it on the affected area.
The grinding of the bone, when it's related to wounds and cutting procedures, involves applying a plaster made from powder of mill grind and egg yolk on the bone, and place light bandages over it. If needed, put an iron spatula underneath for support. Then take a very large bandage that's about the size of your palm in width. Place two layers of bandages on top of the bandage and plaster it over them. Then take a slender stick around three inches wide and long, wrap it around this bandage piece such that the edge of the bandage hangs down below it. And place the needle at the wound, and turn the bandage around the neck, and over the healthy armpit, and over the diseased armpit; and adjust it from each part, and when you see that the blood flow meets with the wound addition, and you clearly see that the needle does not move above the broken bone, then reward him each day, and when he takes off his shirt, then restrain him;
And let the disease heal on his back, and apply it when he sleeps, a small pillow under the armpit to lift the shoulder up; so it eases the strain of the wound through the strength of the shoulder blade, or you tie his arm around the neck, and do not untie him from any bad accidents for twenty days;
Then redo the plaster bandage if you see that he needs it, and bind him tightly but leave him like this until he is restored; and she will be restored at most within 26 days, and less in some cases.
Of the breaking of the shoulder
Sometimes the shoulder breaks or fractures either at its ends or in the middle, not just externally but also internally; if it is handled according to the shape of the fracture and its natural form, then you can reset it accordingly. Try all possible ways that suit your needs for this.
And if a bone piece sticks out before, and there's no opening in the skin, then cut it open and operate on the bone as we've instructed in handling injuries to the thigh for soothing abscesses.
On the breaking of the heel
The heel is often broken at the midpoint, but this happens rarely; it breaks more frequently at the front. And when it breaks in the middle, it descends below, causing great pain for the patient, loss of consciousness, and vomiting, and suddenly blood appears from the ankle bone, and one can feel this well.
And the restoration should be such that the body lies on its back and you place one and a half cushions between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs of two ribs with your hands, and delicately put them equal in all ways that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then lay bandages and wadding above the delicate salt draft or another lightweight substance, and wrap it tightly with a blanket, and fix it to the broken bone so that it doesn't move; and turn the bandage around the back smoothly, and compress it evenly, and reward each hour the injured person, and if it heals, then tighten; and if it needs to be released due to corrosion or itching in the body, or pain or abscess, you should act quickly, release it, remove the bandages, and treat the one who has come seeking remedies in ways of treatment; then replace the bandage again and compress until it is healed.
Of bone fracture
Know that the fracture of ribs occurs only after a large hit on the back, and within the chest cavity, and they can bend due to being brittle; and one feels this well during examination at the bedside.
And for the treatment if it is to equalize the fracture, just like it should. Then apply plaster and bind it with a bandage, if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is occurring inside, then the patient feels intense pain and cramps, like crying, because the bone punctures the skin; and they have spots, and are hot and vomit large amounts of blood, and this is a sick health state, and the elderly often suffered great suffering.
And if there are those who say it is suitable to administer meat that inflates the belly, in order to relieve the nausea outside.
We do not follow this rule, as pus and ointments do not come from within, if they have not already appeared. And if it has appeared, then heal it.
And it is said by none of us to apply suction cups over the skin, in order to suck out the contents, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the suction cup draws away excesses from the body due to the weakness's positioning.
And it is said that when one must cover the body with moist wool in hot oil, and they place wicks between the ribs to make the heat even everywhere inside, then apply the treatment for pleurisy, meat and medicine.
And if the patient experiences intense pain that cannot be tolerated by the broken bone piercing the skin, there is doubt for the patient as to whether one should cut through their broken part of the body, and it must be covered with a tool among .i. instruments to protect the wound; then the bone must be cut open, drained gently, and then the wounds stitched together if they are large, and treated with plasters until healed. And if abscesses form, put moist cloths in oil on top of them and cover their body; treat while letting the wound take care according to what is suitable for the abscess, and be attentive on the affected side or where it must be, until it heals.
Of the breakage of the neck
In no instance does the breaking of bones at the neck occur, and there is no bending; similarly with the spine in the back. And when this happens to anyone and you need to know if it's alive or not, take heed: if you see his hands softened, swollen, and dead, unable to move or stretch them out; and when you prick them with a needle, he doesn't feel. Know that it is in multiple states of death, and if they can remain motionless and well when restrained, know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and that the injury has healed, if care was taken in treatment.
And when this happens to the spine in the back, and you need to know if it's alive or not, take heed: if you see that its joints are softened, and those anomalies akin to limbs exist on his back, along with gustatory and loss of appetite against will; and when you have observed him on his abdomen, he does lose appetite against will. And when they've treated him on his back and he wants to sit up, he can't. Know that it is in multiple states of death: if no labor were found in her cure.
And if such an event does not happen to him, then it is a lighter thing.
And the treatment is this: if there is pus at the site, apply a poultice of sulfur or oil from an egg, until it eases; then place on one of the reinforcing plasters and drying ones, and bind with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until they recover. And if any bone becomes exposed, you must cover it with your hand; and remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound if it's large, with stitches, then treat with an ointment that hardens in a couple days until they heal; and if the bone chip is broken, which is called 'the chip from the knee', you should hold your left hand pouch against your right hand at your power, then place the plaster and heating on it as needed; then press it down, and if there's any exposed bone, you apply it over it, remove the bone, and treat the wound until it heals.
Regarding the breaking of the hip bone's fracture
It happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does happen, there might be a slight discomfort at the thigh; and it stretches long, declines towards the knees, and brings pain to the patient at the thigh, bruising, and swells up the one that breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand upwards as long as you are at the site of the fracture. And know which bone is broken and its shape; and if the break is only in the thigh, put the break even as it is, until it reaches its natural shape.
And if the break is along the length or it declines towards the inside, have the patient lie on their stomach, as long as your restoration of this break becomes apparent. And when you have made it even, place it on the plaster, then put onto a charcoal or coal grate, and keep it warm so that it does not move. And apply the heat across their back until the wound is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his sound side, or on his back.
And if abscesses appear under the skin, do not touch them until the abscesses are alleviated and placed as we have said before; then return to the restoration process, apply pressure as is necessary, without any bad incident occurring. This is the manner.
of dislocation of the shoulder
The assistants are those that are between the knife and the shoulder cap, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to either of two methods: where one would take a full rod of medium thickness, as per this shape:
And tie the two joints with two bands, and bend them upwards, placing the skin on one site; then let the broken arm rest on the rod, until it reaches the armpit, having formed half of a rod curve, then place them under any heavy object or have those serving to hold them in place downwards; then position the eyes (apparently referring to the hands) so that the break is evenly aligned with their combined width, until the broken limb returns as it should.
And the other method is as follows: have the skin resting on his elbow and tie the hand to his neck, then instruct two servants that one should shave off the area where there's the break at his hands, and the other should cut along both sides of each inch mark, spreading out each person according to their own part.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, hold one strap over the wound and above it, and extend each minister to his part. And if the wound is close to the head of the shoulder, it is necessary to place one strap midway between the joint and the edge, and another towards the knife, near the wound; and likewise if the wound is opposite the knife, you must put a light strap without effort until the wound is even on the upper part and on the knife; then make an even incision as necessary, and hold it tight, unless there are discharges from the wound.
And if pus comes out, do not tighten for more than seven days, and place it on greased wool in a comfortable position and in oil rose; until the pus coming out is relieved. Then hold tight, using this method of holding: you should put the plaster on the wound, then join the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and apply the cloth, tighten it both on the shoulder joint and on the arm, so that the arm rests in its natural position, without any obstruction, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use braces, and place an extra large and strong brace above the wound, keeping one inch of space between each brace. Each brace should be so wide that it passes three inches on either side of the wound; then hold tight with these braces, as I explained at the beginning of this chapter about the wound, more firmly and not by pulling away.
And if you see the base of the bone and its narrowing, as we have said, in your effort to restore a broken limb, and you're unsure about removing the clot, if you let it heal for up until seven days, as we have said; then look each day after three days at the bandage, ensuring that no itching spreads around it or any pus comes to the bone because it's too tight. If there's an issue, as we have said.
And if no such incidents occur, or if the dislocation is not relieved until two days later or more, let the pain remain on their back and keep their hands on their stomach; then place under the shoulder one clean cloth of equal wool for each hour of the day or night, watching that the figure of the broken limb does not move or that the ligaments do not soften; if it heals through the power of medicine, and gives them the meat we placed before in such a way that the meat becomes as fine as possible; and when they start to recover, let it be large. And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to take recovery for forty days total; then you should remove and administer baths and medications for treating the area effectively. If the dislocation is ugly or twisted, let it remain in relief for two days or a month.
"Of the breaking of the arm"
The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the pair 'foscile'. One bone is small, and it's this one that covers the elbow; and the other bone is large, and it's this one that lies underneath, towards the little finger. By chance, only the larger foscile breaks or both could break, or they might come together.
When the small bones break, the restoration is light and the healing; and when the large ones break, then the healing goes badly, and worse than when they broke together. If it's only the small bone that breaks, then slight stretching should be done, and make it even.
And if it's the larger bone that breaks, then one needs to strain harder; and stretch it on two cushions, and raise the hand of the patient higher than the others, and place the small finger lower than the other fingers, and have the limb cross over itself, with another cushion in front higher than necessary so no discomfort is felt; then extend his assistant's arm up to where their elbow lies beneath their hand or at one's wrist, and a helper at one's other side above. And then place the arm of the patient level according to its best form.
And if during the breaking into pieces, you place each in its place, and if there is none that sticks to the bone when you grasp it, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do on and with the bone, as we have said before.
And if during the healing process, I mentioned it in a separate chapter; if take the treatment.
And if during the beginning of the restoration process wounds occur, apply this: take a plaster made from rosin and white beeswax, ensuring it is neither too hard nor too soft; then place one sheet of plaster carefully above each other until all the wounds have calmed. After that remove the plaster, and then apply the paste made from mill-ground powder with enough egg. Place the splints, making sure they are further up in the healing process than elsewhere, slightly wider than on other parts, and note that there should be seven or eight splint positions: either if it's within one bone, or two bones; keep them higher around the healing process rather than other places, and every day move less far away from their original position as I have mentioned at the beginning of this chapter. Ensure that all materials covering the healing process are soft and moistened, neither too hard nor abrasive; use threads made from linen, not too thick or thin, as we've discussed. Lastly, care for the limb and its wound over several days. And if any bad incidents come to the member, for example itchiness coming to the member, it is necessary that you immerse the member in hot water until the itch subsides; and leave the member not moved to rest. And then start tightening again, and if the band has been broken and the bone uncovered, doing something similar, then place it correctly.
And if precautions are taken so that no stiffness comes to the member, because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it by rubbing, and let it rest for a few days, until the stiffness passes, and then tighten it again.
And if none of the things we have said comes to the patient or it's healing doesn't progress up to twenty days, then you can undo the bandage. Afterwards, place your hands on their neck and ensure that both sides are equal, while guarding against movement and strain, and let them sleep on their back; and know that this healing is restored in thirty days or forty days, and sometimes in twenty days, depending on the nature of the remedies and their individual constitution.
Of the breaking of the hand
You should know that on the back of the hand and around our thumbs there are few injuries, and it only causes many plagues.
And when the sole of the hand is broken or swelled, it is necessary for the patient to lie with their palm facing up and straight ahead as well; then they should place their hand on an extended surface, extend their fingers over the broken bones, and align them evenly until they are properly connected; and they should apply bandages and splints, if no abscesses develop, then they should place a splint according to the size of their hand; and it should be wrapped in one linen sheet.
And if the injury is located at or near the belly of the sole, then make a bundle with cloths, and instruct the patient to place this on their broken foot; and then apply a long cloth wrap, and have them wear a splint that fits as well as possible for the size of their hand, just like they would for their entire hand.
And if the break is at the front, it should be that you place one pin above and another under in the foot, so that the hands are open and straight, then tie them altogether under the hand, and seal off the connection between the fingers.
And if the break comes to any of our fingers, if it is in the middle, as it should be; and bind with the foot, and if you see that place a small pin upright to lift the break, and do not move; and if the break is at another finger, such as in the index or one of the others, then place it evenly, and tie with the healthy finger which comes after; or you tie all together holding them, so they don't move, or you put a pin there as for when we fix it. And take care in the restoration and positioning of each abscess, and apply what comes to that person, as I have said.
Of the broken foot
The bone of the knee is broken many times, and one can see it often when it turns forward and backward; and its repair consists in joining .1 above the breakage, and another .1 below. And the limbs lie on their face, then extend each minister his link to its equal part; and this is when the breakage is inside the bone.
And if the breakage is near the knee joint, then have one of the links towards the foot, and the other links below the breakage. And likewise if it's near the hip, then put the joints in front of the hip, and thus make the extension upwards; then place the eyes on the bone equally with its two hands, until it is according to its natural figure, and then apply plaster, and the link, so that no abscesses come about.
And if there is pus at the site, let it heal then return to your work and treatment; the operation has been performed in such manner. It is necessary that you envelop around the wound; i.e., bind it with a bandage doubled in two or three parts, and retain excess material. Then lift the leg so that the heel reaches to the base of the shinbone, and insert one thread long between the skin and the leg, down through the knee, and guide the end of the thread upwards; then begin enveloping around the leg and the thigh with the bandage, place a stake at the wound site, and put a stake at the bone of the leg; then place four pieces of cloth under the leg and the thigh to maintain even pressure. Begin binding around the wound in three or four turns; and as you go above the wound, bind less tightly; then attach two thread ends that you have inserted between the leg and the thigh, and bind them with three stakes that are up there, then return below to where the thread end is, until you reach under the foot; and tighten, so it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, then if there is pus or swelling or any other symptoms.
And if it happens, set it free, and address whatever comes up, just as we have said many times. And if there are pieces of bone that catch hold, it's right to remove them, provided they can be removed; and if you cannot, then it's right to cut the wound open, and drain the pus; and treat it in such a way as we have said, until it heals completely.
And never is the wrist broken when one places them like this, as in the shoulder and arm; still, no complaint from the patient follows such a restoration.
Know that the wrist is restored in one or two days, or perhaps less or perhaps more, depending on the variety of physiques.
from the alley of the gallbladder
Know that in the gallbladder alley there is little breaking, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it's usually just a crack, or a small tear of about an inch, and occurs with or without injury, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is this: if you place it evenly with what's round at its ends until they are assembled and moveable, then apply plaster. And put an oval piece on top if you need to, and tighten it according to how it should be done, then redo all the arrangements we've talked about in other injuries, like pus and similar; for each condition put what suits it, as long as it's sound.
of the breaking of the leg
You know that in the leg there are two bones. One of them is called 'right non' which means 'tibia', and the other one is called 'foscile' meaning 'fibula'. And any kind of injury or breakage can happen to it just like with the arm, and for this, the restoration process is similar to that of an arm, equally, and all the procedures are exactly the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, then turn the leg from every side.
And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn in front.
And if the large bones are broken, one feels intense pain and sees it clearly; then turn immediately. Therefore apply extension, place them equally, and tie the ligaments equally; but still, when the break is irregular and consists of several pieces, make sure that the extension is less extensive and lighter; and align them according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two lengths of checked wood that bend the leg on one side and the other, and let them be as long as half the length of the leg from the knee to below; then wrap these in two layers of twine over and under, and tie them in the middle so that the leg cannot lean to the right or left; thus it is well; and no one should apply a single strip this length made of wood for the leg, and place it on guard against any movement. It must be properly done at the break where there is injury; and move the leg each day, to see if there is any pus or other incident; continue the cure until it is sane.
of bone fracture due to impact
At the ankle there is no breakage, but with bone impact breakage occurs and in the lower leg bones, it only results from shaking under various positions.
And if there is an impact breakage at the bones in the leg, and you see these bones press one against another, place them like bones on the ground, just as if they wanted to go, and then put your foot on his ankle, where the bones are raised, push them as much as it takes for them to return to their sockets; then apply plaster and bandages around this side of the leg, and place a small table under both ankles, each filled with about two inches. Then press against the leg up to its bending point, then when you have wrapped cloths around them, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days have passed, if you remove the bandage, because you will find that the bones are even, whether broken or re-aligned.
And if any of the ribs are broken, repair them as we said about the ribs of the hand. Then put a splint on the broken rib according to its length, and make it slightly wider than that, then place under the foot this board I spoke of, and apply even pressure; and if there are two or three, or more, break them, put one splint on each rib according to their size, wrapped in one linen sheet, and hold the table against the foot. And being on the head of the table facing towards the belly of the foot, make sure it is well positioned.
And you must not forget the other things I've said about other injuries, just as we have discussed; and assist each case according to how it should be.
Regarding the breaking of the bone in the hand.
When the bone of its nature in a woman is broken, have her sit with it swollen and enlarged. Then incline her to the lower part of her backside and hold her at the rear. Next fill up the gap of nature with cotton, placing equal quantities as would be about one hand. After that take out the woman and lift her bottom gradually and little by little; then let the cotton fall until it reaches the entrance of nature, bringing the bone with it. And when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton; upon her finishing, return her to normal again; thus repeat this process for seven days or more: if restoration has occurred, take a kid's bladder and tie onto its tip a stick; fill up the whole bladder in nature. Then inflate into the stick forcefully until the bladder swells internally; this will help restore the breakage. Next, fill with cotton and let it stay like that for some more days till it heals.
And when the bone of the elbow in a man is broken, or for a woman, restore it as we have said about the thigh bone; and these broken bones are not to be overlooked by those who apply their skill and use them, and heed my book. For breaking indicates in various positions the correct path of restoration: thus understand it.
In the case of the penis if it is broken, take a goose’s throat and fill the penis with it; then wrap bandages around it, and let it be for three days or as long as needed, and it will heal quickly.
From fracture with wound
It is necessary for the person with a fracture that also has a wound, even if it's large, like in the case of bones in the elbow or shoulder or similar, to be now cleaned, so that the cleanings which we have mentioned bear witness.
And if the wound is clean, you can fumigate it with vitriol (sulfuric acid), and if you don't have anything else, then start restoring the fracture in that same hour or day; or when abscesses do not appear.
And if the abscesses start appearing, let the restoration continue for another day or two, until the abscess subsides, and don't touch it on the third or fourth day, because you might provoke a harmful incident.
And if bone is broken and visible at the site of the open wound, it is necessary to place your hands on it gently, in a small extension.
And if the extensions are not present for you to align evenly with your hands, take this iron instrument that is made of steel, which is seven inches or six inches long, and the width should match the size of the wound; and for this purpose, the surgeon must choose three or four (depending on what he needs for each treatment of bone fracture), and it should be round and a bit large so that it doesn't bend under compression against your limb during surgery, and it should have points at the front, and be thick in the middle forward.
And call it "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved bones be placed on the top of the visible bone; and strike once with it, until it returns, and make them equal one against another. And if the fracture is thin, and the instruments cannot properly grasp the bone, it is necessary that you hold the tip of the bone, as long as the instrument has the ability to do so.
And if you cannot return the bone to its place, as we have said, if you have an appropriate tool for this purpose, such as a scalpel or a fine awl, then with your strength; then reposition that which is staying in the hard part of the bone and small cuts.
And when the bone has been put back in place, and if there is intense pain from the patient afterwards, know that it hasn't returned to its natural position. Do not force it into position, instead moisten it with one part of alcohol mixed with black laudanum, and properly if it's in its original state; and do not apply any ointment or other substances where there is pus, so as to prevent the development of putrefaction and decay; then administer these measures when you have set the bone, and leave the wound exposed, and cover it entirely according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not strained by pressure; many times this has been done, leading to death or corrosion in some cases; and let the straining be softer and more gentle than other injuries; and thus, many have seen the patient recover.
And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt that any adverse events will occur there, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, it should not be treated with these measures; but cover it entirely instead, in place of these measures, with hard cloths and bind them. And when after one or two days you see an improvement or some healing on the wound, then remove whatever you had placed over it with all the wine, and apply a healing ointment for wounds, such as the four-formula ointment and similar treatments.
And it is necessary for you to dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is united and healthy.
And it should be so that the joints of the limb are put together in such a way that the bone slips down slightly.
And if this continues day after day, and it cannot be joined but stays like that, know that there are small bone pieces causing pain due to which you should cover the wound with a tent, and remove all these pieces of dead tissue that cause the pain.
And if a fistula comes about in the body, or any other form of decay, it must be treated according to what he instructs in his previous chapter. And when bone is broken and exposed within the limb, such as in the case of bones in the foot or shoulder, or similar large limb bones, they should not be treated immediately because death may occur from them many times; however, leave them until they heal, perhaps after 20 to 30 days, then treat the wound if possible; and if you cannot, let it be.
The burns that come from sweat
The burns come many times after the healing of the burn wound, even when it's close to the joint. A strange thing is to see the shape of the limb; and by chance it cannot perform its natural acts on the limb.
Take care therefore when this thing is fresh: if you administer stiffening medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, along with sarsaparilla, licorice, and other similar things, do so according to your preference or combine them all, mixing them with stictic wine or with plenty of egg or with garlic; then apply them on the wound in poultices, apply them well, and don't remove it by hand for days; then remove it, and start another poultice as long as the pustules are removed; or you can apply over a piece of plaster that has been made properly; because the properties of plaster allow to remove all swellings from the limbs; and if the pustule has hardened like stone and needs removal, cut through it from above, revealing excess fluid; or have it sanded by someone until it is removed, and continue treatment until healed.
When the breaking of the bone is restored, and afterwards the limbs remain weak and delicate, this can happen for various reasons: due to which it was bound too tightly and wasn't bound as it should have been; or due to there being too many bindings, and not being able to bring the respiration to the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or due to too large movements, not in its time; or due to having little blood in his body, if it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat well, and make the body soft until the healing spreads in him; then give them baths, and provide them joy and comfort. Then apply grease on the limb so that the grease attracts to the main respiration, and washes it with water often, until the respiration matches the limb. And restore its natural shape.
If the member is twisted after healing
When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken openly, and the shape of the limb is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: nor should one believe those who say that we must break the entire limb anew. And many foolish people have done this in our land; these procedures are criticized, and they bring great harms, even causing death at times. However, if the dislocations and pains are still fresh, you should heat them with hot water or cook soothing herbs such as leaves of comfrey, roots, and mallow, among others; and apply a moistening plaster, like well-made yarrow. You take the comfrey sap and mix it with lard or oil from saffron, and make a plaster from that; or you take greased figs, grind them with bran, and other medicines that are made soothing by heating.
And never stop to moisten the dislocation and keep rubbing it for a long time with wet hands. And allow the limb to move every hour.
And if the dislocation has become old and hardened like bone, requiring treatment with an iron instrument, so it should be cut up to the bone at a subtle incision lightly; and place supervision and diligence in the treatment.
This begins the book on dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the body.
When dislocation affects no particular area but now requires immediate restoration without hesitation.
For if one delays, the limbs swell up, and by chance it might be set back to its original position in pain; because you should not move it at the moment when it is swollen: many times it brings on pus and other pains;
If this happens, if you have a surgeon for the patient, then let him stay until all abscesses are subdued; then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each limb according to where treatment comes naturally.
And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder dislocations up until here.
of the jaws
It happens that the jaws are dislocated and downwards, and the dislocations of both occur in two ways: either they are somewhat ossified at their joints and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the feet, causing saliva from the mouth to spill out, and preventing them from closing their mouths, as well as wrapping their tongue with speech.
When a dislocation is small, it can return through various positions.
And if it's complete and has been fully displaced, then you should reset it quickly without hesitation;
And in this manner, have the assistants cut at the head's place where there are hairs, and with one hand push her cheekbones into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth; if it's a dislocation of two parts; and let the other hand be out to match. And instruct the patient to soften and move their jaws in all directions.
And keep pushing until she wakes up in her place.
And if returning it causes pain, in the same way, if they are two jaws together, then use hot water and oil, as long as you gently reset them; don't overly force the return, as we have said.
And when they are returned evenly, and the mouth of the patient closes properly after being made milder, then place moist cloths in a poultice made from olive oil and beeswax, then bind them gently with moist threads.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and have their head resting between two cushions, so that they do not move to either side or force themselves to turn, but consume light food until the pains are reduced, and ensure that their jaws are closed.
And then taste this so that it can be eaten lightly, and does not cause the opening of the mouth during eating or drinking until the jaw is well set and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be set properly within an hour and are not returned to their original position, this results in fevers and recurrent illnesses, as well as occasional abdominal discomfort or vomiting.
And when you see this, then know that it is loss; and many times, death befalls the one who experiences it within eight days.
from the forcefulness
The strength cannot relieve the pain from within or below, it relieves only when outside, and one certainly feels this.
And the process is that when the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; and then presses them into your palm, they will return. Then place them on a plaster and wrap the bandage around, and keep it tight;
And the shoulder that is towards the knife cannot relieve itself; if it does not and if it relieves once, then reset it to its place as we have said; then place it on a plaster and wrap the bandage around, and keep it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed;
And similarly, bring back the shoulder of the spine when it is freed from its place.
On the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in two ways: one way is when it dislocates towards the side of the armpit downwards; and the second way is at the part below the buttocks; and by chance it dislocates upwards, which happens less often;
And it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside through the nerves; and many times dislocates towards the armpit for those who have little flesh, because when they jump, the shoulder goes in quickly; for those who have enough flesh, it jumps to the elbow bone and then returns to it.
And by chance happens in some men due to impact or bruising, and the shoulder swells up with an abscess and they think it is dislocated because of this.
So then you must verify it as long as you are sure about it; and only after that start the treatment.
And recognize dislocations when they are directed towards the shoulder blade, and make a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them an evident diversity. And you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and from the shoulder blade to the armpit, as if it were a hole; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to his nose, nor move in any way.
And also, if it is dislocated upwards and not hidden, you find it clearly at the armpit;
And this method of dislocation must be to reset it when it's new or if it affects the child.
And the method is that the minister lifts his hand from the ailment up top, then places his fingers on the surface, and lifts the joint up forcefully to its original position; and the minister lifts his hand, extends it upwards, placing it onto [the affected area]; if it moves too quickly.
And if it doesn't come like we have said within days afterwards, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the minister should administer a soothing treatment, as with decoctions of marjoram, fenugreek, and chamomile in hot water, and apply it.
Then cover the patient's back with a cloth, and place on the surface a padding of equal thickness, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the heel of the foot on the padding, and raise the head of the shoulder gently, and guide the hand towards the ailment.
And another servant cuts the neck of the patient so it doesn't move forward; this shoulder comes back right now, and if you see that you reset it according to this method:
And you should have someone present at your home who is bigger than the patient; and be upright towards the side, and push the shoulder under the collarbone of the patient, and lift up the collarbone, so that the head hangs vertically. And another servant pulls the hand of the patient backward towards the belly. And if the head is too light, and nothing heavy is placed on him, then the dislocation comes back now.
And you also reset it in another way: and one sticks a long stick into the ground, so that the head of the shoulder is placed as with a bullet, and not too large nor too slippery; Then place some over the hair, but have a shield underneath it, and let the hair stay as long as that of the stick. Then extend her hand down on the other side diagonally, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if she doesn't return with all these things that we have said, do this treatment: take one rod of two strong and four thick, which allows the head to fit in by force from below at an angle, according to this shape:
then bind the head to the stick under a shield so that the stick doesn't hurt the hair, then place the stick on the shoulder at an angle with the hair; and extend your arm up along the stick as long as possible, then tie the support on the stick, and the arm below the head, then put the arm on one of two thick rods, about four inches wide, and have your hand extended downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return to its place right now.
And when it is so, in whatever manner, if you need to place an equal thread on the shoulder joint, then apply plaster powder mixed with mill dust, along with incense and yolk butter, all over the shoulder and around it, then remove from the shoulder area, and retie above the plaster dressing, and secure the bandage again on top of the plaster, and hold hands to their necks, and keep the hands in this manner.
And it is necessary that he eat a little, until the body parts are strengthened, because he will heal faster; and then increase his intake after about 5 days or 10 days, and move him; and if it is firm and not softened, then he is healed.
And if the joint is loose due to moisture that has caused it, or for another reason, you should administer three applications of cauterization to it, as was described in the section on cauterizations before this chapter.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift your arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder has been stretched or weakened; and know that the joint would never be fixed in its place.
Dislocations near the buttocks, breasts, or behind, are caused by hand thrust and stretching, and occur elsewhere too; treat until it becomes clear.
And if after healing there's pain in the limb, and delays in movement, then immerse the patient in warm baths repeatedly, until this pain subsides, and returns to their original state.
From the dislocation of the shoulder bone.
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at several points and returns to them; it has been dislocated from all sides, as well as in front and behind. And dislocation isn't resolved because one can clearly see and feel it very well; and it dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the shoulder bone with good health, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is bony, and cannot bend the arm or touch his shoulder to any extent.
And it is necessary that you reset it in this way for abscesses to be extracted completely, because if they were extracted partially and left behind, it would be difficult to remove them; and by chance, it may not be able to be removed entirely, even when it's at the back. It is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and by chance it can lead to death.
And for its restoration if it can be returned to this condition, you should extend his hand with both of your hands; and his arms shall be spread outwards, downwards and upwards, and place the fingers towards the elbow along the inside, outside and underneath, then press the joint onto his shoulder blades or at the root of his palm until it regains its place.
And if there is a dislocation at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand against itself, and places the cut on the root of the palm that was dislocated.
And if it doesn't return to its place, apply strong extension; and have both of you extend the arm, and do this with both hands so that it does not move during extension. Then turn the arm in each direction, then take hold of a long and wide double cloak;
And when you touch the joint to the joint with your hand, if you smear some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint together until it heals;
And when it's at the head, if you place dry plaster with egg yolk on it and push it together, then allow the limb to be in this position near the wound for some days, then remove the bandage.
And if the joint is firmly in its place, remove the bandage and leave it alone; and if you see that the joint does not heal well, reapply the plaster and the bandage again, and leave it like this for a few days until it is firmly placed; then remove the bandage.
And if it feels painful after setting the joint back in place and it moves again, bathe and thoroughly rub it, pressing until it is relieved; or you apply a piece of fat sheepskin to the joint, then leave it for one day and a night, then give the patient a bath. And when it sweats, rub the joint gently, then set the bone back in place, and afterwards into a bath; and do this twice or three times until it feels better; and if you can see that it helps, apply moist cow fat heated with butter to it, and leave it on; it will return to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
The hand dislocation recovers easily, more so than other joints, across the board. It is fitting to return it to its place as soon as possible, while it's still dislocated, in this very moment that it has been dislocated, so that the fingers swell up, or if there comes pus exudation hot.
And the process involves placing your hand on the afflicted area as if it were on a table, and stretching out the minister's hand, then you inspect it to make sure it is even, thus that their palm touches the appearance of the joint, and you hold it until it returns to its position.
Always, it must be that you inspect if it is properly in place; then have the afflicted person lay their hand's back on a table during extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, have them place their hand's back on the table, and inspect by having their hand touch the appearance of the joint. If it returns to its position now, that is well.
If not, if the application of plaster to heal abscesses is too painful, then let it rest as such without beginning anew.
And if he cannot bear it, and you can't put him back in place after some days, then the joint will remain twisted;
And it does no harm to the patient so long as his hands are bound, and he cannot strain anything in any way: thus you will know that the nerve has been cut, or the artery; if there is no other means except cauterizing for straining in this case, then by chance there is no better option.
And when the hands are in place, then apply plaster as we have said, strain it and leave it for five days, then remove it and let it stay like that.
And if it cannot be moved well, and there is no dislocation, with hot water, and rub until it becomes clean.
Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Neither once are the fingers of the hand separated from their place, neither once on the back of the palm or the belly;
Therefore hold the fingers and keep the dislocation away from your ears until it heals, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disconnected;
And let it two days, and then make him equal on that day; and without tying him up, as we have said, and release him from the noose of the day, and make him move, and tie him back at noon; and do this often until he is restricted.
And do the same if it is dislocated at the back of the hand and do as you did above until it's cured; and do this similarly when it is dislocated on the other side.
With the relief treatment for the heel, with the back
When the heel or the neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, if there is no treatment, because time speeds up the disease.
And the signs are that the discharges escape involuntarily, cannot be held back, and often soften various limbs or both wrists or elbows or shoulders.
And it softens the knees into four parts; the one that softens at the back is called 'gibbosity':
The treatment is that you should heal when the gibbosity has come from childhood: if there is no cure or healing in general.
And the one that comes from falling or impacts or similar things, according to old medical practices using large words, it doesn't provide any significant benefit in all cases;
But I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gynecological condition which occurs before the anus, there is none nor any remedy;
And also in the chest issue that comes straight to the two ribs, and one cannot cure anything else than what directly affects the back, as I say;
And that if any disease spreads up to the belly bone equally for one length and has strain on him from within, it does not cause blisters;
Then stick one point in the head in the earth, and another at the heels, and tie a bandage around the knee joints, and another at the hips, and knees, and ankles;
and let two people know about the bandages, one by the head and the others at the heels, among the two points;
and make sure they are well closed, the point as we have said, and the person lying down places their palms on the earth formation, until they regain consciousness.
And if she does not recover from this treatment, take a board of three arm lengths long, and place it under the back, and if the patient is on their side, place the head of the board under the back. Then put the middle of the board on the earth formation; Place the eyes of his feet on the other head of the table, and press well, until he comes to himself at the head; and if you see it, do it to the wrist that turns in the hand.
And when you place two spurs on the head of one arm of great length, and towards the feet also two others, each with an inch long space in between them;
Place one small piece in each spike or where the wrist bends, and ensure that the spikes are firmly in the ground so they don't move. Between every two spikes place another turning spike at which the bone turns, and between the two turners place two other short spikes of an inch long for the purpose of turning the wrist;
Then tie the ligament that is between the heels at the wrist to one of the bones, and the other end towards the feet for the other bone, and each servant rotates their wrist fully along the ligament, and the master makes sure the spine is equal as we have said.
And when they are even, place them under drying plaster with abundant eggs, and then oil it up, and then apply the ash of a tablet of one and three quarters inches long, which purges the gilbositis site and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a bandage as we have said, and let the patient undergo subtle nourishment until they are healed.
And if anything comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the ash that we have mentioned previously; and each time it is administered, one piece of plaster should be given.
And if the appearance comes at the end of the back spine in the back, and you should watch for whether it is dislocation; and this bone opens, so one should not have any presumption about it: otherwise it might bring death.
On the dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only produce dislocations, not sprains; unlike other joints which can be sprained. The hip joint is dislocated in four ways: internally and externally, forwards and backwards; more internally than externally, less so in front and behind.
And the knowledge of internal dislocations is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and the diseased knee opens more than the healthy one, and the diseased knee cannot bend to reach fire. And it is where the limbs are swollen due to an abscess, because the head of the thigh bone comes into play.
And the indication for him who is coming to danger, it means that this event is contrary to these before.
And the signs for him who is coming to what lies ahead, it means that his leg is well according to completion; however, neither doubles nor stretches his knee without pain, and if one tries to make him move forward, he cannot before and retains his urine, and swells his ankle, and when he walks, he does so on the heel.
And the signs for him who is coming behind, it means that he cannot extend his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more bent than the other one, and the ankle becomes softened, and the shoulder of the arm is at its head under the ribs.
The correction of this appearance of dislocation means that you should recognize if the dislocation is old and remains in its position, without any treatment; and it's not appropriate to assume anything.
And concerning those where the dislocation is recent, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hasten to restore the joint, and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it right and left; by chance if it returns, and no other treatment is needed.
And if it does not return in this way, then you should apply one strong remedy and stretch the leg strongly with both hands, or with one band where they are tied above the knee; and another remedy should be applied with one's hand above in such a way that they push his hands under his armpits, then he pulls it with one strong pull on the thigh; and another holds the head against the band.
And it extends upstream and downstream at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
This method of extension applies to four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is correct.
But if not, treatment should be given according to its appearance. If the dislocation is in the pardedens, it would be fitting to set the patient's side against a healthy one, then tie him near the heel, and above the armpit, then place the bandage at the top towards the armpit, and toward the backside;
Then hold another minister's arms and encircle the large side of the bad heel, and extend it upwards in this form: if it returns to its place now; and this kind of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot squeeze it in this way as we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope or string under the two heels, and under the knees, and make sure the diseased leg extends one foot more than the other;
Then have them hung by the head from a post, and be two feet above ground; then instruct one of your assistants to hold the head of the thigh bone, and have other assistants with the patient, who will hold around the thigh firmly, for the joint is now returning quickly.
And when the dislocation is at back, if you place the thigh bone as we said in someone who has elasticity, and pull one rope properly on the diseased leg and also on the foot.
Then place two thorns, one on the head and one elsewhere. Then stick a thorn between the armpits of the patient at the right angle; and have wet cloths placed around him, so he doesn't burn the patient, then extend each minister towards himself, and place the vision of the dislocation evenly with his hand.
If it comes back, that's good. If not, place him on a table and press him in such a way as we have said for the gilbositis treatment, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when dislocations are in front, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg promptly, and according to what I have said; and place the pain of being on the bad side, then press with the other hand, and pull forward towards the knee.
And if the dislocations are at the back, it is not necessary to extend the leg behind or lift onto the ground, but rather the limb should be in the same position as when the hip was dislocated at the back, just like we said about lying on the two hips. And lie on their face, and extend the joint like we have said before, and one must press at the joint on the table;
And it will be ready when the patient extends their legs and they are of equal length. Then adjust their hips and apply a plaster, and bind them with a bandage so that they do not move;
And they rest for three or four days, then release them and apply the plaster. And if you see that they are of equal length, bind them as before, and leave them for another three days. Then release them again and let them move well, until the limbs have become strong.
From shoulder dislocation
The knees can be dislocated in two ways: this means, internally and externally, and behind; and they do not dislocate forward.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their knee, and if they cannot reach their knee, you know they are dislocated;
and the restoration of everything is that you make the patient stand straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back against their thigh, and set their foot on your feet;
then take their kneecap in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee together; and another attendant extends their foot until the knee returns to its place. And the signs are that they nicely move their leg at the knee gently.
put the bandage on, and allow the leg to rest at the knee, then join them tightly for three or four days, then release. And do not move the injured limbs until they are healed, as long as the body parts have been strengthened.
And if the limb is not yet at all, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip joint, until it is healed.
of the ankle dislocation
The heels are never properly set and never fully released, both inside and outside.
And the signs for this are that the ankle swells up, and tends forward to the part where it was dislocated:
The movement should be swift; one must gently extend their hands when they are merely stretched out.
And when it has come back to its place entirely, it is necessary that you make the patient sit up straight, and hold him with two attendants behind by his leg, above the ankle;
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then again with your left hand, four times, then lift up and firmly hold the foot high;
And do this twice, as we have said, while holding and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is well; if not, begin the process again, for it will return.
And if it cannot return like this, then release the patient's back towards the ground, and place a stick, and push it firmly into the earth between its buttocks, and tie cloths around it, so that it does not bruise the patient.
then scrape his thighs, and other attendants spread his feet to his hands or under one tie, so they are bound around the neck of the foot; then extend each attendant evenly, and let the stick stay between the thighs of the patient to hold the thigh in place when one extends it.
then position both shoulders evenly at the patient's hands, and other attendants scrape the healthy leg up to the knee, and the dislocated shoulder will return quickly.
And when it is at its point, place the plaster and apply hot iron over it, hold it in place firmly, and tie the stick to the leg, guard against the nerves that are behind the ankle, so they are not too tight;
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage comes loose, hold it in place again; then release it on the third day or fourth, and gently guide the patient for four days; And if he moves beyond this period, it is not secure that he will not dislocate again.
And if the pus comes out, you should soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
From these two
When both shoulders are dislocated, if they suit well to extend them by work, and this is a slight matter.
And if the dislocations are in neither back nor seat bones, you should have the patient sit on or on the end of their back, making sure it is perfectly flat or on a table completely upright, and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly until they regain consciousness;
And when they are level and there is nothing open, place a bench of two stools under the foot's sole, then press firmly, and let it stay for three days, then release him; and have him rest until he recovers.
Regarding wounds and dislocations combined
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one seeks to restore it, many times the patient dies:
if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful but not hasty;
and begin with soothing things for the abscess to drain, and leave the patient in God's hands if you do not see hope of recovery; And when you see hope, reset the limb back to its place immediately, so that the abscesses can drain and heal.
And when the limb is back in place, apply soothing ointments to the abscesses and treat the wound as it should be treated, using dried healing substances.
And if there is breaking with dislocation and small fractures, set the bones, and do as we have instructed for simple diseases.
And beware not to fall into the path of fear, as I have said, for this is what your Creator commands you to do, and through knowledge protect yourself and your body. Amen.
