You dear children, I have completed this book which is the culmination of the science of medicine, bringing together its completion through my explanations and declarations. And it came to me in vision that I would complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is well established in our region and has spread everywhere, it has lost its science and been divided up, and nothing remains from it except for small descriptions in books written by the ancients that were handled by hands. And because of this, there has come error and vanity, and closed are the minds, and the science is far away.
It seems that I should revive this treatise together with the order of its content according to the path of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and come together in assembly the forms of the cautery irons, and the other tools of work along with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And because no good masters are found in our times, the art of medicine has been neglected. And he who intervenes should ascend in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as they know how to judge members, and their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles, and the number of bones, and their movement and the moving and resting veins, and where their exit lies.
And thus, according to Hippocrates, he says that without knowledge it is little, and with practice it grows some; similarly in the art of hand.
We shall tell you at the start of this book that if someone lacks knowledge about what has been discussed, they may easily commit errors and mislead others; just as I have seen many times among those who interfere with this science and abandon their knowledge and lack of experimentation.
For I saw a fool who tried to cure one of the scrofulous swellings or neck of a woman. He tied off the arteries below her neck; so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another fool who was treating a stone in an old man's body, and the stone was large; he took along with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I have already been called to extract, and saw the position of the organ and the size of the stone, and indeed if they had cut him he would have died.
And saw another case where I treated the leg of a Duke from our land, who had broken his leg and sustained an injury due to the breakage. The surgeons ignorant tied the break over the wound, causing inflammation there; they didn't stop with the treatment till it improved after one week; then instructed not to disassemble it again; so waited until the leg was fully swollen up and down and eventually led to ruin.
I have been summoned to help him, and I hurried to free his leg. And when I found it dislocated so perfectly, he was in peace and felt no pain.
But every path of corruption had already been confirmed throughout the body or member, and there was no way to heal it; and the corruption continued to spread within the body until the entire member was lost.
And there is another method that collapses an abscessed wound, and then inflames it through the wickedness of her lordship.
For a chancre, when it is full of melancholic humor, it should not be touched with iron if it cannot all be removed, what has been corrupted.
And because of this, dear children, you are required to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: meaning, those situations where there are risks in multiple positions. And I will show each one in this book where there is danger and risk.
Because it is necessary for you to take care of this, so that no one may speak ill of you.
If you prepare your weapons carefully, and treat your illnesses gently yet firmly, and use the best approach so that through God's grace you achieve salvation and become whole; and leave behind terrifying diseases with no complaint of health; and remove from yourself those who cause doubt, and have faith in what you can do so that you may go from this world to glory.
Galien mentions in some of his admonishments: "Do not treat illnesses improperly, lest you be called foolish by the people."
I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters deal with fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and the chapters are organized from head to bones; and about the forms of instruments, and the materials for cautery tools, and all that is necessary in work.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are organized and contain the forms of instruments.
The third chapters deal with restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; it is organized from head to bones, and includes the forms of instruments.
Just as we remember our work, it is necessary for me to tell you about the quality of each remedy and its harm associated with each temperament.
I say that the qualities of aid, and harm, are the longest word and most subtle science and the secrets respond; and many wise people spoke about this, agreeing with it. And they were content with their words for me, because I fear its length.
I say that the fire cautery universally benefits all compositions where there is substance, because it caters to two types of composition: these being known as warm composition with substance, and dry composition with substance.
In the warm and dry combined with substance, there was no agreement and they said that the fire cautery is great help; and another group said the opposite: that the fire cautery only benefits illnesses caused by heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and should never be treated with hot diseases through heat or drying. And this person who says the opposite, that the cautery provides great help to hot and dry illnesses that come into people's bodies. For when you compare the body of the person and their moisture to the aspect of fire, you find that the body is cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it true on every occasion by experiment.
And for every way, do not intervene except that which has been proven and by long use known, the art of cauteries, and the diversity of skin types, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and duration; we have no fear from other skin types, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the instruments gathered together with the cautery.
Know, children, that when a fire cautery is assembled, it contains the secrets of healing, and offers more benefit than a burning medical treatment.
For fire is simple, and does not come forth from any member except that which is cooked, and it harms no other member if you do not name it.
Hot medicines spread from one part of the body to another when they are removed, causing diseases and disorders in various parts of the body. And by chance, they might cause trouble for the patient.
Fire by its height and by the goodness of its nature does not do this if there is no excess.
And this I have found for you through experimentation and from the longevity of my service and study in the art, it is true about things; and for this reason I apologize for the length of speech, because I do not want to withhold the secret that has been revealed regarding fire and its quality, how it relieves diseases in the body, as the philosopher explains by demonstrating. May you accept these insights in your thoughts.
And know, child, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done, and read prayers.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the nuisances happening are mitigated by the help of the cautery; and indeed, if the cauterizations are for necessary pains greater than can wait until larger mischief befalls the limb.
And never think of it, little child, as the foolish people do; for a disease cured by cauterization does not have recurrence. And they say it like this: but it is not quite as they believe, because cauterizations are only medicine that changes complexion and dries the fluids which cause pain, and is worth more than medicine due to its speed in enhancing valor, and due to the virtue of its work and authority.
And know that when disease comes, it happens according to the complexion of the sick person and the location of the disease and its virtue; and there are gathered in him the excesses due to the consumption of meats and similar things. If only cauterizations were administered where there is little excess and moisture, such as cauterizations for pain, and similar things, then that kind of pain does not recur; but this happens rarely.
And no one understands why cauterizations are called the later ones in medicine, and this is seen; but they do not believe that cauterization holds after medicine. But their understanding is false, and cauterization is considered the later ones of medicine because when we administer our healing methods in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works. Therefore, it is correctly understood that cauterization belongs to the later stages of medicine, not according to the understanding of those who misunderstand.
The old ones said that cauterizations made from gold instruments are better than those made of iron, and they said this only due to the quality of gold and the purity of its substance; they also stated that the gold parts of a cautery do not cause ulcers, but that is not true as I have proven it myself, and found out that this is indeed true in some individuals; and cauterizations made with gold are better than those made of iron, just as they said.
And yet, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not realize it by the color of the gold, and it is suddenly cooled down; and if you heat it too much; they place it in fire; and thus there is enough prevention.
And because we use our metal cautery that has been adapted to our work.
So I have organized this chapter on the shoulder until this point, so that finding it may be easier.
The olive cautery
A fire cautery is suitable for moisture and coldness on the head. There are two kinds that we do this due to the cause of an illness called 'soda', and because of many fluids that descend from the body like sweat, and from ears, and through a multitude of dreams and toothache and sore throat, and also towards all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda poisoning and apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The shape of this cautery is such that the body's maladies are purified by a dissolving medicine altering the head. Three times or four times, according to how the virtues and the acidity and the habituation of the malady can bear it; and then you should reapply over the head of the malady.
And then place his palms together, and position your hands on the sides of his nose; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two nostrils; and let it be where your middle fingers go, if it bleeds from there, then heat up the cautery which is called "olivare", whose form is as follows:
Apply ink to his shoulder mark, and while descending and stretching your hand gradually and steadily, move it back and forth. Then lift your hand alone, checking if you see the bone. If you don't see it, continue with the cautery until you do see the bone as I've instructed; afterwards take one part of charcoal, place a moistened soft cotton inside, put it on the shoulder mark, and leave there for three days. After that, apply a poultice made from butter onto it; let it remain until the scorching disappears; thereafter treat the wound with ointment known as 'tetrafarmaçon', until it heals properly.
And if they said among the old ones that when a wound remains open for longer, it purges more; and because of this advice, they moved.
And it was said by some that one should let the cautery burn until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone and treat it.
And they say that concerning the cautery one must allow it to stay there and press so strongly that you raise as wide of an area around the bone as would be made by a single ellipse, like what women place in their needles when menstruating because the body fluids are forced out; and should one leave the wound open for a long time after that. Afterward, one must clean it and stitch it up.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good for everything, except where there is a passage for fear; and I think that I should allow them. Because the joints become weakened by continuous exposure to nature's solutions, as we have shown in other limbs, and even when the joints are weak due to nature itself, my first impression of cautery is more healing and stronger for me, and from this method I work together with it thus gathering health.
of the old pain in the head
When throughout the entire head comes chronic pain and lasts long, one should use the patient's years of experience and pills which are called "cochies", and treatments for clearing the head and ears and bandages; and if one applies the cautery as we have previously mentioned, it is effective.
Take care that the shoulder of the patient is of strong nature and not too cold; therefore, apply the cautery just below this cautery as we have explained above.
After you have done the cautery on each of the joints up to the bone as we said before, and do another cautery at the place which is called 'vassel'; and attach two levers where suction cups are placed; and lift your hand so that you cannot touch the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will explain further. And it must be that the cauteries on the joints are finer than the one used for half of the head, and they should have this shape:
For the fire cautery, When sudden pain comes to part of the head,
The medicine-cautery if you take one spoonful of oil,
After the ointment treatment as long as it is clean; and if you see fit to use some burning medicines that I have written about or the tenth treatise on burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat up the form of the cautery as described:
And call it "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a bell with a .i. point of curvature, and in the middle there's a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, hold your hand and gently move the iron for a bit until half of the edge of the wound is burned; then lift your hand to prevent the artery from burning, it is done, and allow an abundance of blood to flow.
After putting on sailcloth and place it on the wound for .iij. days; then remove it and apply wet cotton soaked in butter, then continue treating the wound with ointment until it is clean; and if you wish to cauterize this headache with the cautery that is called "cultellare", do it at the tip only, and be careful not to cover the artery in this headache which is not old.
From headache
When you treat headache as we have described before in the divisions of diseases, and it doesn't improve, and when the fire cauterization tools which were discussed earlier are tried on metal but do not adhere, then it is necessary that you heat up the "cultellare" type cauterizing tool until it becomes white; and so with your hand guiding along a line half the length of its full size from the elbow, apply once while making sure not to cut the artery and stopping just before reaching the bone; and be careful not to let the jaw move when eating, making sure only the gum is in contact without causing spasms in the patient, and guard against bleeding from the artery if it is cut or severed even with fear and likewise for those who are unaware of this and have not been trained and experienced; leave the work halfway done; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and show you where it is mentioned in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizing tools do not adhere to the disease, and patients are suffering, cauterize them in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and when you observe this, administer the cauterizer that we have mentioned or in the chapter on the extraction of arteries, with a cauterizer having two knives; and these cauterizers are better than others and more helpful.
From the pain of the ears from coldness
When pain in the ear comes from cold, and one has applied solutions of medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned under division, and if the pains do not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "points", as follows:
After applying the cautery to all around the patient's ear, or in and around both of them where the pain is present on both sides, then move away a little from the root of the ear after you have indicated its location. Apply ten points around each ear; treat the area until it has healed completely.
From the pain in the mouth
Pain that needs to be treated with a cautery is not for those that move from pus, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and no cautery should be done on symptoms that come from drying skin and scabs.
When you treat this instance of pain that moves from pus in the ear and from discharges from the head and gargling, if it responds well, then you must apply a cautery to the hair with three applications: one on the root of the ear, and another slightly beyond the temple, and the third at the adjustment of the two lips; place the cautery where health opens, and make it cauterize that area above the ear up a bit under the eardrum, and another one on the temple as long as an inch; let the cautery stay there until half the wick is burned; this is how you should perform the cautering:
And when you see the appearance of the surgical instrument that we described earlier, but it is somewhat more delicate, so it should be advisable to have the knives a little bit larger. After treating the wound as I said before, until it has healed.
When dealing with apoplexy that's been present for a long time and you're treating it as we've said, and if the patient doesn't improve, and the patients don't have fever, then do this: make three applications of the cautery: two on the two horns above the head, one behind the head, and one where the neck is called "vassel" as we previously mentioned, and the last application on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we said before.
from liturgy
For this illness, give the patient large bread and pills that soothe the brain; after that, have all of their head shaved, and then place the sinapic plaster on the back of the head as written or described in the treatment guide for plasters; and here is how to do the cautery: do it in the way I have said.
If it's healed like this, well and good; if not, then perform three cauteries descending from the head to the neck. Leave a space of one and a half inches between each cauterization mark. Proceed with treatment as usual. If you see an adjustment needed, and the patient tolerates it, do another cauterization in the middle area; and if necessary, apply two others over the first two marks until it is healed. And use those cauteries that are called 'olive-shaped', just like I've previously mentioned.
from coldness of the head It is necessary to cleanse the head of old dandruff and what we have mentioned before; after washing the head with water, then apply heat to it. Perform cauterization around the head and on each horn, one behind and three on the spine near the neck; and if you need more, when the horns are wet and the skin is sore, and the illness is severe, do four cauterizations on the spine at the back; and leave until the driest part of your burn is done, then lift your hand. Afterwards, treat it until it heals properly, and use those cauteries that are called 'olive-shaped', as we have mentioned before.
From epilepsy
The epileptics should only use a cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and first modify the brain with years and other remedies that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is large and suffering from physical medicine.
And if it's an infant who cannot endure this treatment, make them gargle and chew often with good meats; after that he restores his head in the middle, and I do a single cautery according to what we have said previously, and a single cautery on the jugular vein, and on each horn; and if the patient is large and suffering, perform the cauterizations as I told you when dealing with paralysis and softening of body parts, on the spinal column and the neck, and do the olive oil cauterizations according to the method that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, then you should perform one subtle cautery in this manner:
When due to the cause of melancholy are excesses or fluids corrupted and full of pus, then the part cautery of the fire cautery as we have said to those who have paralysis.
And if due to the cause of melancholy is the excess descending into melancholy, and the parts are moist with malaise, then this should be drunk so that the brain may be purified, as was discussed in the previous section.
After touching the part of malaise; after make two linen strips well done, as one circle, place them around the head; and if malaise is felt, you will cross them, held tightly from all sides; then present the liniment, and apply butter of old beeswax; and heat it on a moderate fire, so that it can be applied without causing discomfort; after this, empty the ring inside with the head in place, and let it cool down; and do this once every week to each malaise part with another good administration until they are cured.
If you see that the fire cautery is being used, by making several points all over it at once. This way of applying the cautery moistens the brain greatly; and then place wet cotton in butter and in gelatine grease.
of the eyes When the onset comes to the eyes first through the symptoms I have mentioned in the division, then start and continue making the patient drink things that purify the head, and keep him/her away from all moisture, and make them sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
After giving him/her instructions about his/her head, and make them undergo cautery on the head, and make two cauterizations on each temple when their eye pressure begins to be felt together in both eyes, or if it is only one eye, then apply all the cautering across all the veins and arteries that are around the brain, and keep them cauterized as long as you can according to the width of the temples; and watch for bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop the bleeding with such force as you have.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions with the cautery, how to apply it; and never should you do cautering or remove an arrow from between the two bones behind.
of the tears' two courses
When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed, and located on the veins, or beneath the arteries that appear outside of the head; and one sees that they are cold excesses of phlegm. So I make him apply the cautery that I have said at the beginning regarding descending to the eyes: 1. Apply it around the head, and 2. two cauteries on each temple, and 3. two cauteries where removing an arrow would be done beneath the two bones; and if there is need for more, carefully apply the cautery above the eyebrows with every small application of the cautery.
of the tears within the eyes
When you administer the remedies according to what we have said in the division, and if they do not benefit, then give the patient three raw onions to drink; after that, place him on his head, and apply a cautery or olive oil in the middle of it; and perform two cauteries with the "claw" type cautery on the two ears, slightly above the hairline; and be careful not to touch the artery, so as not to interfere with it. And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "claw".
When the paper of the oil is softened due to illness and moisture, then apply this type of cautery which is called "olive". And here is its form:
And if you see that two cauteries should be made on the two hairs as long as they are; and do not let your hand rest until a third part of the paper is burned away, according to the manner I have said.
The hair which pricks the eye No instance has occurred where the hair of the eye turns inside out and pricks the eye; in such cases, one performs cauteries according to two methods: that is to say by fire or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then make the patient healthy; afterwards draw on the page of the eyes a figure that is as round as the leaf of a laurel tree, and start drawing from the sign at the beginning of the hair. Then place wet cotton in egg white paste and garlic paste on the eye, then heat up the cautery which has this shape:
After cauterizing on the figure you have drawn a little bit each time, until the scabs cover the area; and the signs of health are that you see the page white, and the hairs lifted at the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then place wet cotton in butter until the scab is removed; after that apply ointment until it heals completely.
And if hairs and the page become soft after this, then reapply the cautery on that same area as you did initially; and if the hairs have fallen out, then cauterize until the page is lifted to its natural position, and even, and doesn't touch the eye.
The burning medical cautery commands the patient to let the hairs grow large and even; then take parchment to form it like a bay leaf. Then take French soap and live vinegar, each about half an ounce, and finely grind them together. Mix them quickly so they don't cool down. Spread this on the form resembling a bay leaf on paper, and place it under the eyes; if the illness lasts for only one day, you must cut open in one place, and if in both places equally. Place moistened cotton below each eye like an egg. The patient's head should be clean and you should hold your finger in the medicine every time the patient feels the irritation of the medicine, because it feels irritation as well as from fire. When this has been done for some time, once you have exposed the medicine to your finger. And when the irritation has passed, lift your finger from the medicine, and check if you see the paper lifted as it would be after being forced off by fire or through incision; and if that is the case, then everything is well. If not, apply more medicine to your finger until the medicine works equally on both sides, and the eyes are properly aligned; then place moistened cotton in butter until the burned skin is covered, after that cure the application of the ointment called 'dyafenis' and other remedies, until it heals completely.
And if this requires that you prepare well for your work by great care so that no medicine is wasted on them. And if the paper becomes damp afterwards, and the hair touches in the eye, then repeat the medicine on that part of the eye which was softened with clean paper properly; just as you did before; after this treatment until it is healed; and this is the form of the leaf of wormwood:
And know that the eyes of humans vary in size and proportion, and according to this guide your measurements; do not let the right path be denied to him who is studying this craft.
regarding the treatment of fistula with a cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not beneficial, then it is necessary for you to apply cautery according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your healthy hand; and guide the doctors' head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move or depart from its place; afterwards, stuff cotton moistened with the yolk of an egg or garlic juice onto the eye; next, heat up the cautery which is part of this method: and place it over the head as if forming a peacock's feather; if you see it, may it be pointed between one ear and another, and if you see it, may it also resemble a tent; but in all cases, what is beside that should not move for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it has been opened, and treat the putrefaction, and dry it; and if it is closed, open it again, and remove from the wound. Afterwards, apply heat over the cautery in this form, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part below the nose above the eye, so that your hand does not cause mischief; and place the cautery into the oil grease, and let it become contaminated.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be well. If not, then continue with another round of cautery and do this if needed as many times as necessary, leaving it for three days; after that place cotton saturated in butter on it, and use the desiccant ointment dressing while the wound is still clean. Once forty days have passed without healing, apply a corrosive water medicine until the bone is uncovered; and follow the instructions according to what he prescribes in his chapter.
And there is a way to cauterize a fistula that none of the old ones mentioned. Understand what I mean by a fistula, and make it round in shape; after this, place one thin camel bone inside the opening. And I do it to the size of about three inches in length; and hold your hand or camel firm, not allowing the muscles to move, so that the melted wax doesn't drip into his eye; and when one places on the eye a wet cotton in the shape of an eggshell or in ashes: the wax performs the work of the hole and brings marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed through the cautery method we've described, that's good. If not, then it is necessary to use wormwood for the child, and bring the fistula back into the body according to what should be done in its own proper place.
of mouth ulcers Occasionally, mouth sores appear on the lips which are called "whiskers", and similarly on the lips of children.
When you treat these mouth sores with the methods we've discussed in divisions, and if treatment doesn't help, then use a small surgical tool like this to gently burn them:
And place it quickly into those cuts until they grow just enough; afterwards, clean the wound of wax while it is still healthy.
from the phlegm in the throat
When abscesses come to the root of the throat or in the lymph node, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it leads to putrefaction and decay; after which it hardens and turns into a fistula. You treat this as we have instructed in divisions, but if it doesn't improve, then you need .i (one) cautery according to the size of the fistula; after removing the pus or pustule from the fistula, hold your hand until the metal rod reaches the bottom and up to the root. Then do this once or twice, after the treatment we have mentioned in cures, while it's still healthy. And if treated like this is good; but if not, you need to expose the wound and remove the rotten bone as you find it in your manual.
movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but this doesn't work, then put the head of the disease in your health; afterwards heat up the cautery until its form comes after in such a way that you place a twig on the tooth. And put within the cautery a hot stick, and keep your hand steady so that the diseased part feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after lift your hand and start using the cautery according to your desire; afterwards fill the diseased part's mouth with salt water, and leave it for an hour and then pull it out.
And in this manner the moving tooth is repositioned, and the softened gum becomes restrained, and the moisture that was present dries up.
from the pain of teeth
When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is cold or heat inside the body, and medical treatments do not help, then one must use cautery according to two methods: and butter cautery and fire cautery.
Butter cautery works like this: you take butter from a cow, and in a spoon made of iron or tin; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a thread, then soak it in melted butter, and place it on the painful tooth quickly and hold until it cools down; and do this several times until its effectiveness reaches to the root of the tooth, and if you see wet wool and cotton soaked in cold butter, place them again on the aching tooth, and apply hot iron for as long as heat reaches inside the tooth.
Fire cautery works like this: you take a hot iron or tin rod, so large that the fire does not reach inside the wound; after heating the cautery, from which the heat will come out afterwards, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the heat of the cautery cools down; do this repeatedly, as the pain will be gone that day or the next. And ensure that the patient fills their mouth with plenty of butter while the process is happening, then pull it out quickly; this is how to use a fire cautery:
When the sores are due to cold blood and moisture, and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then apply the cautery as described below, and make two openings for the vapors to escape from the other side; and place the heated cautery on the abscess once, or twice if needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, adjust the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it in that position for three days; and apply moistened cotton with butter until the scabs are removed; afterwards cure with ointments and bandages until it heals.
When the moisture invades through the channels of the lungs and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the body be cleansed first with diuretic medicines; afterwards apply the cautery at the root of the throat, and make sure not to go all the way to the throat but just a little bit. Afterward do another application of cautery at the junction between the neck and the base of the spine, and it is from this type of cautery that we have our form depicted ahead; and treat after as described until it heals completely.
In respect to cautery by fire, it commands the diseased person to allow hair growth until it becomes long and uniform; and if they prick at their origin, it holds the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. When all and the diseases of the stomach are due to cold moisture, and patients do not have fever nor dryness, and it's an old disease, then make the burnings on their strength in their veins; and one other burning under their buttocks between the two nipples; and let the burning called 'claw-like' be according to the form that was mentioned before.
And if you see that, do the burn with all the burn called "points" whose shape is as described in the illness of the ears; and let there be points up to thirty or more, or even slightly beyond. After treating the area according to what was said earlier, apply burns at three intervals following this form:
And because of this makes the cautery lighter, because you make three at once.
From the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After that, surround the wound on its back and sides; afterwards, remove the kidney inside the testicles with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated internally, use the cautery with two fingers as described here: it should be shaped like this.
And apply the heat to the wound until it penetrates up to the bone, and let the shape of the heat treatment consist of four treatments; and this is done with the heat that has three points, because the appearance of the heat application consists of four treatments; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the heat which has three points:
And always fix onto this single nerve, because there are seven heat treatments for it.
After placing the heat treatment, grind with a thread; after that, have the patient rest, and do not let the limbs strain too long until it is well comfortable.
And if it is reset above, in which little happens, then apply a cautery to the thick part of the clavicle, or use only one application of the cautery. For the joint is closed again, and the moisture is expelled and the patient's health is restored.
apply the weeping cautery
The old ones said that one should do pleuresin cauterizations using the roots of aristological plants, and here's how to do it: take a long root of aristological plant, the longest you can find, ensure it's dry, and make sure it's as thick and as long as your thumbs; then mix it with oil, heat it on fire, and apply one cautery between the jawbone and neck, and two small ones slightly below where the beard is; also apply four cauterizations between the fifth and sixth ribs, leaning a bit behind; apply one in the armpit and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and make sure your hand doesn't press too much but rather does it smoothly as if smelling.
And an old saying states that no man uses a fire cautery on the root of hair, and it burns and is placed between the ribs until reaching that abscess; and once the pain leaves, just as we have said regarding the abscess in the liver. But in this chapter there is fear or now the patients die, or a fistula occurs which cannot be cured.
Of mice
When you treat the illness of mice in those who have been instructed on dividing treatments, and it doesn't benefit, then they adopt three methods of cautery that are all good.
From which there is a method thus: you make .iij. or .iiij. cauterizations, in line according to the length of the mice, according to the shape of the heart cauterization as we have said before; and do not press your hand all over the cauterization, and let the patient remain under their back;
And another way of cauterization is that you heat the cauterization which has two handles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; lift the keur that is located under the mice, or where the pain starts coming from the left side, and make the elevations where you lift the keur according to the curvature, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizations should be according to the width of the body.
After placing the two flaming handles in until they pierce from the other side, then remove the cauterization and do this four times. If you see fit, completely cauterize with three handles on the cauterization. After the cure when it has expelled pus over a long period, it is equivalent to using another of the previously mentioned treatments.
Of cautery by fire, command the ill patient to allow hair growth until long and even; and if they pierce at their root, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Cautery is not suitable for ydropique, except through the method called "asclytes". When you treat it using the methods we have discussed in divisions, and if your treatment does not benefit, then you must make four cauterizations around the anus, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the kidneys, and four behind the back on the spine, and one place on the testicles; and ensure that these cauterizations are well near to the urinary bladder.
After allowing the cauterization to set for a long time due to putrefaction, and do not cease the treatment of the disease after the cauterization; and recovery would hasten, and both the four intentions with God's help would be together.
The form of the cautery for the belly is as we show it in front, and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what was placed before.
of swelling around the joints When the joints swell in someone who is hydropic and filled with yellow bile, it's necessary to apply a cautery on the back of the joint between the first and second fingers; then move your hand with the cautery without turning. And don't go too deep inside, otherwise it would escape the yellow bile, and you should apply the cauterization according to this form:
After doing this on both legs, apply two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the cuticle; and make the cauterizations along their length, one in front of the knee and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and let the cauterizations remain for a long time without curing them until the bile comes out; after this, perform the other treatments that we have mentioned.
From memory
When the belly's solution comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retaining and digesting virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are overwhelmed, they cannot be cured by usual treatments; you see the patient suffering greatly and with much virtue, so do this. One large cautery on the stomach according to what was discussed earlier or the gastric cautery, at the circulating cautery; and three small cauterizations around the subtle mouth, for each one of .i cauteries clavile subtle, and four cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see the moister being abundant and the patient suffering, do this: one cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauterizations on the stomach close to the large one. For the cure is beneficial when there's good help.
Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the embolli are either at their foundation or one or more exist, and they are old and consist of large cold fluids that have become corrupted, they should be treated as we've said in divisions; yet if it is ineffective, perform cauteries:
And if you think that the stomach is cooled down, and the food does not cook properly, and you see swelling in the belly, then treat the belly with one large cautery over the stomach as it was described before, and another over the liver, and yet another on all sides of the kidneys; and leave the cautery for a long duration. After that heal your patient until they are restored to health.
Regarding the inflammation known as 'thelul'
When you perform surgery, if you ignite the cautery that seems to be one of the blades and then place it fully on fire over the place where you are cutting; leave your hand in such a way that the heat from the cautery reaches the base of the vein, from which the blood flows out. Do this once or twice, and if there is much fat involved, cauterize each part just as we have instructed; after using treatments that benefit afterwards wait until they are healed. And if you use a large cautery on fatty areas, it will provide more help.
from poorly treated wounds
When the patient's body cannot endure cutting or incision, as we will describe in its place, if there arises a disease that cannot be cured except by cautery.
When there is no issue of pus and it's old and corrupted due to putrefaction and moisture, if you need to determine its extent entirely with one test, make sure that you know how far this test has penetrated. After heating the cautery until it resembles a sharp tool, place the tip into the fistula according to the amount that the test has entered, and continue using the cautery until all putrid and corrupted pus is burned away, once or twice or thrice depending on your need; be careful not to burn nerves or major veins. If the fistula goes through the body of the bladder and intestines, take these precautions, and do this only in the intestinal area, remembering that it isn't complete until finished. After treating the area until it is healed, when pus has been removed and materials have hardened over time, then you can determine if it is fully healed. If the materials have not hardened, know that there is still pus present within, and the bone has become corrupted at its base; and thus as one of these we shall speak about in his area.
Regarding kidney disease When the abdominal pain originates from the kidneys and due to large wind, it affects women more so than men, then you must perform a cautery on both sides of the kidneys with an iron rod as we have previously described; and if we apply the cautery centrally, there will be three lines of cauterization, which will provide greater relief.
From the bladder When the bladder is thick and weak from heat and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then apply a cautery to the lower part of the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, and one on each side, and let each cautery be as long as your fist; and do one behind the back, or two if you need them; and make the cauteries in a cross shape according to the form described before.
Of the mare's urine When the mare's heat is cold and moist, and fails to allow conception, and her flowers are rotten with delayed termination; and when they come, she feels great pain: then it should be that you apply three cauterizations inside the womb, as we have said or like the bladder cautery, and two cauterizations behind the back; and make the cauterizations in a cross shape, as we have said.
From the hip
When the viscous mucus descends into the hip socket, and due to this reason it moves out of its place. The signs are that one leg is longer than the other when measured together; and when you find the knee at the point where you would see it normally, you should cauterize the hip socket with a fire cautery similar to half-circle shape. And mark in front of the thigh as she turns, so that the socket is inside the circle. And let the cautery be like those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if the fire cautery is not at your disposal, make three large olive-shaped cauteries, and let these cauteries also be perfectly round like all the knuckles. And treat it while it remains sound.
The pain in the hip When pain comes in the thigh bone area, and this is due to coldness and moisture, and the treatment is as we have discussed for division and cure failures, and the illness is old: then you must cleanse the patient of large thick body fluids with pus-filled pills or other good-looking pills.
After you do the cautery; and the way of the cautery is according to two methods: this is to say assembled heated medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many ways, among which some are like this: you apply three triangular cauterizations according to this shape, and each makes a good depth and large, and there's space between each of these cauterizations the size of two fingers, and they're olive cauterizations; never do a cauterization in the middle above the hipbone, for which there are four according to this shape:
And if you see that the circle cauterization as we've mentioned before in relation to hip joint dislocations; but do it this way so that all the hips are contained within the circles, and all parts of the bone burn.
And this is the way to treat sciatica, when pain remains in the hip and does not reach up to the thigh nor down to the leg. And if it reaches as far as the thigh and leg, then two cauterizations should be done where the patient says the pain stays, and one above the ankle on the fourth day, at the left side a little bit; and make sure these are cutaneous cauterizations, burn off any thick spots along veins; and if the patient feels that the pain extends as far down to the knee or close to it, then cauterize where he feels the pain, three points or four on the cauterized area which is called "points".
And if more work is needed, then do it; and if the pain extends from the knee towards the thigh, use a cutaneous or circular cautery on that area, and make sure you take good care in all your cauterizations so as not to leave them incomplete such that you burn nerves and major arteries, and do not cause the patient any greater discomfort or constriction.
And I have seen several instances where cauterization was done on the ankle up to the knee, and they left it until the leg swelled completely, and the feet as well, causing them to be pierced and corrupted throughout. After a stomach treatment from which she died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery on each and according to this manner. // And the surgeons say that concerning the fire cautery for the buttocks, as is this manner, take one piece of metal shaped like a small pig's hoof or slightly less so, with it being around the size of a finger joint, and place it evenly between two pieces and then have those two pieces between them up until they cover the entire space equivalent to a pinch of something. And let these pieces be twisted on each side and resemble knots, having one metal handle well made; and this is the shape:
And let it heat until it becomes entirely red and gives off smoke, and then place it on the spot of the disease in the buttock, turning it towards the healthy side. And apply a single cauterization using one cautery stick and leave for three days; and then apply a layer of butter bandage, allowing the wound to remain open as long as needed; continue with ointment treatment until it heals completely.
Albucasim says that we use very little of this cautery for the fear of his view, and there are few who use it; however, he states that this is a good cautery which one can bear with, and leaves where it happens.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by impact or percussion or from too much evacuation, or due to similarity of cold substance spreaded, none of these appearances warrants cauterization, because that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary to follow this when the patient has been freed of infected pills or other similar symptoms, by applying it to the back where the pain is located, three lines marked with an X, and in each line from .v. to more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the body can endure; and perform the cauterization according to the type of cauterization called "points"; and if you see fit, do 3 or 4 cauterizations at the midpoint of a standard cauterization like this:
This disease often affects young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they become pale when they stand alone, and faint; and you find a swelling in the last spine of the back and an appearance that comes over other spines.
When you see this and observe it being treated, if you apply the fire cautery according to this shape.
If you see this and observe it being treated, apply the hot iron to each part of the spine equally. And if you notice this, apply the fire cautery along the spine using two or three lines, and have the points close together. After curing it until it's healthy according to what we've said, be sure not to use a hot iron in an area that is within reach of a nerve.
Of the pain in joints
When joint pain is caused by moisture spread throughout each limb, and when pain comes from the foot, which they call "gout" properly, and when it's due to cold reasons and its cures are made with medicines that can't heal it, then it should be treated using cauterization in this manner: make a hole inside the joint of the foot, and have olive oil cauterizations according to this shape:
And if you need to touch the foot near the heel, have him apply fire to all of the cautery until "point" is claimed. And if the pains extend up to the knees and other joints, when this happens frequently, apply fire on each knee three times or four times for each part, throughout the olive oil-coated area; and if you need more, then do so, but do not keep your hand out from there until the healing is well underway.
And if the pains go down to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have described in this chapter. And if the pains are on the hands, make marks within the armpit four lines wide; and if there is still pain at the back, apply the cautery to each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains extend up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care and use medicines. For if you treat him well and cleanse phlegm, then he will be healed with God's help.
Of the rupture in the uterus
When dislocation occurs in the shoulder, and the muscles descend to the chest this is newly happening, it's necessary that when you see them being treated, do not disturb him during the day; and use things that relax his stomach, so that the intestines descend from his belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to shave his underbelly until the muscles are repaired, then bring him back to your fingers, and mark along the rupture above the bone of the elbow, and ensure every sign is like half a circle above the torso; then heat up the cautery which is formed thus:
As long as it's white and smells of farts. Then pinch the intestines back into place; and have ministers shave his hands so they don't turn backwards; and work well on his legs with the patient, and place one surgeon and one assistant on each leg, and another behind who shaves his hands; then place the cautery over your mark using both your hands, and keep your other hand straight as you reach up to the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, keep trying until you do; and be careful that the intestines don't escape when you apply the cautery; not to burn him; and so that through this, patients are not injured or suffer any other illnesses.
And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is meaningless. And it's necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and also large people should have ones as big as their size; after three days treat his abdomen with butter until the scalding goes away; afterwards apply other ointments until he heals completely, and let him lie on his back for forty days so that the wound is well healed; and it's necessary that his rest periods be long enough so that the intestines do not escape when he wants to go into chambers.
And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, one should help him with a well-made bandage and use it for another forty days; and having good rest, he should work little and avoid too much drinking and eating, as well as too loud shouting. And once he follows this instruction, he is fully healed. And I will explain the treatment of tailoring in my chapter later on. of the rupture of the abdomen
When ruptures occur in other abdomens and are known, and you notice that they no longer grow, one must apply a fire cautery according to their size for each of them, and do so using three quarters of the full amount; after which, follow the treatment as we have described. And none of the old texts have mentioned that one should cauterize with the cautery at three angles in this particular form:
However, the first sign is the edge of the wound and make a line across the width above the tear, and another below, and hold your hand in contact with all the fire iron. But the first applications are lighter and more moist.
from old pain in no limb When pain appears in any limb, whether due to falling or being struck, and if this pain lasts long, and medical remedies do not help, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called 'points', and the applications should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain. If the first application is well, that's good; if this is not so, try one more second application on top of it, because these customs require that they should change in relation to the member that they are close to, so you must make the applications until the patient is healed.
In mixture
The remedies are applied once by cautery with great assistance, and equally the illness that comes from the putrefaction of bile and melancholy. If you see it being cauteryed, take care that the illness is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread or remain, then you should doubt whether the corruption will permeate all the disease, so you do this: .v. cauteries on the head:.i. on the top of the head towards the nose at the beginning of the hair, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and .ij. on the .ij. horns, and .i. behind on the lower jaw; and let your hand remain until the cautery reaches to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape; and cauterize it on the cheek in accordance with what was said before.
And if the mixture is everywhere scattered; and it becomes apparent, then it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries we have said on the head, and one cauterization under the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the buttocks and another elsewhere, and two on each shoulder; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and guard against the nerves that are at the heel, do not burn them; and never do any cauterization on the bone under the fingernails, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that when I make more cauteries, I provide more help, and he benefits from them; and know that the patient does not feel pain during cautery as a healthy person would, because his body is already completely corrupted. And it is necessary for the cautery to be large and small according to the limbs and joints, in accordance with what you will find in manuals on metalwork. After treatment, rub the area several times with honey and other remedies until it becomes clean.
of inflamed
When inflammation appears in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but remains unwell, then I make cauteries on the limb according to the size of the limb; and let each cautery go somewhat into the heart of the lesion; then treat it with poultices until it becomes well. And for each time a cautery is made, do so at the hand, foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and in this way the inflammation is removed; and still no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of moving nerves within the body.
From woad
When the sickness which is called "albaras" grows old, and the field of medicine cannot help it, then cauterize slightly with a cautery according to the quantity of the fur in the keur, until the bladder is removed and its color changes; then wash with flour several times and lentils using rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from colon and water from an almond tree, each part from one. Mix all together, wrap it with a cloth, and keep under the sun until healed.
The treatment for the sore by cautery
When the sore begins, and you see it stop, then apply the cautery using a circle-shaped tool that seems appropriate. And always let those who advise you know to also cauterize in the center of the sore; and I do not think this is good because I fear it might lead to erosion and corruption and I have already had no intention to do so at any time; and more sensible practice would be to cauterize around, with the tool that's called "circul", as we explained about types of cautery.
Of the swelling that cannot perish
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is lingering to die or due to the excess it produces or because of the old age in which illness occurs (that is, when one is too old) and there is little blood, or due to strength; then you see its hastening towards death: therefore cauterize internally with a few small cauterizations. Afterwards leave it like that. For it will hasten towards dying.
And if you see her pierced through with the entire cautery, then heat up the cautery in accordance to what is described:
And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced through its core, and make sure that these cauteries are such that the illness feels it being pushed out to such an extent that the process of putrefaction is accelerated. After treating until it has been completely healed.
The treatment with a fire cautery using a iron
Another method of disease called "corrodens", which is nothing else but a gangrene of the limb because it sears the limbs like iron sears dry wood. If you see this disease that can be treated with combined fire cautery, then apply small and large iron cauterizations according to what is suitable for the location or where the disease is present; after applying the cautery from all sides until you remove all corruption, leave nothing behind so that everything corrupted is removed. Then let it rest for three days, and apply suffering with oil on the cauterized areas until the burnt skin and all corruption are gone. After this ointment cure of pus. And if you see after three days that no healthy flesh has grown, it's good; but if this doesn't happen, reapply the cautery to what is still corrupted in the limbs. This disease can sometimes be cured with an ague medicine instead of a fire cautery treatment; however, fire cautery is much more helpful and I have already spoken about the cure for ague disease in its specific section: take it as needed when you require it.
of hernias that come to stones
Sometimes there is a disease born outside the body that we call "clos," according to our understanding, and it's a large protruding thing that hurts the foot. And for this illness of clos, there are two ways of applying cauterization. That means, you need to heat one cautery like a feather from a goose, and make it out of good iron at the size which can hold a nail in every direction, with thin edges; after this, put everything hot on the nail, and move your hand right around the nail until it reaches the tip of the nail; then leave it thus for three days until pus begins to form; afterwards apply an ointment made from ground wild marjoram mixed with oil, and let the ointment stay overnight, and the nail will fall out from its roots. Then treat the area with salve until the wound heals completely.
And if it is converted from the outside on the body, and this happens repeatedly both in hands and feet, then you should apply hot water cautery; and here's how to do it: take a spider's hair or iron rod, or a goose feather, place them above the nail and the althelul (meaning blisters or warts), and put the rod such that it touches all around. Then pour some hot water onto it, hold your hand tightly in position, squeeze while moving your hand until the edge of the rod reaches the root of the nail, then you will find the hot water penetrates deeply down to the root; let the patient tolerate this for a bit, and they will be free from the irritation of the hot water for an hour. Then leave it thus, and everything at its roots will come out completely. Do this another time until you have removed all those on the body, then treat with salves that generate flesh.
he treats through trembling
When some shake due to cold or nerves or a quartan fever or other affliction, it is necessary that you perform four or five cauteries on the spine of their back. One cautery between each vertebra; one on the chest at the olive cautery; if this doesn't stop shaking, and quickens the recovery from the cold ailment.
pus-sores
When visible through openings in the body's surface, or pus-sores that originate from thick putrid matter, they are a result of this process. Upon their first appearance, it is necessary at once when they appear to cauterize each head of the pustule: a subtle firewood stick cautery, where the tip touches the flame, or a long root of the aristologue herb, or a lenticular (round) cautery. And one should not cauterize them at their start when they first appear, following this method; instead, it discharges all excess that has come from them and leaves them healed. But it is required that this be done after the blood's evacuation.
When the artery has been cut Many times great hemorrhages occur from the artery that has been cut at the wound coming to the outside, or during incising of an abscess, or due to the cautery on a limb, and similar things; it is very distressing when the smell becomes unbearable.
And still, when this happens to no one, if you hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein and press it very much until the skin is relieved under your finger, and no drop comes out; then light several small and large olive oil cauteries until they are all red. Then take .i., or large or small according to the wound and limb where the artery is located, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the skin is completely cooled.
And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are off the fire, then take hastily another one of the cauteries that are on the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after the other until the bone is completely healed; and watch that you do not burn the nerve which lies beneath, and that no harm comes to the patient; and know that when a bone dislocates from an artery, one cannot properly heal it themselves when the artery is large, unless done through one of the four ways we have mentioned: by cautery, by extraction if it has not been treated, by strong thread binding or by medicine applied which has the power to heal blood; and then bind and keep it steady for the future.
Who will administer the reattachment by tightly binding with cloths or by placing burning things on, or other similar actions, if it does not help then it likely won't.
And if this happens to anyone and they have no tool or medicine at hand, then they should place their thumb on the wound of the vein as we said, and stretch it well until it is healed above the wound and above the vein; and do not move their finger, but often moisten it with cold water so that it stays very cold until the bone is frozen, swollen and healed. And prepare for cautery and medicines what needs to be done.
We have spoken about the first chapter on all diseases where it is necessary to apply a heat cautery, or hot medicine, and their causes, instruments, and forms; and we placed that chapter up until the knee, and I will continue this chapter in the same manner so as to find what seems easier for whoever wishes to know.
And as I begin this one, it is necessary that you understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first section about cauteries, which means greater caution must be exercised.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to undertake foolishness. For many ways of people come into cures. Some come from those who become quite afflicted with their illness that they die lightly due to the despair they find in their disease, and the severity of their wickedness; and one must have fear towards these things. And of these there are who give their understanding, and say: "Wait, I am good." And the illness is spiteful. It is not fitting that you agree with those who come to you in this manner, but rather place more stringent consideration for your honor than for your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely from what you are certain of and have experienced; and use prediction and indication in treatments for illnesses where health has been transformed; and this will assist you in acquiring good reputation, glory, and long-lasting remembrance.
Dear child, our lords provide good understanding and righteousness to you, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of their hand, so be it.
Or I have ordered this chapter out of discussion by chapters, according to what is before or the chapter about the cauteries, which I discussed from the head up until the foot, because you will find it easier that which you need.
from the head full of water
Know that this disease comes very often to children at birth, and when the mother presses too hard on the head of the child; and it happens in no other instance due to a reason that we know.
And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than children, and among all those I've observed, their death was hastened by it; for this reason, it seems to me that it is worth stopping the treatment with these remedies.
And I saw one child of this kind where the shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day until it couldn't support more weight; and feared so much from the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled beneath the bone within the socket, between the muscle and the bone. And the openings are such when the moisture is between the muscle and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a wide cut in the head one groove; and be so long as two fingers, as long as the moisture runs; and here see the shape of the spathile:
If there is more moisture, and the abscesses are larger, make two cuts in a cross-like manner, according to this shape:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the openings of the head's edges from each part, and water leaks when you press it inside with your hand, and this does not stop: then it is necessary that you make three cuts in the middle of the head in this manner:
And after the incision, remove all moisture outside. After holding the cuts of cloths and powders, then put wine and oil, and leave like this until the fifth day; then reset it, treat the wound by changes and ointments, and let the head also heal equally. Afterwards, allow the patient to eat dry meat from a bit of moist until the limb is comfortable and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look at where the large opening of the abscess is, and gather water; for it is never in front, nor behind; neither to the right, nor to the left.
Cut then the place where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and make a cut according to your ability; and be careful not to cut the artery; watch for blood flow, so that the patient dies from blood loss and evacuation of moisture.
Of cautery from fire, command the sick person to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When it comes to any disease which is called "catarrh" in the eyes or at the bottom, and this sickness is old, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then the last resort therapy would be cautery using which one cuts off the two great arteries.
So it is necessary that the patient does this after his head; after rubbing the area with a rough cloth until the arteries can be seen, then pull out the diseased part up to one cloth. Next, observe where the vein lies, and the position of both eyes relative to the ears, ensuring they are properly placed; then mark the eyes on each side. Then puncture both with an extremely sharp needle point halfway through the thickness until it reaches bone, and do this while keeping in mind the width of the head.
And if you see it, hold the spatula near the artery and vein above, cut also as two inches through.
And when the vein has been severed, make sure to continue cutting upwards outward from there.
And if the artery does not open upon feeling it, you should measure the length of the space as three inches, then gently press and cut until reaching the bone; and what needs to be removed from the blood is about seven c.c., and by chance a little more or less according to how the patient can endure it and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if there is just a point left on the bone, if the incision does not continue as far as it should, then press and bind the wound, and apply ointment until it heals.
"De emigrainne" translates to "from grain" or possibly referring to a process of sifting or removing grains. Without further context, it's challenging to provide an exact interpretation for this specific phrase within the medieval medical treatise. In general terms, in a medical setting, it could relate to procedures involving the removal of grains (such as pieces of gravel or sand) from bodily tissues or fluids.
When old age approaches, and severe coughing occurs, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and elsewhere in the elderly body, as well as similar things, treatment is done using methods of medical cure and all this does not benefit it. Therefore, one should extract the arteries of the temples and apply a cautery, as we have described.
The method of extracting them is that the patient feels beneath their temple hair, and listens to the artery emerging at the temple, as it opens well through its beat, responding only in some very cold individuals; if it responds, one should tighten a piece of cloth around its neck, then rub with a coarse cloth on one side, and raise above hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then take the spatula which has this form:
Then lightly scrape the skin until you see the artery, then move it up to the pincers, and remove all the webs that are from beneath each part; and if the artery is thin, turn it at the tip of the hook. Then cut that part according to twice the size of both shoulders. For if it is not cut, there will be no blood flow completely throughout.
And when the blood flows for 2.5 days, until it lasts for 3 days; and if the artery is large, you must tie it with two strong silk filaments in a double thread so that no rot occurs before the healing of the wound, nor does continuous bleeding happen; then cut away the excess between the two threads at that same moment, and then, if you see fit, cauterize it with a surgical cautery up to the bone until the shoulder is cut; this is the final work, if the patient doesn't have fever and has warm complexion.
For cauterization helps to finish off moisture issues: because in this case it provides greater assistance for moisture problems. For when it's necessary for the extraction of arteries, fill the area with old cotton and place well-made cloths on top; and once you've freed them, apply dry medicines that create pus and cloths until there is no longer any moisture; and if you remove part of the artery as you are working on this task, quickly cauterize it with a cautery or use a glass container and squeeze your hand so that the artery dries off; and if you don't have a glass container available, fill the space with ice until the artery is frozen, then wash with cold water until it stops bleeding and ensure it's done correctly. The one that is wetter and more light during the extraction of an artery should be cauterized on this flat-ended cautery, but make sure the ends are well-spaced to last longer their heat. For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat. And there should be between the two knives about one finger's width, and then when you mark to incise the two lines, place the hot iron until it reaches up to the bone, and make the cut in two places; and keep them apart from each other because this cautery does not fuse all together; and that is the form of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears from the eyes are flowing through the veins that are above the nose at the head of the arm, and no benefit is gained from medicine treatments when these are done, and you see the skin turn red from this ailment, feeling or sensing as if it were shaking on your forehead; and where they are tight and moist so that the paper's hair falls off, and the paper is heated, burned by the heat of the tears, then this treatment requires effort.
And they called the old 'healer of bruises', and you should instruct the patient with this illness to let their hairs grow on their forehead, then make them three cuts across the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one cut should be like two others all over the forehead downwards until it reaches halfway down, and the other two are each opposite a rib from above the hairline, and watch out for incisions of the arteries which are above the ribs; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and make each wound three inches deep through the join.
From the incision that is behind the temple up to the second incision; and scorch all the tissue that is between the two cuts all across the furrow above the bone, then make another cut from the halfway point of the incision up to the other cut, and then remove this spatula.
If you use a tool in the first incision that is called 'culetter', and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is hollow, not sharp, and this shape: And make the cut towards the soft flesh at the heart, and the edge hollows towards the bone, and push the tool until it reaches halfway into the incision. And remove all vessels that descend from the head to these spots while keeping the cut continuous up to where an opening appears at the heart, then proceed with another part of this cut up to the other opening; and then remove the blood evenly, and express the wound for the taken blood; then place a layer of old cotton in each incision, and put wet cloths soaked in wine and oil and saffron above them, making sure that no pus appears; and on the third day release the bandage, and give it large baths of cold water, then apply the ointment treatment with basil oil, and other treatments for wounds until healed.
from the pus
When it comes to sudden and customary cold sweats, you see the eyes reddened and small, and they weaken vision, and burned paper; and hair falls out, and one feels a fullness due to ague-like pain, and the patient sneezes; then recognize through these events that this substance and that fever come from multiple veins, and the treatment applied if it is so, involves this.
And you instruct the patient to look behind their forehead, then make a large cut down the middle of the forehead, and another wide one. Start from the cut on the left temple towards the right temple, making incisions until reaching the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples' nerves that move with eating; when the bone is revealed, drain all blood using a sponge, then clean between the two lips of the cut and place old cotton and linen; after this, cover with cloths soaked in wine and oil, making sure not to allow an abscess. Once removed, it should be rubbed on the bone until the char starts appearing, then treat with drying substances that promote the appearance of char.
In this manner: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of clove oil, and make a plaster; and administer this plaster to the wounds to promote the appearance of char everywhere.
On the cauterization of ears
Everything that enters into the ears is one of four things: or grains, or beast, or mine stone or similar thing like iron; or seed, such as beans, peas; or flowing substance like water and sweat and similar things.
When what he excretes into the ear is a piece or another way of thing that doesn't fit in the ear, nor grows in the ear, place the ear under the sun. If you see the stone, if any drop of violet oil or nut oil distills out, then proceed with extraction; and have them sneeze pepper, and block the nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool into the ear; and hold the ear up. Many times this remedy works; and if it does not work in that way, have them extract using fine forceps, as is described here:
If it jumps out with the forceps, that's good; if not, proceed with extraction using a small delicate instrument of two halves. And if it doesn't jump out by that means, make an arachnid stick and press out its head or part of the stick near the ear strongly, and block the wick in the middle of the candle or rosemary to the extent that nothing can enter through the candlestick with the stick; then pull it forcefully as we have said; and if it does not work in this manner, take some glue from this substance and place a small instrument on it at a suitable point for doing so, and put a bit of cotton inside. Then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull it forcefully. And if she does not heal from all these things that we have said, hurry to cut the ear in this way, allowing pus and blood to flow out, and spasms; and the manner of cutting is such that you first make a sinner on the cephalic side of the patient, and remove some of the blood according to its measure. Then let the patient sit between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fatty area hanging down; and let the cut be like a crescent moon until you reach the bone. Then break the bone according to your strength, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and the cure as long as it is sound. And if they are grains and it is inflamed, administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer one of these small incisions according to this form:
And administer an incision to that grain. But do not do this when you think that the grains are wet due to the moisture in the ear, until you have done many pieces; then extract them with fine forceps and suction, as we said before, so that the extractions may be clean.
In water then, when the patient vomits in the ear, instruct the person to use some cotton swabs for suction. And place them in the ear directly where the liquid is. If it splashes out this way, that's good. If not, take several stones according to their length and gently, and heat each of them a little on fire; and place one or two pieces of these stones into the ear of the patient, and step away by about one foot from each side, and strike another stone against the stone in the ear; and continue this process of striking stone after stone until all the water is forced out entirely, and thus all the water jumps out completely; and if you see that, take one rush, and insert the larger end into the ear, and the smaller end ignite with fire until the more tender part of the rush is burnt; then perform the same with other rushes until all the water is forced out, as we have described in stones.
In the removal of the beast, if it's of small size like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in division; but if it's of large size that can be felt, proceed with the extraction using forceps; this is the more gentle thing to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you apply treatments as we have described in division and distillations, if the cure does not help, you should look at the ear with the sun: if there is no worm visible, extract them using fine forceps; if it's not visible, take this form from here:
And make the opening narrow at the bottom and wider at the top. And use the finest needle according to the severity of the patient's suffering, then insert it completely into the canal; perform this often until all liquid comes out. And if they don't wish to come out, numb the inside of the canal with cotton as I have described in relation to cutting worms; and if they do not protrude forcefully as we have said, administer distilled remedies that the old ones have proven effective for worm extraction, and you will find these instructions under treatment of distillation; and when you distill your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, as shown here, follow this form as you can see:
And whether it is made of silver or lead, make it narrow at the bottom with two small holes, and wide at the top for distillation; and to press internally in the middle of the distillation use one well-made tool made of lead specifically for this purpose. If you see a scraper and wrap cotton around the tip, place oil or juice into the cylinder, and whatever medicine you see inside it, let them be in the canal, then pour all the cotton with the scraper, press your hand appropriately until the oil is distilled or from the ear; and feel within, and make the distillations one small piece heated over fire like when you distill it into the ear. And remember not to let it get too cold, because the medicine would not be as good then.
Regarding ear piercing.
No child is born without a bit of ear wax; and this same thing happens with injuries or birth in the ear, causing eardrops that only come once inside the ear if they cannot be seen; and never do two drops of ear wax appear at once, you see them well.
Thus, the one that comes inside if you cannot see it, is due to a blockage in various positions, and here what needs to be done becomes clear: you should place the ear near the sun; look inside: if you can see the plaque apparent, if the work has fully formed this pus-like substance from which we are speaking:
And be so, cutting in front and behind it completely flat, so that it does not irritate the ear; if there is a plaque or bump from inside the ear or of the ear itself, if you have fine pincers, use them to carefully cut, until all the char has been removed.
And if the operations have gone too far in the ear, take one thin and light rasor, scrape a small piece from fire, then place it inside the ear. If you feel the operation causing pain to your ears, pierce lightly, and ensure not to injure the nerves of the ear; then insert into the ear a patch according to the width of the tear, and apply the moisture in the Egyptian ointment.
Continue this for as many days as the wound is healing, or take a patch and moisten it with rose water, then sprinkle powdered vitriol over it. And if you see swelling in the ear, it should be that you remove the patch and apply another wetted patch made from rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling is removed; then treat it until it is well healed.
And if bleeding occurs, soak a cloth and wet it with cold water, then put it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are similar to those used for distillations.
From the residue of paper
In the process of unfolding hairs when they are moist and drying, it is necessary to use tweezers and forceps on them. Take a small slice from their roots; then place under the glass tube.
And if you do not remove the thorns, cauterize them with a thin round cautery iron. After incision, it's worth removing them; and they are often cut again, because nothing remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized by fire, those root parts burn and never return.
Regarding ice
Many times, in the papers come things that seem greasy by their form and hardness, and because of this it is called "grains", which is an assembly of moisture thick on the paper above and below; the operations are like this: take care if the grains move from one side to another, and this is a simple thing to know; then do it broadly, then lightly cauterize each part, then hold them with tweezers, and cut. If you cannot cut without piercing a bit of the paper, or causing harm to the patient; and if the tear is large, and there's an assembly at one seam, treat until it heals; and if it's small, do not use force, for the ointments will heal it quickly and regenerate tissue.
And if the grains descend into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and place the grains on tweezers, cut and press from both sides; and if the paper is moved away by the incision, it causes no harm; and when the grains are cut, remove the salty water, treat the surrounding area until the tissues regenerate; as long as the patient heals.
of the grease of the lumps
Exinach is a fat that accumulates on the surfaces of paper sheets, and this happens more often in children than in adults, causing great pain to their eyes, and they experience an excess of tears in the mornings; thus, they cannot look at the sunlight as tears tend to flow into their eyes; for this reason, they lie down next to their beds, sleep on them, and have their paper sheets moist under their eyes. And when you press your hand onto it with your fingers, you can feel the exinach between them.
And the way to treat it is such that you have your patient's head in a healthy position. Then take one piece of linen cloth and set up as tent-like structure into a circular shape according to the amount of exinach present in each section, then place it on top; press with your hands from both sides so that all the exinach is gathered within the circle. Afterward, cut in the middle of the moisture, making a small slit not larger than the wound made when opening veins, and ensure that the linen reaches into the moisture completely. Then various sections of the exinach come out through this slit, resembling the shape of a piece of white fat.
Pull out then, in one piece, the cloth padding between your fingers on the outside, and twist your hand to the right and left until it is spread; make sure not to block the slit, that you reach all the way into the moisture up to the eyes, do not hurt.
And if the exit does not open at the start of the incision, increase a bit the incision gently until it opens; then treat it as we have said, then moisten with bandages and water, place it on the wound, and apply binders.
And if there are those who grind grain and place it to corrupt the moisture that has remained. Then treat until they become clean. And when an abscess forms at the wound, then apply plaster remedies until they become clean.
(of paper hairs)
When hair grows in other than its natural place and ages, it harms the eyes, causing various diseases like familiar infections and paper weakening or scarring, as well as white discharges due to this cause; and one treats accordingly with four methods: either by combined fire cautery, or through ague medicine as described previously in the section on cautery, and is done through cutting and sewing, or through sutures, according to what I will explain.
It is necessary that you place the tip of the eyelid in your healthy state, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it flips properly, it's good; if not, sew one thread above through at all .i. and attach another thread over the entire sheet of paper, and then turn it with a sharp tool; then cut in the area under the paper, under the displaced hairs, from the major tear to the minor tear; then remove the thread, place a small cotton tent on top of the paper along with a piece of silk, and then sew an outline resembling a leaf, like the bay leaf, onto the paper. Yet it is necessary that the shape match the amount you see when lifting the lifted paper.
And if it is necessary to cope with a large quantity of paper according to how the paper has become soft; then do this for all parts around the tear lines that you have indicated, starting from the major tear and going until the minor. And make sure one of the tears is close to the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then place the needle into one of the two corners of the tear, then scrape off everything; then join both lips with a stitch using a needle and all .i. fine thread, and let out any blood, and air the excess threads on the two tear lines, if you are able to do this; but if not, don't worry about it, and leave the stitches open for .iij. or .iiij. days; then heal the wound without a stitch with dry and binding substances, as the paper heals in response to the healing of the wound and its joining together, but the stitch becomes loose (as the old ones would say), which is work without fear.
And if you choose another way: and it is that you mark the paper with a shape as round as the leaf of myrtle, just like we've recounted, in three inches cut according to this form:
Then cut the one that sits above evenly, according to this form:
And if you do not have the ability to hold the forceps, and if the thing is not equal, take one thread or needle with two threads; and place that thread inside the figure. And place another thread under the large suture line, and the second thread under the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your fingers. Then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin over which you have marked, just as we recounted, then sew both edges of the wound by stitching, and treat until it is healed; and if pus comes to your incision, soothe it with ointments and similar healing substances;
And it is sometimes the case that the hair on paper changes: if it is necessary for you to use what we have said about incisions; but the stitches in one and the other are more unnatural.
The treatment of canes follows this form: and you should convert the paper and cut it inside according to what I have said, and then make two canes by art, and also two fine threads each as long as the paper and as wide as its thickness; and pinch these two pieces together at half way from the paper of the eye, and hold tight the two canes from their ends shaped respectively; and leave them like this for a few days, and the skin that is constricted will soften and heal and recover, until it discharges through itself.
If the process takes longer and forces are applied, treat until it is healed; and when the wound has closed and the paper has lifted, and no more hair will grow; this is the form of the two canes that you make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
The tasks are such that you take a delicate needle and tie two pieces of silk thread that are both fine together, then join the heads of each and tie them intricately, making sure the length of the threads is as long as your palm; then prepare another piece of very thin silk thread for sewing, and tie it to your head. Next place the patient's head in a healthy position; ensure sunlight illuminates the operation area because this method requires subtlety and precision. Then insert the needle into the root of the hair where it is adjusted naturally until piercing through paper rapidly as you move it over the natural hair; then pull out all hairs up to the sewing line, tying that hair back into the line if there are two or three or more; finally remove your hand so that all the hairs emerge from the sewing area along with the natural hair.
And if the operation on the area is complete and hair doesn't come out with it, then pull the line away from the other end of the thread you have prepared until you see your hand through the vision of the eye; then pull the line and the thread, and keep the eye closed for two or three days, as long as the hair hardens in its place and grows flesh at the spot; and if the hairs are small, accompany them with one long natural hair, hold it up like you would this, until it is straightened out then raise it.
Regarding eye infections or diseases.
When this disease, called 'aleacrati' or gangrene comes to the eye, there are two ways: one natural and another unnatural. It occurs suddenly from wounds, or from surgery or cautery, and by similar actions.
And the method of this surgery for it is that you split that seam and expose the eyelid, and place linen tents inside, and bind it until it heals; and it should not be that you use in the treatment of it things that dry up and restrict. For if you do this, then the disease will return worse than the first one; but work with soothing things instead, such as fenugreek; and pour water or boiled water and linen seed into it, and apply the yolks of duck eggs to all oils, and cover it with a tent, and treat it accordingly.
And the treasures of your treatment are that you must be cautious not to join it back together in the same shape as before; and these operations we have described are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return in the same form as before.
of the fat which comes to the eye
This disease which is about to be truly called "axacrati", and it's natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds, cuts, cauterizations, and similar things; and the way of this operation in such cases involves you piercing with a needle, having two threads within it, inserting this into flesh, and causing the thread to appear on both sides of the left tear duct as much as possible so that the threads move through the two parts of the flesh. Then the flesh is above the entire needle, and the cloth has two large buttons at its end.
And if the appearance of the paper follows as it should according to what is required, that's fine; but if not, take a pair and place it in the cut, and turn the paper, creating two cuts where they were inside the paper. Then make the edges of the two cuts from each corner of your incision, so when they are assembled together, the appearance matches that of a letter which has four dots 'i'. Then remove this flesh according to how its borders match up with those of the paper, then reattach the two separated parts with thread made from wool. After this, heal it using treatments as we have spoken about for softening medicines and antiseptics until it's healed.
And if the illness comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make a full gash across the hairs of the paper, and follow as before; then cut between the two leaves of one page like I said; and must perform the operation according to the shape of the illness, for she varies greatly in form, and the surgeons arrange their tools in accordance with all their ability so that they can return the figure to its natural form; and even the patients themselves, following the operations and instruments needed from various dispositions.
suddenly of the paper
When this seam happens in a way that the paper above is fastened with the white of the egg and cannot move or do its natural works, then it must be that you pierce the edge of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and stretch it out on pins until you reach the fine spatula where it is not too sharp nor too deep, so as to prevent the spatula being too sharp causing pain in the eye; perform your incision, gently removing that which has been assembled together, in such a way that the paper regains its natural form and heals completely. Do not let anything acidic fall into the eye, and rinse it with fresh water and cologne; then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and cover the eye with wet wool from an egg; afterwards apply for three days a cool cloth and soothing things until it is healed.
At the eye's nail
Know that the nail of the eye is in two ways: it is nerve-like and resembles a single hard substance, and another which is not nerve-like but seems like frozen moist congeal. If one touches it with iron or cares for it with pins, it cannot; both appearances start from near the large lacrimal gland, grow slowly and gradually until they cover all of the vision, light and movement of the eye.
And the way of incision is such that the patient places their head in a healthy position, then exposes their eyelashes; and lifts the paper with your hand, then places the nail with pins into a small double bend, and extends it above. Then take a needle, and put one horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and a strong thread; and double the needle point slightly and stick it through the nail, and pierce all of the way through the needle, and fix the nail with a thread and extend it above, then scrape all the hairs on the side of the nail that meets the cornea and silk up to the root of the hair at all delicate parts, and leave the natural tear in the eyelid, so that no trace of the body's usual tears appears through the incision; and the nail is extended only to the edge and along the thread, just as we have said; then scrape off all the silk from this side, and here is its form:
And make sure that the cautery does not touch the fatty tissue and breaks it, and that the probe doesn't pierce; and after making an incision pour a little of the heated oil into the eye, and makes a ring with powdered silver, and lets it stay until the next day; then treat according to what needs to be done as long as they're in good health.
And if the nail isn't made of bone, and you can't push in the needle, and the nails can't enter it, repeatedly treat this semblance of a nail with medicines; and just as I described in the division section, and if you see it cover, works on the eye from the disease, take the cautery slightly sharper than this shape according to its size.
Cut the nail carefully upwardly, and if you see that it doesn't diminish and the reason is pressing against it, then pour a little from your mouth into the eye, make a ring of silver and a red collier with oil, and soak the eye until the next day; then start another task according to this same treatment, until all of the nail has been removed.
If there's nothing against your sight, for instance with pus-filled sores, then treat it by draining and start by curing the pus-filled sore until it becomes clean. Then resume the work as before, until it becomes clean again.
And if the appearance of the flesh near the ear is harmed by great damage to your eye, suspend it with an ointment, and cut off some part but not all at once, so that no tears come; then apply red powder, which is made from stannic oxide, around the eye.
of the flesh that forms near the pupil
Some people are born with red flesh once, covering the pupil and restraining it behind the eyelids, and seems like a rose of carbuncle; and all the operations should be such that the body puts its head into this state of health, then removes these eyes, and thus all this flesh is cut using uncinate scissors suitable for this, and supports with strength; then cut the first layer of flesh completely up to the edge, and make sure not to hurt the eye during the operation; and do the incision on the eyelid as we have said in the incision of a nail and the small forces that you remove the sebaceous gland, as the figure after this chapter demonstrates;
And when the incision has been completed and all the flesh is removed, then use oil of juniper or you distill it into red colander and similar corrosive medicines, and place cotton soaked with egg white over the oil so that there's assurance of heat; if nothing remains and the skin stays, and you doubt about heat causing an abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with things soothing heat; then return to your work until it is healthy again, and thus make several incisions are healed by this appearance.
But nevertheless, it must be that you treat each weak oil of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in iron work; and do not thrust your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that operation.
of veins and eyes
When the veins become red and cover over the eye, and tolerate their appearance to vision for days weakening the eye. Thus, it is necessary when you first observe this condition in the eye, to examine where exactly the disorder lies; apart from that, there's no other disease than the disorder in the eye itself; therefore treat it like this: instruct the patient to position his head towards your healthy side, then suspend those veins at every ounce according to their ability, and have them do so subtly twice following this form:
And let there be two ounces in stages through one half according to this form:
Then perform this procedure with the veins subtly, and let blood flow for another hour, until you see those veins depart from the eye; and make sure not to damage the eye with the points of the lancets, and do this operation at noon in front of the sun, and be very meticulous in your work so as not to touch other veins; and once you have done this, distill a collar of green and red liquor into the eye to help dissipate that which remains from the disorder.
And if you don't have the ability to do all this at once, make a poultice with things that soothe the pain in the eyes and leave it on for some days until the pain is soothed and sure of no abscess formation, then continue following this method as described until they are well; and this is the form of remedies:
Of the ear canal
The type of fistula known as "arissati": when you treat it with a cautery and with boiling water medicine following what I have previously said, and if it is not fully healed, then there's a place in the abscess where you cut, near where it should die off, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you will see corruption and darkness, if you gather all of the tool used as described here; and it is called "hard head", and should be made of iron in the shape of half a pound weight tool, and pointed like a file just as its current form depicts.
And place on it the part of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your hands, and press your hand a little until you know that this corruption has receded; and do this once, then restore the part with drying medicines.
When the bones are fused together and cartilage begins to grow, and the body of the bone is fused, and remains like this for forty days, and does not heal or become an abscess, and no bad events occur, know that it is healed. If this is not the case, then there is no other option but to bring back the fistula to its original place near the neck according to this form: and you must uncover the bone again with iron and medicines. And when it is uncovered, take a tool according to this form, and make the iron head have three angles, and let the handle be thinned down until it resembles what you see here:
Then place it on the edge of the bone in front of the eye socket, and keep your hand away from the eye for one or two fingers' width. Then return to touch every part until you pierce the bone and feel pain through this location as long as you hold your hand on your nose; and then restore with dry medicine as I have taught you, and when the char is born and hardens your hands, let the matter go back to the nose; if it's a lighter thing for the patient.
From the outcome of the eye
When the eyes are wide open and there's no disturbance in the chest or diminishment, it is necessary to tie the patient down; then heal them, then apply suction cups or bandages without piercing to draw out impurities, then place on the eye a mixture made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarsaparilla and then strain the eye. After that, plaster the area with layers of cloth and bandages; the method for the bandages is to take soft cloths, fold each one in quarters, and place them layer by layer according to the need of the eye; then strain it from above using a hard cloth formed into a strip, and start applying suction cups without piercing again. Remove the suction cups, let the eye be strained day and night until the bandage comes loose, if necessary, strain it more. After that remove the bandage after day and night, and if you see the eye healed, it's good; if not, continue with plastering, cloth, the bandage, and suction cups until they are well healed.
from the bursting of a blood clot
When disruptions occur in the uvea, then it opens and produces substances as if they were a grain of resin, and it is observable; thus when you see its coping, the workpieces are such that you push an awl into the root of half of the part below until halfway up. Then push another awl with a double thread from the part above the tear. And make it pierce, then leave the first awl according to placement; then cut off a part of the uve with the double thread and tie it around partially inside, and tighten it well, then remove the awl and place on the eye greased linen in abundance of egg; and let it be as long as the thread breaks with the uve, then cure the eye with restorative substances until the wound is healed; and in no case does the wound heal by the uve each part from a circle of cloth, until she is healed.
And if the eyes have shown large appearance, then pierce them in the delicate sinus that comes beneath the eye, and dry out the moist albumen and bring down the eyes, and enter there soon; then tighten them until they are healed.
From the field of the eye
This disease which is called "alcunnati" affects only the field of the eye, appearing as something resembling an arrow descending, and it's not an arrow; and the way its symptoms manifest in the work involves having the patient sit upright with their head supported by one elbow at right angles, then place your hands under the eyes, moving them until you see the field come up above your eyelids; then insert it, don't let it descend and remove any obstruction of light, observe the patient's reactions as if normally; and if it doesn't descend immediately, know that it's an arrow, and when the discharge exits from the field, distill hot water mixed with honey or boiled water and fenugreek in the eye, then apply another treatment until it heals.
From tears of the eye
In the division of fluids, we perceive what needs to be pierced; indeed, according to health rules. It is necessary that you place the patient between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, and tie the healthy eye tightly while holding it firmly; then place the paper on the eye with your left hand if the eyes are on the left or right hand if they are on the right; next take the instrument called 'almagda' in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right. Then place the tip of the instrument under the crown by a distance roughly equal to that of an eyelash to the tear duct part of the eye; then thrust the 'almagda' tool vigorously, and twist your hand until it pierces through the eye, feeling when almagda reaches the empty thing; and the measure of the pathway of almagda should be similar to the measurement of the space from the eyelid to the end of the darkness; this is the crown of the eye. If you see bone in that paper due to the clarity of the corneal fabric, then place the tool until it touches or reaches where the fluid is, then express through one path after another. If the fluid descends now, you will see the patient facing their own and the instrument in their eye.
After resting briefly, and if the fluid rises through the second path, use force with the tool, and when it is inserted and does not ascend further, gently pull almagda using small rotations; then return to slightly insert a little of the gem juice into the eye, and remove the eye from this. Then place beneath the eye something damp or wool in olive oil, liberally covered in egg whites, and bind with healthy eye. Now, and those who are of our time, let's do it as a poultice using plenty of eggs.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then it is necessary that you take the tool called 'alberit', of which here is its form:
And then puncture only the conjunctive tissue, do not go too far forward but make it about one thumb's length. Then add borage oil as we have said; and once you complete this work, administer to the patient one anointing agent with a soothing effect, on which he lies on his back in darkness for two nights. And remain stationary from all movements, eat light meats, and do not move your head neither to the right nor to the left, tie him according to his position until three days; then release him within this same dark room, let him test his vision, and have you show him some things, and then reapply the bandage for another seven days; it should not be done during the curing time or after incision as stated now, but you must apply it because an infection might spread quickly.
When dealing with discharges from the abscess, you should release the oil before the seventh day. And apply to this one who soothes abscesses; and when he is at peace, then release his vision and place one eyelid over it for covering no more than a day, and stay in that dark room. And remain within that same dark house gradually. And know that no students should interfere in such cases.
One came to us from the Orient who told us that in their land they were using borage oil which extracted pus after applying it, but still I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I read of it in old books; perhaps this is a new discovery.
And these are the descriptions of the forms of almagdah, for those who do not know them see them; and they are truly of araignae (spiders) properly:
And these have the head of those from this very subtle thing, and at the back there are three angles down.
from the skin up to the nose
They are born or emerge from various joints of the body, some resembling scorpions at the end of feet; and if there is a joint with skin colored in red tone, and if it has a yellow skin. In this case, among these joints that are yellow and not enhanced, you should have the patient lie between your hands facing the sun; work their nostrils, and pour wine on those joints, then remove them; then collect what you can hold of the fine sharp tip on one side until you know that this joint is completely ossified.
And if there is no part that can be handled, when opening the entire body with all its instruments subtilely and lightly, ensuring nothing remains; and if there's not sufficient elevation or abscess encumbrance, then surgically intervene as it should be done; and if it's malignant abscesses, act promptly and use the cautery until the pus is expelled and all the contents are out, then cleanse thoroughly either with water or wine.
And if it is the nose that's affected and moisture invades up to the palate, know that there is pus present; and if moisture doesn't pass as intended, know that there is newly formed flesh above the bone, so the instruments don't come through properly for cutting: thus, you must introduce a thread of linen somewhat thick, hold it with both hands, and have an inch or less between each knot; and guide the patient's tongue along this thread until the pus comes out from the nose into their mouth; and often children do this at school, and it is a simple task for those who can do it. Hold one head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and wait to check between each action as we are instructed with the thread present. Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted that flesh, then remove the threads, clean off any blood, oil the thread in Egyptian ointment, and place it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or longer, until the ointments dissolve all that is left of the pus; and then leave a strip of opium paste inside for several more days to heal, and if it requires dry medicine, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, with which one distills oils and medicines or wine.
And use silver or lead, resembling an open lamp, like a rod, and guide it in the same way; and if you can see it, make a closed rod, and ensure the instruments are filled for purging the head; and have two handles on the head to hold it when heating oil or any liquid.
Of the flesh around the nose
Many times a disease is born in the head near the nose, which is called "telul", it grows and becomes large until something visible; hence it must be cut at the beginning, then remove all the bone, then place the cautery or burning medicine on it. And if one delays cutting until it's large, should be careful if it feels hard, changes color, or lacks sensation: don't touch it with iron because it is encrusted pus, for when you cut once, it causes great harm to the patient; and if the pus is due to hot touch not from change in color, and if you see that it can all be cut, drain the patient and let it be operated on fearlessly, and treat its surroundings with dry and restraining substances.
When the nose has been cut and sewn together
Know that when a continuation of the work comes into one of these open joints, it benefits little for some individuals. Therefore, this should not happen to any person, if they examine whether their wound is fresh throughout their blood; and then align the two lips onto a suture, and treat them while they are still healthy; and if the lips have turned black on both sides, you must sear all parts of their skin until they heal, then join the two lips onto a suture, and keep them together, and apply powdered dragon's blood and incense. And put powders one upon another with a plaster piece of strong or any other soldering plaster, and leave it until it discharges by itself, then treat with ointment while they are still healthy.
The method of suture is that you join the wound: either with needles, as we have said in the abdominal stitch; or with thread, as I've instructed.
from abscesses of lips
Hands go inside the wound cavity of an abscess many times, resembling grains sometimes, small and large; therefore you must return to the lips, cut into each one individually, take it with tweezers, remove it from every part; then apply the hand after the vitriol incision, until the pus is drained out; and afterwards wash the hand thoroughly, cleanse the wound of dry matter until it heals.
of the flesh of the gums
Many times a piece of attached gum tissue comes out on the gums, which the old would call "albulus"; it should be held with forceps, cut at its root, and leave the bleeding or blood; then put in under the hand vitriol broiet powder, or other powders that restrict and dry out; and if this flesh returns after incision, and many times happens, when it is cut a second time, and cauterized: if it does not return even after the cauterization; and these are the forms for removing them.
Of cauteries made with fire, command the sick person to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Certain times, teeth are gathered together at the front of the mouth, between the gums and the inside of the mouth, where the skin is ugly and rough; and at other times teeth turn black, yellow, or have worms until corruption reaches the gum, causing them to stink. So it is necessary that you place your hand on the sick person, with his head in a holy position, and grasp each tooth or piece of flesh as they appear between your fingers, making sure there's nothing left behind; and then do this for blackness, greenness, jaundice, and other colors until they are removed. If what is taken out at first is sufficient, that is good; if not, start again on the second day and third day until you have everything removed; and know that teeth require various tool shapes to be extracted, according to how their work shows them, because the scraper used for tooth extraction has different forms than the one used between teeth; and these shapes and others should be ready with you.
It is necessary that when you treat the tooth for its pain, you delay extraction as much as possible because it should not be done hurriedly; this is due to the nature of the material so that there would not be an excuse for the scraping. Therefore when the patient is constrained to draw blood, it is necessary that you know exactly where the tooth lies. Many times during this operation, one might think there's a tooth abscessed, and you should check if it's indeed a tooth abscess before drawing blood; and once done, remove the good tooth; but until the bad tooth is extracted entirely, the pain does not disappear completely as you may lose some due to the operation, which we have already explained to these surgeons. And when you are certain of where the tooth lies, it's necessary that you cauterize inside the tooth up to a depth of i spatumile strongly in order to keep the gum from bleeding everywhere; then move your hand or with your fine tongs directly into the first pocket and gently until extraction is complete; then firmly hold the tongs; and have the shoulder of the patient in their saint between your knees, and hold it well so that it doesn't move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if there is no bleeding, take any of these instruments and gently place them inside each part, and move them as you did at first. And if the teeth have been pierced and are mixed together, it's necessary to fill them with cloths where they were lost; and when extracting them carefully with tongs, ensure not to break them during extraction; and it is important to cut very precisely around the gum to remove the tooth.
And ensure you do not break it and leave a part behind, causing the patient more intense pain than before. And be aware that this should not be done as some ignorant surgeons do, who break once without hesitation or consideration for the tooth's integrity, and they do not apply what we have advised; but instead, they bring about another painful condition through their haste and recklessness every time due to the roots remaining in place or because of the tooth broken by them; this is something we often want. And when the teeth are extracted, wash off the socket with wine or water, and if bleeding continues as it often does, fill the cavity with vinegar. If that doesn't suffice, cauterize it instead.
The shapes of the tools, to which one binds their teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles, such that they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
And may have large members that do not bend when being pulled, and be made of well-crafted iron, and have teeth for holding as needed.
from the root of the teeth When the root stays during extraction, it is necessary that you place inside your mouth a wet cotton ball soaked in butter. For one or two days, until the gums are softened, then take out the forceps called "algefri", which makes the shoulder appear like a care; and make them inside just like a file, this is the shape:
And if they do not want to come out of all these nails, it is necessary that you reveal the flesh entirely along the root and place the tool called "althalus", which means palanchet, as its form is shown here:
And if it is free and large enough so that it does not break at all, and if the root jumps out through this, that's good; if not, use all the tools you have available, as their forms are shown here afterwards:
And if one uses this tool which has two points, as its form is shown here:
and there are other tools placed according to the order of teeth, and this tool that appears to be large tweezers, as its form is shown here:
And be it this instrument that cannot break it, and know that there are few instruments of teeth; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise surgeons themselves find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their operations and diseases indicate him, because there are parts of diseases for which old teachers did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of these ones and so they do not break from a fracture or of the other bones, or if it rots, then he searches among the instruments that he needs, as I have told you, and helps with gestures, from which this is the form: And be them large and well holding for holding the bone that it does not escape but that you may hold and remove it; then restore its place with medicines fitting to this, and if there is decay in the bone and it is small, seek all this instrument.
When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and the shape is ugly, especially in virgin girls, you should know if this tooth has been born after another tooth, and it is not straight in place, and one cannot polish or file it: then you must extract it; and if it adheres with a tooth, take this instrument as depicted here, which resembles two small beaks, and it should be made of sharpened iron.
And the tooth is inserted gradually into one's hand due to its hardness and because you don't move others, and if it can be seen that we could grind it, then this tooth is ground with a single grinding wheel as it is formed:
And similarly to the file used for making needles; and grind the tooth gradually into one's hand lightly over time, so that it doesn't move until it cuts; then make it flat at the end with all nozzles, and if it is too sharp and it irritates the tongue, then you must grind off the roughness until it is even, so that it doesn't irritate the tongue or spoil speech.
when the tooth becomes loose
When the tooth is in front of the mouth, or by percussion or by falling, and the patient can't press on what they're chewing that they don't defecate, and you've cured them with medicine that restricts, and it isn't effective; if they should be restrained with a thread of gold, because threads of silver turn green and rot, but gold never does change. And make sure the thread is not too thin nor too thick, according to the size of the space between the teeth; and if you see to align the teeth, then take the thread and a pair of tweezers between two healthy teeth first, then place the dislocated teeth between your own teeth, if there are one or more, until you feel them properly on the other side; then resume covering up until you covered back that part, and pull your hand subtly and skillfully, until it doesn't move at all; and bind your thread to the root of the tooth so it can't escape. Then cut the dislocated teeth with the thread using tweezers, and assemble them again, and place them between a healthy tooth, and then put it so that it doesn't irritate the tongue; and then leave it like this tightly as long as it can stay, if it loosens or the threads break, you should tighten it with another thread; if stays properly and serves for all its time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth and two dislocated ones, just as you see:
And when the tooth dislocates, if you put it back in its place, bit by bit, just as we have said; and don't interfere with anything that isn't careful and suffers, and not once does one make the shape of an ox bone tooth, and then place it at the spot where the defect is, and tighten it like what we've said, and stays and serves for so long.
covering the wound of the tongue
No occasion comes from within the tongue or nature, which we are born with; or by accident of a healing wound; and the procedures are as follows that you work on the mouth for the diseased area, have its head in your healthy hand, and lift the tongue; then cut down the nervous ligament, until the tongue is removed from its position. And if there's stiffness or swelling, which might be due to a sudden wound injury, if you pull off the hook and cut it out completely; and make sure not to let the incision be too deep, for fear of an artery beneath; once completed, then raise your head to pink and cool water, or cold water, then place under the tongue a linen bandage. And soothe the diseased area every night, so that the wounds don't stick together. And if bleeding occurs again, place vinegar over the head; and if this doesn't subside, cauterize with the slow burning cautery, which is well-suited for this task; then continue other treatments until it heals.
And if you see it's of color or black or hard, such that the patient doesn't feel it when touched, do not touch it for fear of gangrene; and if it turns yellow and shows pus, with moisture present, should you pull off the hook, cut out a thin incision from both sides, and remove it completely. And if the pus continues to come up through your apparatus, place vinegar over it until it's dried, then return to your operation while working with all your strength; then raise your head with cool water and other treatments until it heals.
regarding throat abscesses
No matter comes within the throat cavities known as 'godath', and these are properly called the two almonds. And when you treat them, following what we have discussed in division, if they aren't seared, be careful: If there are pus filled lumps of small sensation and fusiform color, don't touch them with a metal instrument at all. And if they are red and their root is large, don't touch them with a metal instrument either, so as not to cause the evacuation of blood; but leave them until they're healed, then you will remove them, or it would break on its own. And if they have a white color and their root is delicate, prepare your tool for application, yet first ensure that the pus filled lump rests and calms down. Then make the patient lie in front of the sun, and let their head be in a healthy position, and let them open their mouth while you hold the servant's hands between their own, and press the tongue over the entire instrument, as described here; and use silver or finely crafted arsenic too, just like knives.
Can't you press the tongue with all of this instrument? And when you see pus, take the tincture and insert it into the almond, then pull it upwards more than you can; and remove nothing from the strings with this, then apply to the tool as described here, which seems like a strong force. And both the head is tied together, and one place another, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or arsenic:
And if you do not have this tool present, then use forceps, as depicted here:
And make incisions on both sides, and on each side you name; when you have cut out one of the almonds, then cut the other according to that same manner, and after making the incision gargle the patient with hot, sharp water, and cold water too, and if bleeding starts, then gargle with hot water, or slices of cooked rhubarb, or bay leaves, and similar things, until the wound is healed; then perform the cure until it is healthy; and in no case let other abscesses form in the throat than those two almonds, so cut them accordingly like the two almonds equally.
And I treated a woman of an abscess that was born inside her throat, one small-sized abscess. I had almost completely closed off the entire throat, so that she could not breathe through the obstructed passage and could neither eat nor drink, dying after one or two days. The abscesses were so high up they were placed in both sides of the neck, with four inches down each side from the throat's entry point. I then hurriedly acted, put an inch of salt into one, followed by pulling out the tube, and a large portion of water; after that, I sewed another part in the other opening near the throat, and made her mouth open while pressing her tongue; afterward, placed the salt inside these abscesses and removed a part from them, only letting a small amount of blood come out. And thus opened up the passage for breathing in the woman's throat, she started drinking water then wine now, not stopping to cut away at that abscess over long periods; and the abscesses grew back immediately, filling the space I had emptied till it became very large; then I treated her gently and cauterized inside the throat: thus did she live without growing worse; and left those parts, and may God do the same for me afterward.
regarding the eye
When the head descends into the eye socket, and it swells up and becomes long, it's called "perpendicular"; and if it's swollen and round, it's called "eye". When it is treated as we have described in the division section, and the treatment isn't helpful, and you notice that the wound has healed, and it feels tender to touch; then it should be handled accordingly. The one that is round assembled and not long; and if its color is red or reddish or black, it should be treated with an incision procedure because there's significant risk involved for the patient. Therefore, when you observe this, according to the method I have mentioned, regarding its size and length, place the patient under the sun so their head faces upwards, press the tongue onto the tool we previously remembered; then insert the needle into the eye, drag it outwards, and apply pressure with two or three tools as described in the incision of four almond-shaped areas. And ensure you don't remove more than the natural limit; for if you take away too much, you could harm voice production and speech ability. After making an incision, use what we have instructed about the incision of four almond-shaped areas, and treat until it heals completely. If there is fear during handling, then it should be treated with a cautery apparatus in that way. The method of cautery usage should be precise. And when the patient's head moves into your healthy section, then press the tongue onto the tool mentioned or detailed within the chapter on cautery equipment, and apply it with lively heat so it is neither too thick nor too thin; and use the movement of this apparatus which was shown here:
And let my head have a hair or where I put the medicine, like the movements of a spoon, and place the tool completely with the medicine over the eye socket; and the patient should remain stationary on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine inside, without it descending to the throat or causing irritation; then keep your hand on the medicine and press it over the eye socket for about half an hour, until you see it absorb and the medicine's impacts are relieved; if you notice this, take cotton and wrap it around any tool, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and place the tool completely on the cotton in the wax, until the cotton dries up on the eye socket; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry off, and clean after four or five days. And if you need to reapply the medicine cautery, then do so, and afterwards, wipe around the eye socket with cotton dipped in butter, cleaning that area where there's leftover medicine; rinse with cold water and perform gargling until it is fully healed.
This treatment is safer than incision or the cautery; if it is treated with fumigation like this method, take calamus and juniper and oregano and rue and chamomile and clover and similar herbs, and gather all of them or some of them into one pot, and put water in it, and let it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot have one tool knife according to this manner: And make it of silver or lead, and have one of the shoulder blades placed in the mouth against the wound until the vapor rises to the eye via the nose, until the eye is dead; after that repeat often, until the eye dries out, and remember not to do this at the beginning of the coming abscess eruption, for many things happen; and don't perform this method when the abscess is declining. And if this tool isn't present, take a stick and place an eggshell inside your head so that the mouth against the wound isn't too hot; for the eggshell doesn't let the vapor irritate the mouth, and this is a good treatment together with salvation.
Many times it happens in the throat bone or spine of fish, where nothing occurs; if therefore you are able to do so, then pull out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the tool, so that you see the thing move; and whatever does not open up and is stuck in the throat, it's necessary for you to make the patient vomit like this until the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if the thing is expelled due to vomiting; or if a piece of sponge, navel, lettuce root, or one piece of dry bread is ingested by the mucus. And tie a string to the sponge and then swallow it afterwards; and when it comes up at the head, if it clears away, and then pull out forcefully; and if it doesn't come out from what we have said, then take one tool of lead according to this shape:
And prepare the instruments to the throat so that they can enter more lightly into the mouth, and have the head lifted up high above it; and beware not to touch the epiglottis, lest everything goes wrong or pushes the bone inside; and move so that the patient pushes the instrument in its entirety equally until she does it forcefully, as long as it is pushed forcefully.
from the saliva of the throat
No treatment is made of saliva, as I mentioned in the division by medicine cure; and if this doesn't help, then look into the throat of the patient with the sun, because you press their tongue onto the instrument that I've told you. And when you see the saliva, if you remove it with a quarter inch small enough or fine tongs suitable for this task. And if this doesn't work, take a hair, and insert it into the throat where the disease is, then after the hair turns red after one ironing, do this often. And wash the patient's mouth with cold water all day long, then fill a cup of cold water and let them rinse their mouth and pour it down without swallowing, and move it around frequently; and as soon as the saliva feels the water, they defecate.
And if it doesn't bleed as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the tool we've mentioned in the fumigation of the eye. Do this several times because bleeding will occur without scarring. And this way of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are coals and it has a cover pierced in the middle, and at the bottom of that pot are the roots of the tool; then pour your fumigation, put the tip of the cane inside their mouth, seal the mouth so that no fume escapes but goes until it reaches the sinuses; and now the mucus will come out. If it doesn't bleed, restart the fumigation several times; and allow the patient to feel thirsty and eat salty things and such; and don't drink water; then it's necessary for her to leave through this method.
And the shape of the tool used to treat the mucus is such that when one can see it, it resembles curved tweezers meant to enter into the throat; and it has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and it has the texture of steel, so whatever she takes doesn't let go; here is its form:
This chapter deals with abscesses.
No mention of pus removal are found according to the memory that comes after this from one or another in this book, and they differ in perforation and carving; and it's done in two ways wherein one is like its own appearance, and concerning what has moisture. And the second way is for the areas where they are within the body. For abscesses at the head are different than those at the foundation, and abscesses at the middle meat are different from those that come in joints. Each has their judgment in the work.
And if for abscesses one must not pierce them until the body is done according to its maturation. And if there are such that it should be pierced when they have grown and do not mature according to their development, like abscesses below joints. Because when abscesses come from below joints and you leave them until they are rotten inside, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, this causes contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is within the main member, and if you delay piercing it until it's done, it will harm the main member. Or if it is within the foundation, then pierce it when it's done; and one should not pierce a growing abscess without full maturation, except for that which is within the foundation, which rots through completely and lies inside, causing a fistula; and cannot heal properly over a long term.
And it must be that you know the time for piercing the abscess which is done according to its maturation, and this is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and from the movement and firmness of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it must be that you place the piercing area as close or as far as needed from the abscess, and where it opens; and make the piercing at a point along the length of the body, and whether it is in the hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and all equal areas or places without fold.
In cases where the joints bend according to that body part. And when abscesses are in the internal flesh, if it's worth mentioning you should let the perforation remain until digestion is fully completed within it, as we said. For if you pierce it beforehand, if it stretches out through the body with its venom and becomes full of a heap of dirt; and by chance hardens the skin and the flesh beneath him. And for any abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what this member requires. It should be that you remove small abscesses, small protrusions; and in large abscesses, large protrusions, and many openings according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses or it's necessary to cut through its center, and cover it; when it has become as wide as two cloths, and is softened, then it should be done as one does with blisters: and for those that split into three angles, and those in which they cover like the leaf of bay, such as abscesses of angles; and those where a circular cut is made, and other cuts and similar surgical techniques are applied.
Those without a head, such as superficial abscesses, it should be that you fully pierce them; and when the abscess is large, and has a lot of pus, if you pierce it, do not remove all the pus at once but remove a part of it. Then seal the abscess until the other end, then leave nothing directly on it; repeat this many times gradually, until all the pus comes out. Similarly, if the patient's immunity is weak or pregnant women, or small children, or elderly and decrepit ones. For there are many times when with the pus discharge, the patient dies, and you don't notice it. Therefore, handle this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscesses, if a wound occurs, check that the wound from the abscess is small; and if it's a simple cut, cover it with lint or old cotton; and if it's large abscesses, and there are many protrusions, then it should be that you sew each one so that they touch each other. And if you have sewn part of the skin in the abscess and sealed it around, then fill it with old cotton or linen rags soaked in moisture, and hold it until the third day; then remove it, and apply ointment to it as long as it is healing.
And if bleeding occurs in your operation, then cool and gentle water should be applied and a wet cloth, and place it on the wound many times. And if bleeding persists, then you should provide management and treatment, and use the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it's near winter, or the location is very nervous, then it should be that you put moistened cloths and pieces of linen on top of vinegar and oil; and if it is a wound, and the area is meaty, then it should be that you place wet pieces of cloth on top of water and oil, or vinegar and cold oil until the third day, as we have said; and then remove and clean the wound, and heal it as needed, as it should be, until it heals.
And it is necessary to know universally in the treatments of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed before the treatments of abscesses, and here begins the chapter.
of the wounds
Of the small abscesses that come from the head and are in the form of spots, such as pimples on a girl's face, many have these characteristics. Some are oily like greasy food; others contain moisture like little pustules, and there are some with no doubt that they are veins because they do not behave oppositely to veins. And when cutting into the spot during surgery, use all kinds of tools called 'entromissoire' as follows, this is their form: if it contains moisture, cut deeply from above downwards. And once the moisture has drained out, burn off nothing but the skin that contains this moisture; for if you leave nothing behind, it will heal immediately. Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; otherwise, use water and salt and apply it to the wound, leaving it until another day; and this heals any overnight soreness. And then repeat dipping the cotton in the same way as before on the second day, and the third day, until you're sure that nothing stays overnight; then treat the wound with ointment suitable for healing, until it is cured. And if the abscess contains one fatty nodule, cut according to this form down the long axis; and cut out all its parts, burn off every part of the skin around it, and apply your entire treatment process on top where it was located; and if the vein causes a reaction opposite to what I've told you, then do what I've instructed after that. And also treat any hard abscess with the same method, cut by the surgeon as I've described.
And when it comes to the incision in relation to a stone wound and moisture, it is easier because there is less blood. And if any of these abscesses or on the head where there's no moisture, then of two such abscesses that I observed or on the head of an elderly woman; I found the abscess as hard, rough and white like sand, and could not break it apart; and if one had cut into it, it would have been treated just like a stone. In other cases where they occur near the head, it's necessary to keep the opening for all days until it depends on its own for bile to come out; and treat them accordingly.
regarding the treatment of scrophula
Many times there occur abscesses in the neck and in the glands, as well as in the armpits, and never at any other place or on a crest, and they are soft and intertwined with each other. And each scrophula is properly within its bony cage, like a nut and an abscess near the head, as we have said; and there are many appearances of these scrophulas. Some contain moisture, while others are wicked and do not wish to obey health. In that case, you will see a good disposition towards treatment, and they resemble the color of the neck, mute from each part and neither close to the throat nor near the artery or in the passage, and not deep; then it is appropriate for you to grasp it from above, and scrape off every part, and take both the two lips of the heart at the veins if needed, as we have said about abscesses near the head; and treat them little by little, and make sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and neither be rash nor go too far ahead, so as not to cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it doesn't allow you to open it, place vitriol broth or any powders that stop blood in the wound; and leave it as long as the abscess is calmed, and the wound has softened, and begins to rot. And when the blood has stopped flowing, return to your work until you complete it; then according to your duty, if there are no small, residual ulcers remaining, remove and cleanse them. And if at the root of the ulcer there's a large vein, it shouldn't be that you cut this ulcer from its root but tie it with a double thick thread, leaving it to naturally fall off without harm; then apply the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then start treating it.
And if you remove the entire ulcer, it's right that you join together the two edges of the wound and stitch them now. There should not be any excess left due to the size of the ulcer; thus, it's necessary for you to focus on removing its root and draining fluid from it before stitching again as explained earlier. The ulcers with excess material should be punctured where they open; and pierce them in a similar manner as previously described, hanging them down, then apply bandages soaked in ointment and such things so that the decay is consumed within; and once the wound has been thoroughly cleaned, start treating it with ointment and all other relevant treatments while keeping it clean.
Regarding squint,
The old ones spoke of the art of gullet surgery; but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, and this is written down from their speech.
For those with squint, it is necessary that the incision in the throat referred to as "epiglottis" be made; and one should not try this technique because all the vessels and the heart are close to these who have a large amount of mucus either in their mouth or in the throat or near two almond glands. When the illness is within the channel of the lung, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent loss due to strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it must be done across three or four small cuts through, between the two circles, so that the size of the cut does not involve the cartilage.
And these joints are capable of undergoing the sectioning of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessel extends deeply within.
And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they extend the throat skin to the entire length of a finger, then cut through the bone until it reaches the gum; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything at all, and then scrape out the tongue, as we have said;
and it has been demonstrated by the section of the gum artery that bursts through the broken bone, and by the loss of voice;
and leave the wound open for a piece.
And when the time has passed from which one doubts strangulation, gather together the two lips of the wound neatly, and across the entire cut without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause growth until it is clean.
Albucasim, instruct that this should be done until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient's life judged to be at an end, and when there is no further improvement. Therefore cut into the epiglottis because the patient can't breathe normally, and they are breathing through the wound, and thus you will keep them from dying.
And because of this, the elderly would instruct to keep the wound open until the disease's malady passes, and it has passed in three or four days. And then they instructed to stitch up the wound and treat it, until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a maiden took one knife, and stuck it in her neck, and cut part of the channels from the heart;
and I was called to treat her, and found her as if dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and indeed, it wasn't accompanied by a severed artery or exit route other than the throat, and the veins bled through the wound.
I acted quickly, treated the wound until it was healed;
and did not leave the girl until she had regained her voice, and then returned to her duties afterwards.
I swear by heaven that there is no need for tailoring in the operation of the epiglottis.
In the large throat
Cysts of abscesses are called "throat hernia", and they are large abscesses in the color of a blackberry, and there are many in women;
and according to two ways: natural and accidents; or naturally has no causality.
And the accidents are according to two ways, of which one seems like fat in us, and the other way seems like an abscess that comes from our arteries; And there will be fear, and it is not proper to perform operations outside that in the small ones, and the proof and search must occur throughout all the instruments used. if you find it as thin as a new stick, and cannot pierce any vein, then cut through it, as one cuts through wood, and apply the technique to all its parts, if there is even a hint of it. And search thoroughly from start, and treat as it should be treated until it is completely healed.
from the bones
Many ways exist for us, so I will say all the similarities;
And it is fitting that I should mention all the differences that exist between us and the outcome.
I say that issue is characterized by heat and fever lasting until the body's flushes have passed and putrefaction has occurred; then, the fever and heat settle.
With the new one, there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains a single pus, which is its own sack and varies in size according to the color of the body, and starts off like an apple, and becomes swollen;
And they depend on two appearances, or greasiness, or moistness, and little color change as I have described in the division.
When you come to the treatment of new injuries, it is necessary that you first inspect and inquire about all the tool which is called 'the adjuster', according to its shape or chapter that follows.
And the method of inspecting the abscesses in wounds is that you remove as much moisture as you find inside the abscess, and twist your fingers slightly and gradually, until you know that the tools have reached the center, then do it according to the size of the abscess;
Then remove the adjuster tool, and be careful not to let it break.
If moisture is released, whether it has this color or not, if it's made like I said for other abscesses;
And if after the incision no moisture comes out, know that it's fatty, if then you make a cross cut and pinch it, take it lightly with pincers, and slightly scrape each side. Then remove the coat where it lies, so you can take it away cleanly with the nut;
And if you cannot take it out clean, then take it piece by piece so that nothing remains.
For if anything is left behind, it will return to us many times;
And if it stays for a little while, and the patient does not suffer, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders that cause irritation, and restrain the wound, and place things that soothe abscesses in hot water, and treat other treatments until it is healed.
And if it hurts greatly, then cover the wound with two of his mouth's lips, and treat those who are in pain due to bleeding.
And if the vein is too large or another condition requires urgency and you need to treat it with vinegar poultice, let it remain for one or two days or three, until the wound discharges pus, then rest in hot blood; afterwards return to treating where he has been exposed to the new.
Know these forms of instruments for internal use, and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small; and if there are four squares which are called "albaret", and one called "breb", and there are also in three ways: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas;
And they are also like needles from which one removes the thorns, and are of lemon citrine, or iron, or silver, and gold yellow ones are valued more than black lead for enclosing pus pockets;
And there are three ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the openings.
The shapes of the pins are like little images, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are two bumps on the pins in three different ways, too;
And if the pins have two bumps, they are also in three ways; and if there are pins with two bumps, and single-bumped pins, and these are all in three ways; and all of this is necessary in their place.
The head of this one that they make to be cutting, and there are those who do not cut force from both sides, whom we burn the flesh, for in such cases one does not encounter a vein or nerve;
And these introducers have their handles restored to the hand, so that the patient does not notice them during the opening of abscesses;
And there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and one does not use much force only in the leg muscles, such as legs and arms, nipples, and similar body parts.
And no other small tool is ever made, resembling whips of gallstones, according to this form, on which one stops the blood:
And it is placed in the healthy part of the body, at the junctions of veins and arteries, and never according to this large form:
None of the men swell their nipples when they begin to become corrupt, until they seem like nipples of women;
And remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them should follow this method described by line B until .g.: Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with an ointment that encourages new flesh to grow, then join together both edges of the wound for stitching, and treat it until it heals.
And if the belly sags down and is flattened due to its size, just like it happens in women, cut it into two sections above, making two similar incisions; From which one holds to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line B until this line G; Then scrape off the skin that is between the two edges, and remove the fat, and apply the treatment that we have described for stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the healing process, until it heals.
And if it isn't clean, or if the incision hasn't been completed, because the patient doesn't want to rest, or due to blood flow, it is necessary that you fill the wound with wet cotton in a corrosive dressing; And let it grow until it starts to chew and move again, then clean it as long as it is sanitized.
from abscesses of the armpits
Abscesses that originate in the armpits are manners of hard scrofulas where there are nodes, and if there are any containing moisture.
Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from line b. up to line .g: And when all the pus in the abscess has drained out, fill the wound with old cotton and let it be for another day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscesses resemble scrofula sores, make incisions as we have said in cuts for scrofula sores, and if the wound is filled with pus, apply a cautery as we have said previously.
regarding the rupture of an artery
When the artery is cut and the skin is sewn up above it, many times one will find an abscess. The same happens with the opened vein and abscess in a deep vein.
and if one knows this when it's due to an artery, then the abscesses are long and straight. and when you feel it with your fingers, if you sense resistance; and when it's due to a vein, then there are clear protrusions;
and it's folly to cover this abscess, and likewise when it is under the axilla and under the elbow, and around the neck, and in other parts of the body, and they are very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid iron treatment, and one who is at the head should also avoid it. In that which has inflamed arteries under the skin, they should be treated through the skin for its entire length.
It is therefore necessary to avoid iron treatment, and one who is at the head should also avoid it. In that which has inflamed arteries under the skin, they should be treated through the skin for its entire length. Then work on the size of ounces, and cleanly separate the artery from the meshes, until it is exposed;
Then take out a piece of thread and make it pierce until the other side, and restrain the artery with a double thread for as long as I have taught you in extracting two arteries which are in the temples;
Then poke through the middle between the two threads with an introducer until blood comes out where it is, and free the abscess;
Then administer the treatment that relieves pain, until the patient's condition improves; Then apply ointment supplementary to this one, as long as it is effective;
and if the abscess size corresponds to that of the vein, it is necessary that you dye with your hand whatever amount of pus you can extract from the abscess until all the skin is covered. Then insert the needle through the part you hold in your hand and puncture it, using a single thread of yarn, then bring it from the other side. Then remove the abscess, as I have told you, or tie off one of these ends with thread from one of two sides;
And if you doubt that the threads will hold, then replace another needle with all two threads right across the entire abscess at the incision of the first hole, and keep the threads taut for four lengths;
Then cut away the abscess as much as the excess comes out, then cut off the excess neatly and leave what is tied up.
Then place one moistened napkin in vinegar and oil, then give them treatments and ointments until they are healed.
Of abscesses of nerves
Also like abscesses appearing in arteries and veins, they appear on nerves when they are cut or due to too much work, and similar things.
And this happens more often at shoulders and elbows, and everywhere there are joints, and it is one type of nerve abscesses, and they have a color like the color of flesh, and can be in various positions with pain;
And when you press them, the patient feels pain, and it does not remain in all parts of the body, but below the skin;
And move well in all directions, neither forward nor backward, neither to the side nor above, and that which is in joints should not be covered with iron: by chance it would result in constriction;
And that which is on the head or forehead, let the skin heal over the cautery mark. If the abscesses are small, use your tweezers and remove them from their root;
And if they are large, suspend them to the navel, and scrape them, then remove the bone and stitch up the wound. Continue treatment until it is healed.
Of large boils hanging down None occurs in the abdomen and nowhere else, it is a disease known by the name 'fungus' due to its appearance, and it has subtle roots, and large lumps; and there are both small ones and very large ones.
And I saw two homes where there were two stomachs that resembled fungi more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, had a small root, and were split open, and began to rot from moisture.
I dissected them and found in one eighteen ounces weighing, and in the other five, and the organs in the incision such that when you look at it, the disease is moist, and the color of the fungus is white and moist, and has a subtle root;
If it burns wide, and have the fire cautery in your sight. For the surgeon often encounters too much blood during operation, and if you're not prepared for this, then quickly apply heat from the cautery;
And if you see the patient shocked and fearful from the incision by iron, then take a well-made linen thread, and tie it around the spot as we have described, and let it stay for two days;
And then apply pressure, and keep tightening the linen thread until it reaches the knot, and everything passes without effort; and if the roots are thick, do feel fear for coping to the stomach, but you can handle half of them well.
Then apply heat to prevent infection; then treat the wound, and make sure you don't touch the slippery substance that is of dark color and has little sensation and milky appearance.
For this is an abscess, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene next.
When the bladder burns
When the appearance of the bladder comes through a wound or opening in syphilitic disease, and it is on the belly and there are some swellings like in other lesions, just as when blood seeps from veins or arteries as before, or due to windiness;
And if it's due to the rupture of syphilis and through the outlet of the bowels, its color resembles that of the pus, and is a slight thing without much pain, opening from various outlets. And if it's due to the exit of an intestinal tract, then it is more varied. And when one presses it with their fingers, it returns and then comes back again, and by chance gets stuck, and enlarges quite a bit at the entry from the bath and through strong labor.
And if it's due to moisture, it's a simple matter, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraining it; and if it's due to blood, it opens through these symptoms: large and hard abscesses, implanted according to their quantity;
And if it's due to windiness, it smells at the nostrils, and the veins so that you see their appearance is from the blood of an artery, or a vein, or windiness. If you should leave the wound untreated. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
And if the lesion appears to be in the intestine or the bladder, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to scrape their skin, and have it extended completely straight, then prick all around the wound. then command them to heal it by rubbing with your hands, then go into the area you have indicated on all surfaces, Then half of the abscess is above to the entire large hook;
Next, spread half of the abscess upwards on the tie, and then place your thumb tip, and restrain the intestine; If you find it caught by the tie, release it, and press the intestine towards the front of the abdomen;
And if you find the boil, take it at the root, and cut away the excess;
And if it goes against the artery or a vein, or if you go too deeply into them, then come back to your work and take two needles, and place one piece of thread on each needle, and insert the two needles where you have made a piercing.
Then remove the pus within four days on top of the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the wound heal until it scabs over, and discard the dead flesh by itself. or you cut it when it becomes firm and scabbed over, then treat it as necessary, and scrape out the pus in the way we have said.
or you cut it when it becomes firm and scabbed over, then treat it as necessary, and scrape out the pus in the way we have said. And remove the blood or moisture that you find, then clean the wound of what is necessary, and stitch up the wound.
treat the gangrene
We have discussed in the division the appearances of gangrene, and how to handle it with medicine, and how to avoid iron treatment; we shall explain that gangrene appears within the flesh, requiring great caution during its treatment. The old ones say that when gangrene is found on skin or parts you can remove, such as breast gangrene, in cooking areas, and similar spots, one should remove everything when it's just starting. But for large and old gangrene, approaching it doesn't work; I never knew anyone to be cured by it, nor did anyone else before me.
And when it's in a place you can remove, as we have said, the procedure is to cleanse the patient of black bile on all sides. Then have the surgeon drain if there's obvious fullness, then prepare for surgery by thoroughly cleaning out the affected area. Next, scrape out or cut away gangrene from everywhere and clear it completely with nothing left behind; let the blood flow freely until you've wiped your hand clean over it or any other surface. If bleeding contradicts the incision made in an artery or vein, cauterize so that the wound is fully dry. Then apply another treatment once it's healed.
From dropsy We have discussed the appearances of dropsy in division, and how the assembly of water occurs, and the signs for each appearance, and the treatment done by medicines, and that which is treated with iron: it's only for these two; one must not touch with iron in these four appearances: it's to say, tympanites and yposarche, because this is deadly matter; so when you use medicines for this dropsy appearance called 'eclites' through medicinal means, and the treatment doesn't prove beneficial, look if the patient seems weak or has another illness other than dropsy, such as abdominal pain and similar things; do not touch with iron if that's the case, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient's health very pale green, and they have no other illness but just dropsy, and they are neither too young nor too old, then you should proceed thus by operation: Lift the patient's leg with your hands and have the attendants press the abdomen upwards while pouring water to the lowest part of the foot. Then take the pointed spinal instrument according to this shape: And make two cuts each of about half an inch, and do not make them too deep so that they can come until reaching the intestine when inserted, without being able to sear;
Then look if the dropysis (a disease) is directed towards the intestines: if you need to cut under the belly in this position, two inches straight down from the navel; and if the dropysis is due to liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the belly, two inches; and if it's because of bile, then do so on the right, and it should not let the malaides (glands) lie over the cut so that excesses don't flow into this weak area.
Then cut through the whole skin with the tool, and push it outwards, lifting your hand to remove all the spatumile (a substance) between the skin and stomach as if scorning up to the quantity of a fingernail or twice that; then pierce the stomach until the spatumile reaches half way towards you, this is the level of the water, then pull the tool out, and it's the form of this instrument as described here: It resembles a thin silver rod, and it's made of bronze or brass, and has on one side two small depressions; and from one side three; and from another side, and from another; and the heads are cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision that writers describe as cutting the feather.
At the top is the alemele (a tool), so that when the instrument reaches the water, it can now descend towards the tool; empty it then either half or a third part, because if you remove more than should in this moment, by chance, the malaides may die due to the release of its spirit from the weapon, or it gets disfigured, or it approaches death;
but adjust according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue indicate in the patient's condition, and their pulse; then place the tool and retain the water, and it is now retained due to the anesthetic effect on the pertus located above the syphilitic lesion, as I have mentioned, you pierce it like this; then restart using the tool another day, if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw out a small quantity of water.
Do this each day, and do not rush it until only a little water remains. And if you doubt about the condition of the patient, avoid leaving much water in them. If there is fever or sweating or bathing under the sun, and if they turn red from drinking; and take care of medicine drying treatments as long as they are sane, and cauterize over the stomach and liver after the removal of water, just like I mentioned earlier.
regarding the stopping of the penis No child is born without testicles, or if they are small, or not in their proper position. If it happens immediately that there should pierce completely all .i. very subtle spatumile according to this form: then place or let the testicles .i. delicate clo of tin, and tie and keep like this for .ij. days or iiij.,and when they want to urinate, remove the clo, and urinate, and then put it back; and by chance no point applies, because the urine that comes out does not allow it to be closed. If the testicles are small, there is medicine for a clo of tin, as we have said, if it expands. Those who do not have their testicles in their proper position will be blind, because no child is born with testicles at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards; and cannot procreate because the matter cannot come to the spermatic, and this is a bad disease.
And the way of the opening is that the patient lies on their back, and they place the head of the penis and its surroundings like a feather's size, so that the testicles lie in the middle, as it should; and beware of many times of bleeding, and if this happens, stop the bleeding with someone who knows how to stop bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
Of the pimples of the penis Many times pus forms in the penis, and there appears a disgusting aspect; and among them are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it is necessary that you weigh them at an ounce each, and cut and clean all of them, then place cotton moist with Egyptian ointment on top; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it becomes healthy. And if the pus is malignant, with a putrid color and discharge, it is necessary that you apply a cautery to it. Once you have cut it, and if the pus is inside the penis and part of it under the skin and part outside, then it is necessary to remove the pus that is inside first; and when it has healed, you treat what is outside. For when you treat them together, there's no assurance that the head of the penis will not be pierced, leading to darkness and corruption in the penis and during intercourse; so you should remove everything that is black and corrupted, then cover with a plaster made from walnut shell juice and flour, then cure it with other cures until it becomes healthy.
And if there is bleeding due to decay, you should apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizations aid as two dispositions together: namely, in the case of blood discharge and corruption; and if the head of the penis has become corrupted and removed, it is necessary that you insert a pine needle into the penis and piss through it. And when the skin is dry at the tip of the penis for those who have not been circumcised or due to injury or abscess, then it is necessary that you burn it with one hairpin until all threads are freed, and release the head of the penis from all sides;
And if this is something you find difficult to discuss, it's necessary that you cauterize at two points near the head of the penis and the scrotum; then make a good incision halfway between them, and I place one piece of linen bandage moistened in cold water there, so that steam doesn't rise immediately.
Of circumcision
Circumcision is not a simple matter of continuation like other injuries; nevertheless, when we perform this work out of our own will and for children, it must be that we do the best job, and make the lightest action for their health.
I say that the old did not instruct circumcision of their children, for they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I wanted the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around one day after birth, and in strength, and throughout the entire foreskin; if they left it be because there are two sheets (of skin), and by chance if they cut this one above and let that one below remain.
Or they receive cuts, and the pain doubles, and in the circumcision which is done on the first day after birth, the edge of the member is not secure; and during the cutting of the nail by chance it escapes the blade, and runs through the work, and many times are born like this even though they do not need circumcision and I want that.
From the circumcision done in force on the entire length of the thread I have found the value of experimentation, because the forces cut as well above as below precisely.
For when you squeeze your hand, cut it equally at .i. (1 inch) all the way through; but make sure the thread is well threaded inside the skin; and do it in the manner of the first operation so that you can imagine the child, if they hear, that you are only tying the thread around the penis just like that, then let it out in all the ways you can. Then make it stand straight between your hands, and apply force between your hands or under your feet so that the child doesn't see them or any of the tools; then pull your hand back towards the penis and blow gently or firmly, and do this until you feel the joint in the penis; then thoroughly clean it of all dirt, then tie the first joint with a double thread, and tie each part again for .i. (1) loops at .i. other joints; and hold it about two inches above the second loop at the pouch and index finger, and place them between the two loops, then remove the thumb quickly and pull out the head of the penis;
Then make it stand straight between your hands, and apply force between your hands or under your feet so that the child doesn't see them or any of the tools; then pull your hand back towards the penis and blow gently or firmly, and do this until you feel the joint in the penis; then thoroughly clean it of all dirt, then tie the first joint with a double thread, and tie each part again for .i. (1) loops at .i. other joints; and hold it about two inches above the second loop at the pouch and index finger, and place them between the two loops, then remove the thumb quickly and pull out the head of the penis; Then let the bleeding slowly and steadily continue, for this is blood; and apply powder here and there on top of the powder, applying one spoonful mixed with half an egg yolk cooked in rose water, mixed with well-churned olive oil that is fresh, and leave it like that until another day, then cleanse again after any other treatment until he is healed.
The form of force during creation is thus: let the two shoulders be together and intersecting, and have the shoulders as large as the forearms equally.
The error in creation is when the kidneys inside deviate from incision; hence it's necessary to extend them up to your fingernail, thus causing an abscess; and treat equally, and if you can't hold them up to your fingernail, take them with tweezers, then treat.
And if they protrude for three days, and the one which is under the foreskin swells, let him stay until the abscess is soothed by the pus coming out, and gently scrape; treat as you can move, and avoid touching the part of the foreskin, it will not harm him.
Therefore, treat the rest of the things with the powder that we have discussed or treated in powders, and if you touch too much on the kidney beyond measure, and it goes above, it will do no harm; therefore, treat according to what we said until it is healed.
The retention of urine
Retention of urine is due to the presence of stone, or frozen blood, or bile, or a lump that has formed, or similar things, as we have mentioned in the section of this work;
And if the urine is not able to flow and you observe retention due to the stone blocking or in the bladder neck, then it is necessary that the patient be in a kneeling position. And their feet should be placed under the back, and they should extend their belly from above the part of the back, and restrain the patient so that they lean forward as much as possible; and then the bladder opening is constrained to allow passage for the stone above, which results in urine flowing out.
And if it doesn't come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer extraction using all the tool called "syringe", which is this form: and make it of fine silver that's slightly curved like a feather from a bird; and let its rod be one palm long and half another, and make it fine at its tip.
And the method for removing urine is as follows: take a double thread and tie one end to the head of the patient, attach about an inch of wool or cotton at the other end, then place this end inside the catheter; remove any excess wool until it's fully contained within the catheter. Then smear the catheter with oil or butter and with hen's egg fat. Have the patient sit upright and moisten his bladder and penis with olive oil and vinegar.
Then gently insert the catheter into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis. Next, double back upwards towards the bladder. Then place the catheter in front just before reaching the bladder and feel the patient's urges up to the empty state. This must be done according to this order because where he was directed she went twisted; then hold the thread firmly against each piece of wool until it is all attached, and urine follows the wool. Afterwards remove and properly dispose of the urine.
And repeat the process with the catheter until the bladder is emptied, and ensure the patient has urinated.
Concerning diseases of the bladder
When burns or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction gathers there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, if make everything to the instrument that is called 'clepsis', and this is its form:
She is enclosed, and if has three parts: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the leavings are through which the medicines come should be such that they numb well the penis without addition, if can take away moisture, and to expel when necessary;
And when you see the medicines flowing in the bladder, put the end of this instrument into the moisture, and guide it to where you're pulling; if pulls out the moisture with this tool, then firmly bandage the puller; should enter the moisture inside and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
And this is the form of the subtle stone, which one catheters the bladder with: if it's like this:
And it's made of silver or tin, and the shoulder is positioned higher; and at .i. hand or between the breasts it lets out urine; then take a sheep bladder and put in it some moist with which you catheterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts forming a good double thread, and heat one end of this moist on fire; then insert the stone catheter into the penis, then hold your hand over the bladder with all the moist until the patient feels that this moist has reached the bladder.
And if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make it into one circle, and cut it roundly in the middle; then insert a strong thread into these cuts, then join the circle like joining two plates, and put inside whatever you use for moist and water and vinegar, then tie it up as you would with the bladder, and do this just like you did with the bladder, pressing it with your hand until the moist goes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have spoken of the methods for stone division and extraction in medicine; we also spoke about the differences between stones that pass through urine and all signs, and which stones require size reduction; in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will openly and briefly tell you this.
I say that stones that get stuck in the bladder often occur more in children, and this is a sign that an infection has traveled from the bladder like an infection in its subtlety; and they often pass urine, and irritate the patient's penis, and it swells many times, and then returns; and at some of these infections there are stones; and until about four years old, children have easy recovery, but it is quite painful for the elderly, and occurs halfway between childhood and old age; and stone treatment is easier for those who have large stones compared to those with small ones.
And when we come to treatment, it is necessary to first cleanse the patient through urination, in order to remove all the impurities that are in the intestines. For it only blocks once at trying to pass the stone.
Then grasp the patient by their elbows, and lift and move them backwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, appearing only once from their upper part; then have them sit between your hands with their hands placed on their thighs, so that the bladder is completely descending downwards; then inquire and touch it repeatedly.
If you sense the stone in space, cut it immediately. And if the patient doesn't urinate even at touching, wet your index finger of your left hand with oil; if the patient is old, or wet your middle finger, meaning the patient is young and fully grown. Cut it from its base and touch the stone, when you sense it on your finger, remove it to the neck of the bladder; then press against your finger and cut outwards at the place where you see it should be cut.
And instruct the surgeon to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to extend his right hand upwards above the penis, and have his left hand hold the skin over the penis in the place where the cut should be made; then he cuts out the stone, this is its shape:
And make it between those who are within the joints and the foundation, not even at mid-way but on the edge of the left snowbank; and be straight on the stone, and let your hands meet either the joint or the foundation, and have its size cross so that it is broad outwards, and narrow inwards, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
By chance if the press is what needs to be or foundation, it jumps for no effort; and know that there are parts of stone with angles and margins: it has trouble escaping; and if there's a part beneath, resembling a gallbladder, round, from which the release is light.
In the sky where there are angles and margins, make the size larger; and if it doesn't jump, then you must use the tool that is similar to a file at its tip, to force the stone so it doesn't escape; or you push from under .i. instrument slenderly curved at its tip; and if you can't engineer it this way, then widen .i. hole slightly, and if it's not smooth after that, then use vitriol to force it.
And if there are more than one stone, start by removing the largest at the neck of the bladder, then proceed upwards, then pull forcefully and afterwards remove any smaller stones that may exist. And if it's very large, it might be necessary to make a bigger incision and cause more damage. Because two things happen to the patient: either they die, or urine starts coming out from their body instead of them being able to urinate; but still, strive with your pulling or gripping tool until you remove the stone piece by piece;
And when you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, then press it in place, and cover it with one or two strips of wet wool in oil and wine, or oil and cold water and rose water, to soothe the hot abscess; then put the patient back on their back, and don't remove the bandage until the third day.
And when you remove the bandage, wash it thoroughly with water and wine vinegar, then apply a diaper ointment and basil ointment until it is healed.
And if abscesses come into the wound and corrosion occurs, and blood clotting in the bladder, and it is because of this that urine is retained which is known to behave like this when urine is present: therefore you must apply to the wound, and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and deteriorate it;
Then cleanse the wound with water and wine, and salt, and help him in all ways that you know, until he is well; and it must be that every time you cure him, you tie his two thighs together, and apply the remedies to the spot.
And if the stone is small and it's located in such a way that it blocks the urethra and urine cannot pass; when you treat him as I have described, you should cut him multiple times, allowing some relief with each cut treatment. I've seen this method work before.
Take one iron branch according to this form, and have it pierced at three points on each side.
Then take one thread and tie it around the base of the member so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the iron rod into the member gently until it reaches the stone; and twist the iron rod with your hand in the stone gradually, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if urine comes out quickly, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the member. If is broken quickly, let urine flow and keep the patient comfortable;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie one thread around the stone and another above it, then place the member directly over the stone between the two threads, then pull hard, and remove the thread, and clean the frozen blood in the wound; and treat until it is clean.
From the stone of women
It happens that a stone becomes embedded in women, and if it occurs once, the cure is difficult, and must be done for three reasons: one, perhaps the woman is a virgin; and second, no one can find a woman who knows how to expose her eyes, even when she is pure.
And the third way is perhaps one cannot find a woman who knows well in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone in a woman is more towards the front than the stone in a man, so it must be cut deeper, and there is great fear involved.
And if the need goes to this, it is necessary that you seek out a wise midwife, and find her true location, or if you cannot find one, at least ask for two discreet pure eyes; and present someone experienced in women's life, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do as you instruct about the examination of the stone;
And look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin: then she must push her womb or its foundation and seek for the stone; and if she finds it, make her squeeze under her womb and advise that she pushes her womb or through the malady, and presses her left hand on the bladder formation.
And if she finds it, then she should move it from side to side at the entry of the bladder until underneath, as long as she reaches the root of the thigh; then apply pressure on the stone near the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, where the stones appear, and feel the stone in that area; and do not move her hand over the stone or underneath it, and proceed with small cuts.
Then cut in the abdomen, if you feel the stone, increase the incision until the stone can come out forcefully, and know that there are many types of stones: that is to say, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and that have grooves. Know their characteristics to understand the outcome.
And if it doesn't hurt you, put sulfur in the wound for an hour until the pain subsides; then return to your work while the stone is hard, and have the tools I told you about in the extraction of stones ready to assist you in your task.
And if it doesn't hurt you and it's the artery that has been cut, apply the powder to the wound and use gauze or bandages to compress it, and don't repeat this again, leave the stone untouched and don't remove it by chance, for fear of possibly harming the patient; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has calmed down and the limbs are restored, then return to your work while the stone is hard.
Of fatty hernia
Gelatinous growth is nothing else than a collection of moisture or white jelly, which resides in the sack of the kidneys, containing the egg; and it's called "jelly", and once it properly sits in the fabric of the egg if we believe there's another one; and this is the skin between the white jelly that we've mentioned; and this doesn't have a hole.
And the formation of this gelatinous growth is due to weakness that affects the kidneys, and spreads that substance.
And it does not come at all from hitting the kidneys, and that moisture has many colors: or it turns yellow like jaundice, or without redness, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more often.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is or whitish-yellow as we have said, then the abscesses are round, that is, long enough like an egg figure, and do not open any of the veins, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper tissue, then the abscesses are round with a portion of an egg, and because of this we think that it's another egg;
And if the moisture is between the skin of the veins and the whitish-yellow substance, you can feel it well; therefore, when you know the color of the moisture, try to examine inside completely through this square opening, from which its form was described previously. Following then those who come after the preparatory step, judge by what is inside.
Following then those who come after the preparatory step, judge by what is inside. And when we cure it with iron, the patient's health and their body's ability must guide the treatment; then place them in front of their back, on a slightly elevated thing, and lay blankets under them.
Then sit to their left, and instruct the attendant to sit on their right, spreading their leg towards one of the two ribs near the heart.
Then take the spit rod, and place the skin of the chest between them from head to foot until under the knife, and make the cut entirely straight while splitting the chest skin up to the white flesh, and gently burn it according to your ability.
Then pierce the artery with an acute tool half an inch wide, and remove all of the water, then put your fingers on it, and make the incision upstream; and do not touch the heart's chambers, but only let the artery alone; cut everything or in pieces right away from his body, because if you don't cut it carefully enough, it will cause more bleeding.
And if the egg jumps onto your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the operation around the artery; then join together the two sides of the heart's chambers with a suture, then treat it as other wounds, until it heals properly.
And if you find that the egg has been corrupted by another illness, it is necessary to bind the vessels that are suspended in doubt of blood flow; then cut off the penis completely from the suspension point, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the wound is united in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you gather the other part as you did with the first equally, then bleed it out, and place wet wool saturated with rose oil on the wound.
and place another piece of wet wool in wine and oil, and put it on the two stumps, and cover it with folded cloths, and bind it all together above according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and sew them with frayed wool according to this appearance so that they are joined by stitching in the girth of the breeches, and one piece of the shoulder is placed on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part near the elbow; and the second head is placed on the two angles, and everything should be assembled with the constriction in the loop of the lacing.
And never is medicine applied to this branch of the cautery in place of iron size, and you must take one small iron cautery instrument, and cut the skin around it, and heat it up as we have said, so that the white liquid contained in water is exposed;
take the cautery according to this shape, and puncture that white part like oncinces, and apply it to this small hot cautery:
And cut it in all ways that you can, until you thoroughly remove it; and remember not to let the fire touch the egg; know that this work is more preserved; and be careful about preventing blood loss, and understand how to perform the incisions correctly;
And if no opposing thing occurs, or in the case of pus formation or blood spillage or anything else, treat according to what opposes you, as was said previously.
And if the patient is fearful and cannot bear this work due to its horror, then you should perform a puncture, as I have told you, and indeed, when you are well certain through the meanings that we have said—that the watery branch lies,
And have the patient sit on a raised seat; then puncture the abscess in the part below at all the watery area widely, and make the puncture along the length of the chest; and make the incisions wide enough that all the pus can flow out.
Then place cotton on the area, bind it, leave it to drain in water, then treat until the wound is healed;
And if the white paste stops water from leaking out of the wound, it is necessary that you insert a feather or the tool used to treat water in ydropiques (a type of infection), as described earlier; and widen one inch around the wound, knowing that water will return, and gather together after 8 months or so much later. And when it gathers together like before, then this process will pass through her days.
from the abscess of the testicles
Know that within this branch of knowledge there are various practices, because I believe it's better to follow them;
and I will tell you the process and similarities of the abscess.
So I say that many abscesses come from wounds or bites, and similarly in women; it's through certain cases.
This means to know about the sourness and fever that spreads in women or due to impact, which is dispersed among women.
And its color of the abscess matches the color of the body; and does not find any pain, and it is an abscess lump.
And by chance there is an abscess lump and hard, with bleeding or swelling, and it never comes from a vein or from the arterial area.
If it's due to an artery, you can recognize it by the location of the abscess lump when pressed with your fingers; And it is not right for you to touch it.
Those made of swollen veins can be recognized by their arrangement at the expression through touching with fingers,
and one can do well to make measurements on this likeness, and on other marks; and when you measure the size of the heart, then it is at the top, and the thread should be white in color, and release the suspension from all sides of the egg.
If the egg is already well-formed with these marks born, then you must take out the egg and the measurement;
And if it is in the stomach, or within the vessels, then you should release all that tension, and shape it round again.
And if the birth of the child is behind you, then you should take it all in hand, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your operations are completed, then fill the wound with moistened wool in oil and wine, then continue other treatments until it heals properly.
Regarding the abscess of the testicles
This is an abscess enveloped with an enclosure resembling two thongs, with the softening of joints, And there is severe pain in the muscles as it grows.
And this treatment for such a disease has been well established like this one before.
But we will nevertheless tell you about its treatment, according to what the old ones did.
It is necessary for you to make the patient lie on one elevated seat, then push up the groin suspensory ligament with your fingers, stretch all the veins near the penis, and guide them gently, and extend them evenly;
then cut across the broad cutting point of the thigh bone through the veins, as long as they are exposed,
and then peel off from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
Then I stick a needle with two threads at one point, and tie it to the first joint where the thread came from, and tie it immediately to the other joint. Then go the surgeons straight across, according to the length of the body, and rub out the corrupted moisture;
Then treat the wound as with others or one wraps it, so that no fluid escapes and grows from either end of the bone.
for this way causes no harm, and if all vessels come out visibly, it is necessary to remove the bones from all the vessels. If the eye loses its sight due to cutting of the blood vessels, they dry out and cannot be helped.
from the rupture of urine The occurrences of this branch are due to the rupture that comes from urine or abdominal extension in the area of the hips, because the intestines descend through that opening into one of the kidneys;
And this rupture is from urine or abdominal extension and these two ways of the cause occur in such a manner: due to impact, or leap, or cry, or lifting of weights, and by similar actions;
And the symptoms when it's an extension by suffocation, if it happens gradually and over a long time period, not suddenly. And the pus is equal until around the middle, because the suffocation presses on the intestine.
And the symptoms are when it's an obstruction by suffocation; it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and the pus appears varied, close to the skin, and this is due to the pressure of the intestine and the body behind suffocation.
And the bile never descends with the intestine, it is retained there, and causes great suffering to the patient when pressed.
And in these treatments with iron for fear, because it is advisable to avoid them.
And the method of this work is such that you instruct or guide the surgeon to direct the intestines into his hand within the wound if it can be inserted. then sew up his neck, between your hands, and lift the legs;
then stretch out the loin above, and peel all the skin from the belly down; Then insert through the liver edges of the ribs according to how you need to open the wound, and do it in such a way that the force can escape;
Then burn the small intestine which is under the skin of the anus, until all sides of the white intestine are exposed.
Then place your index finger on the one that covers the anus, on the one between the white intestine which is under the skin of the egg and between the second intestine,
and remove the one behind the egg and between the second intestine; and then move to your right hand inside the cavity of the anus, and place the white intestine at the top of your left hand, and lift the egg towards the waist. And instruct the surgeon to extend the egg upwards, and release the one behind the knot;
And inquire with your hands if any part of the intestine is enveloped or white and hard, and if you find nothing, stop pushing it into the abdomen.
Then take a needle with a thread that is made of ten threads, and push it into the rear part of the syfac, which comes after the skin of the kidneys. After cutting, then cut off the hairs that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads. Then join them one above the other in a manner of a cross, and bind the syfac, which we have said is under the skin of the kidneys, with a strong string of two parts. Fold the shoulder bones together and bind them in two layers so that none of the joints through which they pass can allow an abscess to enter or spread; Apply the bandage along with the first long line, about two spans of that length, and after these two lines leave a little slack equal to the thickness of one span at the back of your knee where there's no space for pus to spread.
And after that follow the roundness of what he has placed; then cut in the area near the skin of your knee until you can't reach the bone and ligament as we have said earlier.
Then apply wet wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and put on the bandage as we have said. And not once is the white scab burned that we have said, after incision, by fear of blood loss.
For this happens many times, and let the wound bleed from itself until it stops; and if it doesn't fall off on its own, then apply hot water, and place what we have said there until it stops bleeding.
Then continue to treat the wound with another method, until it heals completely.
of fatty hernia
In this part of the treatise, I never see anyone who dare to perform surgery with a metal tool.
And the old ones said that it is done like a bundle of sticks being held together by the twist, in such a way that you connect the vessels after cutting slightly on the surface.
Then hold me, and treat the abscess of the one who is working, as long as the vessels are intact; and treat it in such a manner as we have said, until it heals.
Never allow rupture in the abdomen, as we have said, and open the belly; and do not remove any parts of the intestines from their places, and if they are removed, it's rare, and repair them every hour.
And even if it stays too long in this position, if you suspect a wound or gangrene, until the intestines descend;
And this happens due to the extension of gangrene which is in an advanced stage, as we have said, because it is extended, then it softens and inflames the limbs and opens them up;
And the treatment involves a cautery method, as we have mentioned before; and sometimes it is treated in this way with an iron:
And when the disease lies on its back between your hands, then lift the limb from the swollen area outward in proportion to a length of one and a half feet;
And then extract the fat that is under the skin where it follows, then take hold of the muscle and place it into the apparent opening of the fat.
And press on the right side of the belly, then cut both of the apparent edges of the fat above the area where it comes out from the muscle, and cut the one edge and the other.
And remove the head of the muscle, without covering it with fat or stretching the skin elsewhere, as I have taught you in treating the extraction of the intestine contents.
Then continue with wound treatment procedures. And when you cut open, if the patient is well and healed, treat the wound until it is fully recovered.
The surgeon is constrained, and does not appear in the operation, and the cauterizers are burned in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin around the anus
Many times the skin around the anus is softened in some men, because the fluids inside are softened and can be seen; when one wants to treat it, they should make the patient relieve themselves while lying on their back, and then peel off the softened skin from the natural skin. Then bring the two halves of the anus together at a seam, and if necessary, sew the excess softened skin with three or four seams or firmly with four. Next pinch between the seams, and treat the wound like other wounds until it heals, and cut out the stitches when healed.
of sexual restraint
Know that punishments are administered in our law, and because of this I would like to not discuss it in this book; they are necessary only for two purposes: one is to provide answers about how to respond when asked, and the process of curing them; and the other, because we often need to discipline certain animals to assist us, such as from sheep, goats, cattle, and others. I then say that punishments are performed according to these two methods: either through attraction or by making a cut.
Regarding hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism occurs according to two ways as males: one way is when between the two openings of the genitals it matches the natural figure of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes urinates. And the second manner is in females, having at its crotch something like a penis and two openings. The treatment for this condition is that you copulate all the organs together, and treat them as any other wounds; in the second way, for males where urine jumps through the skin of the genitals, there is no specific cure needed.
From the scab or soreness
Tentigene is an unwanted mark on the natural body part; it's so unappealing to see. And some women have them as large as a hand, this needs treatment. You should remove excess tentigene from your fingers or toenails with a careful scrape, and don't go too deep for fear of bleeding outwards; then proceed with another cure until it heals properly. And on another spot that comes up near the woman's mouth, at the anus, suddenly erupting in anger, according to its appearance like a knot, they named this old ailment 'Koewe disease'. You should scrape it off too, just as we've mentioned for tentigene and continue curing until fully healed.
Regarding the irregularity
If the nature of the woman isn't pierced or if there's some kind of loss happening; it occurs either by birth, due to accidents caused by sickness that occurred, through castration, or because of an intricate syphilis, which is caused either internally or externally, and happens in the hips, back, stomach, or any other area; you need to understand its conception, childbirth, and occasionally how to have flowers. The knowledge about this can be gained by observing a midwife. If the injuries are noticeable from close observation, then inspect them with your hands or eyesight.
Of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that often lack proper care, and when hemorrhoids are old they become painful; we have already discussed their appearances, signs, and I will now describe those that require treatment. I state that hemorrhoids and pain occur internally in the vagina, not being felt unless treated with iron. Those found at the mouth of the vagina can be sensed, thus they can be treated. So it follows that you should place the woman in a cold house, then position the anus like tongs, and cover her navel; then apply powders from medicines that stop bleeding, such as garlic, dragon's blood, and incense, among others. Then bind her feet to her waist for an hour, afterwards immerse her in cold water; if bleeding occurs, make her take a decoction of sumac, peel of pomegranates, chestnut bark, and similar things, then mix with flour from oats, honey, and garlic, and apply this as an ointment on her back. And if it stops the bleeding, that's good. If not, she should have leeches applied to her back and nipples without touching them; then take a cloth, make a paste of its juice with plantain or elderberry vinegar, and apply it hot on her.
The treatments for abscesses of the arm
Many ways of incision come about in the arm, such as boils, abscesses containing stones, herpes, ulcers, fistulas, hemorrhoids and boil-like conditions, and many other diseases that I've mentioned earlier in the division. Hence, it is necessary for me to describe here the boil that occurs in the arm, which isn't among those that coagulate; and if you see the beginning of its appearance, then you'll notice it's full of heat and fever, and if you can see it turning red. Therefore, don't rush to pierce immediately, but wait until the pain subsides; afterwards, have the patient lie down on one elbow and place two small pillows under the other elbow where they lean, supporting their back with their hands and bringing their feet forward from their legs; then spread their legs widely, put their arms under their knees, tie them well together, and guide the opening towards the right side of the body. Then take up the instrument used to open the arm, which comes afterwards in this form; it is necessary that when you see the instrument being used that you first mark its depth into the arm so that what enters through the instrument doesn't go further than necessary without causing pain or injury to the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then cover the depth of the arm with a cloth so that the instrument doesn't disturb it; it should place the bell of the instrument at the top, and cut the instrument. And when the boil opens, and you let the hand hold it gently, then it's best to cover it up from head, over the pit of the neck; and when the pus has been drained out, it is necessary to insert wetted linen bandages in olive oil or dried olive oil into the wound; put the dressing at the bottom of the wound onto the depth of the arm, and place a clean linen bandage on top of the arm and underneath where it meets with the cut cleanly dipped in water or cooked with parsley; then apply ointment for two days afterwards following this method until it heals. And if the wound heals into the arm, then you should avoid using hot iron to treat it but treat it as we've said earlier in the division.
Of childbirth
Craft is first among the skills to know how natural birth looks when it occurs, and you'll recognize these signs when you see a woman's water break, and she begins to desire to push out with her breath: at that point, the infant will quickly make an attempt to emerge; then you can tell this birth is proceeding naturally, and its course follows the head first, followed by the rest of it; and upon seeing these signs, you should gently press on her abdomen, so that the child emerges promptly; for when he descends through his head, his rest accompanies him, and his delivery is cleansed of excess with a good birthing process; anything other than this does not occur naturally. For it happens only from his feet, and it forces the body or the legs, and hands, or it occurs from his belly, or genitals, and becomes reversed by chance around his neck, and through other ill-fated arrangements; in these matters craft must be wise and subtle, avoiding error and deception, and I will show you all the signs on how they should assist.
If the child descends through its head in natural birth, and the woman experiences severe pain during labor, and her strength is weak, she should sit on a chair or have women hold her; then rise from her nature with something cooked from fenugreek, and then place the midwife between her hands with a small spatula which has this form: And cut the second part [of the birthing process], and keep to her finger until all moisture inside her is expelled; while keeping her belly pressed throughout as the child descends, if it does not descend then you must administer castor oil to the woman with fenugreek, along with olive oil. Then have her rise slowly and snort deeply several times, hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now this child emerges. If her two hands come out, then gently insert them a bit at a time; if they do not enter, make the woman sit down on a stool and lift her feet up high. Then remove the stool from under her, cut her, ensuring she does not pass any feces during the process; if her hands cannot enter and the child has died, then take her hands with the knife mentioned beforehand and extract the infant, and do so gently.
From the birth of the child upon its feet When the infant comes walking on its feet, it should be encouraged to stand upright; and then make them walk slowly and steadily, until they are even in height;
Then measure one foot and extend it slowly and steadily.
If it jumps up to the thighs, if one commands it to do so, and makes it snort with consideration; If it should jump further, may God will it.
And if it does not jump as we have said, if one makes it move little by little, until it is according to the natural form. For then it will be slightly.
And if no force comes as we have said, take a spoonful of alum and oil from safflower, and molten gum, and grind everything in one mortar; and place inside and outside the body this ointment. then have her lie in water until under her ribs.
and when she is thoroughly wetted up to the ribs, give her one spoonful of myrrh, and put it under her, and let her stay like that for an hour; Then make her sit on one pillow, then make her sneeze and restrain her mouth and nose, and gently pat her stomach, for the child is now jumping. From the child's position on its knees. When the baby comes in this form, if you put the cradle her hands little by little;
From the birth of the child that comes out with one hand on the way, It is necessary to engineer how to bring back the hand: If one cannot bring it back, have her stand up and walk;
If she cannot walk, have her sit on a bed of one foot, and make her bend the other leg.;
then apply the massage that I've described;
And if it does not give birth, make her sit on a stool, then study to bring back her hand; And when it gives birth according to its natural form, make her sneeze, and instruct that she prays until the child comes out fully.
From the baby's exit through its neck, and let her spread her hands, and her buttocks turned towards her mother's back. It is fitting that the baby beaks its hand, then turns it gradually and gradually, and you gently.
And when they are even, you should place them in the nature of muscle and oil, just as we said before, then instruct that it moves a little bit at a time;
And once you have done this, make her sit on one leg, and command that she bend it; and have her sneeze. In the same manner for the rest of the second part.
In the same manner for the rest of the second part. When it comes to proceeding in this way through the entire second part, you should drain the moisture with your finger until it is completely emptied;
And if the child can move on its face and neck, make sure that she doesn't hold her breath, or the child will die.
Then continue to push the child inside, as long as you have placed her correctly and properly, instruct the woman not to stop pushing at any point.
from the delivery of twins Know that fleas are born many times, and every time three or four; and this is not unusual, nor does it happen often. Two are exceptional things, and they do not live at all if one has them;
I know that when they multiply and are fertilized by the sperm which fuses with them, it is tied to the womb;
And they do not come out naturally like all others, as we have said.
And if they pull painfully, as we have said for the treatment, and there are subtle knots, then do what it does promptly and lightly. and perform like this until the cure is achieved. of many children
of many children They are formed in marriage one or two, or three, or four, or five, or six, or seven, or up to fifteen, and they are all shaped like children by the measurement of their glory.
And it must be known by everyone, for perhaps this kind of thing has happened to him. So act according to what is proper.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman who has lost her child or is suffering from an abortion, as I explained in the division and if it doesn't come out on its own and you are forced to intervene manually; It is necessary for you to know if she has good health, and whether she has experienced any accidents or shows signs of impending death;
It is necessary for the woman to be in control over her back, and have her shoulders inclined downwards, and lift her legs;
And the minister should apply a knife for half an hour, or if she is tied to the bed so that it doesn't affect the delivery of the child;
Then rub the mouth of the midwife with moist olive oil and a mixture of sage and fenugreek seeds, as well as linseed; then anoint her hands with these oils and these mixtures. Then press them into the hair lightly, then wants one or two places where the rings might fit for this,
And take care so that when the child is born, it descends to its head; if they stick in their eyes or at their necks or on their mouth or under the tongue or by the beard or near the armpits or around the ribs,
and if it descends towards the feet, make it stand or grasp and at half way to its back;
it is necessary for them to shave the eye with their right hand, place the elbow between their left fingers, and hold it lightly with all their hand, and insert the eye into none of these places that we have mentioned until it reaches the empty thing.
then find another kidney, or use any that you need when required, so that their extractions are equal;
and then evenly extend it by moving on one side and the other, so that they can move out; and make sure each kidney is toothed for holding movement, as this is its shape:
And if any part remains, and there are some of the kidneys beneath it, and you apply them to that part, and pull out the other part;
And if there remains none of it, place this cautery or higher on its position, and do this until it has expelled everything outwards.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned by squeezing, If that happens, you should wrap with a piece of cloth until it has come out completely;
Then treat the joint of the foot or at the cut, and in the other hand, do the same for both feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is obstructed at the exit, or if there is an assembly of an acute head, then you must press the pointed spatulate between your fingers, and shape the head and remove the sharp one; or you will have it done with an instrument called 'almidach', which is used along with the tools or chapters that come after this one;
and similarly, let these children develop naturally to a large head; and then press with force on the bones with the tongs,
and if the head of the shoulder jumps and holds due to force, until moisture is or less comes out;
and if it cannot come out, cut it piece by piece as you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or around the ribs, you should pierce it until the moisture drains.
And if the fetus is on its feet, there is a slight attraction, and the movement to the mouth of the birth canal is also slight.
And if it is in the belly or on the thighs, you should extract it at an angle, wrapped in your hand. and continue with the belly or the thighs until all the moisture that is there has been removed;
and if another bone is broken and the shoulder remains in place, If they ask to clean their hand under the apron, Then I pour, one or two ounces, and I guide it forth.
And if the edge of the apron is narrowed due to an abscess that has come there, it should not be scrubbed. Instead, moist and greasy things should be applied. And the surgeon applies plaster, using both aqueous softeners and moisteners.
And if the child is on their backside, and you can place them level, then apply what we have instructed for live childbirth;
And if it is not possible to do so, then perform the delivery in parts, and leave nothing of the second part.
And once you have done this, apply what we have instructed for dealing with wounds that come about through bites;
And if bleeding occurs during this process, then it should be treated with cold restraining measures, and other treatments should be administered to the patient.
And I saw a woman who had given birth to one child in her belly, then another followed from that womb, and this other one also died. After a long time, an abscess came out in the belly, and it swelled so much that when it opened, it started to cause severe pain.
I was summoned for treatment, and I thought for a long time, and couldn't provide proper care for the wound.
I placed a strong plaster on it, and out came a bone, and after some days another one. I was greatly amazed, for the belly does not have any bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I looked into the wound, and with my hands I felt for the bone, until the woman was in better condition; And let the woman keep her for a long time like this, and it would be somewhat of a comfort to her.
And I remember this chapter only so that when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to provide help.
to bring back the wife to her place
Hereafter comes the form of the presser, with which books are written; and in each two parts there are four heads of four limbs. In all cases, the horns are more delicate than those of a restrainer, and they should be made of ivory or horn.
and the mouth of the tube should be two inches wide, and the edge of the stakes should also measure one inch, and in length it should be a palm and a half; and between the two poles should be two joints of this same tube, which are firmly in one and the other, about half a palm or a little more in length;
and these two joints are placed inside the mouth of the tube so that when you turn the two horns, they open.
Another form, more subtle and lighter due to its resemblance, can be made from the stem of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of tongs; and have two spurs on each side, just like you see, one as long as a palm's length, and two fingers in width;
And when you see the opening of the anus to the whole instrument, make the woman lie on one bed, with her hands hanging and her legs spread apart, Then insert the two spurs together into the anus, and hold the tip of the instrument between her buttocks; Then use your hand on all the tool, like you did with scissors equally, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the iron, until the bolt does what it wants.
This tool is all mounted high and multiplied in their likenesses; and when you have them arrayed before your eyes, the work proceeds more swiftly and the doctors stand higher for their quantity.
Do not lose hope in the tool you have not equipped, because its necessity is not excusable.
When the second part is retained during birth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold back her mucus and then make her inhale through consideration. And let your hands be pressed against her mouth and nose; And if it jumps over this, it's well done.
If not this, take one pot and make a lid or cover, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as garlic, rue, fennel, chamomile, bitter orange, and thyme.
All these herbs, or any of them, whether cooked or simmered in water on the fire; then place a spoonful or a cover over the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the marrow,
And let the steam rise from within the marrow until it starts to exhale; then have it emit a smell as we have said. If the second one leaps quickly. And if it still remains after this treatment, and is not stronger, then instruct her to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or camphor, and then apply the paste in its natural state,
And when she finds the second one; and once she has found it, if you catch it and gently extend it gradually, so that the husband does not feel during extraction; But she must move it lightly to the right and left, and then pull; if it comes out and becomes loose.
And if the mouth of the miscarriage is narrow, we have said the treatment for coughing and the smoking of herbs;
and if it isn't from all that we have said, just make sure you don't overly prod at the extraction;
but it is necessary that the person at the mouth of the miscarriage should be tied to the woman's belly, then apply a clove oil enema;
if it passes and produces pus, and there is a smell; but still, if it doesn't pass and causes bad odors in the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
So, therefore, suitable fumigations are to be conducted for this: none of the old have proven that the fumigation of watercress and dried figs is effective.
The shape of the tool with which one fumigates the woman during the retention of flowers and the afterbirth is thus:
And it resembles a cane in shape, and one places its delicate tip into the fire, and the joints are wide above the flame;
And let the fumigations be over the coals, and continue until it is done, then start another one.
To pierce the base
Many infants are born who have not had their base pierced, but rather experienced an exquisite sensitivity due to this subtle art. So, it is necessary in surgery that this art should pierce the correct part according to its function, and not prick with sharp needles, but protect the incision so as not to touch it.
Then apply on wet wool in wine and oil, then perform the ointment dressing until it is clean.
And if you doubt that it won't slip back, place or insert a tourniquet cord and leave the hands bound, and have it removed when the child desires to go into chambers.
And sudden injuries to the wound or abscess do not occur; it is necessary to cope with this suddenly: if you treat them, as we have said about the tourniquet cord.
of the fistula from the foundation Fistulas that originate from the base are nodal, and grow larger than those that originate below the base, or in the space of two parts,
If there is one fistula or more; and when that swelling exists for long periods, it operates, and often produces moisture that appears as white pus or thin matter,
And these fistulas are permanent; and they are known by the fact that there is an expulsion or windiness when the patient expels something, and sometimes in her direction.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they reach up to the joint of the thigh, and up to the root of the kidney.
And thus one can distinguish between a permanent fistula at its base, and not permanently. And you bend your second finger or its base, and insert a fine needle or a spider's leg or iron into the sore when there is no winding.
And if there is winding or curvature, then you insert a fine tentacle, or a horse's hair, as long as you feel the tentacle or the hair at your finger tip.
And if you do not feel it, and there is no outward discharge or wind (breath), nor any sign of infection, as we have said: Know that it does not puncture at all; if you hasten to heal.
And when the fistula is passing up to the bladder or up to where urine leads, if it jumps with urine, and cannot be soldered by medicines.
If it passes up to the knee joint, then the vein coming up reaches up to the thigh; If there is no curvature and the pain is confined internally, then it remains in the thigh, and neither medicine nor application of ointment helps;
And when it comes to these Persian canals, there is no remedy but work, and the vain efforts of those who interfere.
And in this one that isn't Persian or old, there is hope for healing with iron, as I have experienced.
And it is such that the patient lies with their body under your hands on their back; and you lift their legs up to their hips, and incline their buttocks towards their abdomen. Then make a test bed of spider or of snail, as long as you know where the test bed originates from.
If the patient feels it deep within, it is necessary to press your index finger there.
Then you will feel that the needle has pierced it; and know that it is under your finger if you sense something between your finger and flesh when pressing. If you don't move it, then one cannot measure it.
Despite this, some can be measured quite well, but such cases are rare.
And when help is given for this, so we heat up the fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it was explained before. And the stick is heated through the fistula until it goes beyond the foundation; and do this twice or three times, as long as you know that these burned particles resemble a feather of a bird.
And then the tent-covered wet sponge is used until those burned particles come out, then the ointment dressing is applied over the wound and sealed.
If it's done like this, that's well. If not, there can't be another way to do it.
And if it is tried to enter and does not pierce until the point that is the foundation, and at the entrance of your thumb and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or sinew, and you see the fistula where the covering begins near the elbow. If you remove up to the beginning of the fistula, press firmly before the tent, and then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the tip of the tent.
And the tent will be released and removed; then remove those thickened flesh parts that resemble a bird's feather, leaving none behind.
And if the wound does not heal, cut between you and the wound, then apply either fire or medicinal treatment.
For the fire cauteries combine two things: this is to say, the burning of these heated rods, and the bleeding from wounds and the dissipation of moisture;
then the treatment for wet bandages or ground things, as long as the patient sweats, and the rods burn in the sweat;
next treat the wound with the application of hot pieces that stick to it, and use dry medicines.
For when it is healed, if it has truly healed and does not recur.
And if the fistula comes just past halfway through the base, and is distant from the body, you should press on or inquire about its foundation.
And if you feel the tentacle, and there are two of them or a vein, or it is almost to pierce, should there only be a way of hope and no escape, through the application of one of the three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it until the bottom, or if you can, you place a pin and then treat it in the first manner;
and do not go too far inward, so that you cut the support of the foundation, and let the excretion come out naturally without resistance; then he treats with surgery, as we have said;
then he treats with surgery, as we have said; by chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and clean her up since she has been cut open from under the root, either by probing or with another instrument directed; then cleanse that wound flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can.
then strive to restore the wound and keep off the fistula in the lower part of the base: if it is easier for the patient.
And never are there fistulas in this manner: and when you blow into the fistula, and it is where the base lies beneath the skin above, take a tent pierced through the head according to this form: And tie two twisted threads together, and blow the tent into the fistula until it reaches to the head.
If it is deep in the margin beneath the base, then remove the thread from this one twisted, such that you blow on your finger or base;
And guide the head with the thread, and join the two shoulder bones together, then hold one to another, and let it be for one day or two.
And secure it every time, until the joints are where they should be between the two bones, so that they fit together smoothly.
Then treat the wound until it is healed and has recovered.
If the fistula does not puncture, make an incision in all possible ways that you can, as long as it is not too deep.
For it is not proper to perform such placement directly and then proceed with treatment as we have said, until the wound heals.
The form of the sharp spur that is used to make a fistula is quite hard and thick. And on another side not this, because one should neither use what one shouldn't, as you see here:
Loses are of two types: or they are within the foundation, like a piece of pine resin, and if there's small ones and large ones, and in that place blood collects, And there may be one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the base of its bottom; but those that are out so have little moisture,
And even there is water slightly yellow or a little blood, and they have the color of flesh;
And the treatment of those who have them within the foundation, it instructs the patient to spread out through channels, until the foundations are released and their children become visible; if you hasten, or hold it with tongs, or you keep it by your nail, then pull on its roots.
and if the thorn cannot hold by its moisture, take them with an inch or two of thread, or cloth, or a piece of leather; and pull them out with your hands, then remove them, and apply some hot powders in place of the cauterization; When you apply a cautery as was said or described in the chapter about cautery, then treat other remedies until it is healed;
And if the foundations cannot emerge, then harden the patient's urinary tract with astringent remedies to wash out what is there or at the foundation, so that it may exit freely;
If the body fails to respond and if the fibers are strong at the foundation, then treatment should be gentle; And you should take them with your fingers or forceps, and pull them out, then treat them in the way we have said until it is healed, and until it fears metal incision.
If you need to stitch according to this manner: take half a twist of thread, and put it in one needle, then pull the thread over and make the needle pierce through from another side, and loop both ends of the thread around the needle twice. And if you need it wide; then tighten the thread properly, tie the thread into a knot, and remove the needle, and do this for all others, leaving one end to absorb excess blood.
Then place on the foundation one moistened pad in oil of roses or a poultice, and place it over the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
And then let them grow as long as they can endure it, and when they have fallen off, apply oil treatment and other remedies until the body heals.
so that drying occurs due to fire or foundation Many times there is the drying effect of dung in the intestines, and due to the nature's constraint, and when the disease is old and medicine no longer works.
It is necessary that you place it at the tip of a thorn or on your nail, which should not be left in moisture. Then treat until it becomes hardened as is fitting;
And if it doesn't harden, start again with a more vigorous shave until some part heals, and ensure that it is scalded; Then treat until it is healed.
When the tremor Antennae are a tiny false appearance before the body, and they move quite far forward;
And indeed, this trembling is a true happening within the midst of human nature's workings; and we also perceive it like death by trembling, spreading throughout the entire body, especially in the hands more than any other place.
And the treatment involves taking a reed from a goose feather or a sturdy vulture feather, and place this reed over the trembling until the purple circle encompasses the trembling completely; Then turn your hand to all the cane until you grasp it completely from the tremble and put it properly; eliminate the tremble from its roots.
And if you see something like a spider's cane or iron in this shape, make it thin all around and smooth above:
Don't let it pierce through, so that you may hold onto both sides and squeeze it. And if you see a tremble, then apply the cautery to the tremble, as is shown in front or chapter of cautery.
in the shape of a bladder None of the times does one make an argentary blister or an iron blister, or a lead blister; and none of these small and large instruments are made according to those to whom they are applied.
Therefore, when one applies them in the treatment of infants and those who are weak and painful, they are small.
The shape of the small and large blister is as follows, or how the belly is bound according to this manner:
and there should be an opening where the belly is bound, as you see, and the head is pierced inside; and have two points on one side of the body, and on the other side one each;
And if it's the belly where we place the medicine of a beast bladder or parchment, and pierce it completely through with small punctures,
And have between each puncture one inch of space, then insert into these punctures one strong thread made from a spun thread for ten inches or through the entire belly, and sew the belly as if it were a goat. And when the medicine is within, seal it with a strong thread in front of the tool, then proceed to cauterize; and this is the form of a circle:
And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and smear the opening of the cauterizer with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then gently insert it;
Then the surgeon operates with both his hands together, as long as he can see everything clearly, then removes the gallstone, and lifts up the patient's legs to expose them.
And if the medicine is seen to emerge, it pulls out as much as possible; and if there's a whole night of rest, then it's more greatly helped.
And if you perform a colonic irrigation in cases of stomach upset disease, and the medicine quickly emerges, then repeat until it's well.
And if there is internal bleeding or an abscess, or the condition requires a colonic irrigation, then use a colonic irrigation tool as thin as one's little finger;
And this is the form of a subtle cyst under which the skin might be strained:
of wounds
We have discussed the treatment of wounds in the previous section; now we will discuss treatments for hands and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and depending on where the wounds are located, and for what reason they were caused.
Things that result from wounds are due to the breaking of bone, and the size of a sword or knife cut, or of an arrow or spear or axe, or similar things;
or those that are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound on the neck, or on the head, or on the chest, or in the belly, or in the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and start with wounds of the simple head, since the memory will come to its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes or to the head, and if the bone isn't broken, be careful whether it's due to stone or similar things, and even though the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, And you slightly doubt about the abscess: if it becomes so quickly healthy of the cephalic itself even if there is a little blood from the wound, and let it heal in contrast to the part removed;
And beware that the patient becomes full of wine and rich meats.
And if he does not want to heal quickly, let his food be reduced, and do not give him wine or meat.
And place it over the wound, if there is an abscess that breaks open, use a wet cotton soaked in rose oil or only vinegar.
And if there is no abscess present, apply it to the wound, if it's fresh with all its blood, and it isn't disturbed by air, powder, which I will mention a little later;
And if the wound has been contaminated, apply some dressings until it is clean.
And if the wound is large, like from a sword cut or similar injuries, and the lips cannot be sewn together with sutures, then they are sewn together, like I will explain in injuries to the abdomen, by sewing.
If the wound is exposed to bone and muscle, and only holds together by a little bit, if you stitch it up; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard tissue instead of skin. And instruct the patient to consume large meats, such as fowl and cooked wheat, also like chickens, and similar items.
And if you find or discover putrefaction, and it extends to the bone, then remove all the putrefaction, and cleanse with water, then treat it;
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicine, then remove the artery, and if you find it protruding, tie it with a thread; And if this does not help, then apply the cautery.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should apply this powder which binds in such a way that once it's applied, the wound heals.
And the way of making this powder is as follows: take one part of incense; dragon's blood two parts; powdered live charcoal three parts, and finely ground it, and apply the powder to the wound, then press firmly until it is well aired and joins fully with all its blood.
and then keep it properly bandaged, letting it alone without removing the medicine as long as it doesn't swell; for the medicine should be kept until the wound heals.
And you should not do this with charcoal alone, when you don't have the incense or the dragon's blood, but only that the doctor has cleansed the wound.
And if the doctor has cleaned the wound, even during its state of being clean, do not apply this powder at all;
but place upon some prepared poultices, or oats flour made with water and honey, until the wound discharges pus; then continue other treatments until it heals.
And if bone fracture accompanies the wound, and it's small, you should remove it with delicate instruments;
and I will tell you about skull fractures after this.
from the wound in the neck
This wound comes from the neck and if it is simple, there should be no difference between it and those in the head, but if a vein or an artery is cut.
If it's the nose, there should be no other tool than to let the treatment proceed and not put any restraining thing on it, for it harms the nose and causes it to recede; And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the material of bones is cold, and continuity with them is connected to the brain, which is the highest part of the body.
but let it be under the supervision of medicine, such as salt washed in mild water, mixed with rose oil, and lettuce also washed similarly in mild water, And other stones within, according to this manner, and wet applications.
And if the wound is large, so it binds in layers, then treat until it heals properly.
And if the wounds are deep and filled with blood, then pierce them or as far down as possible;
And if the artery is severed, and blood starts to flow outwards, then uncover it or as far down as necessary, and if required, sew it up and cauterize.
And if it is cut at the throat or the lungs, or where the windpipe goes, by which the flesh flows, if you sew up the lung above the stalk of the throat, and do not touch the throat but place it according to its natural form; and then allow the wound to heal properly, and leave it for several days, then treat with desiccated ointments until it heals properly;
and if the injury has made an impression in the bone, then address it; And if there are bone fragments, extract them thoroughly if you can, and leave those that you cannot have until the wound heals. And let it be drained and treated with its discharge;
And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I have mentioned. And if there are bones in the wound and it has an ulcer, treat it as I have described in this chapter.
From the wound of a spear or a knife
If it's from a spear or a knife, and the wound goes deep, then observe whether there is an increase in windiness around the wound: if so, you will know that the wound is mortal;
and if it's not deep and is full of its blood everywhere, if you don't put the powder on or tie it immediately in the first hour after injury, do not let the blood stop flowing completely because of that. and give him courage and keep him busy; but apply the attractive ointment, and bind it twice each day;
and if you do not have an ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture,
and let the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more; if there is no spasm, nor bad heart tremblement, nor Alainne's movements; And when you see the good arrangements, if you know that the wound is saved. Therefore treat it with various remedies and other treatments, until it heals;
And if it cannot heal or improve, then know that there is an abscess; treat it accordingly.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut and it's simple, or worse or on the back, then treat according to what is in front of you.
If it's large, use stitches; and if it's small, use powder, and if there are impregnations in the bone, and if you have cut out pieces, if clean the wound, and remove any foreign objects if they are exposed; And if they aren't exposed, let the wound fester, if it facilitates the removals;
And for other wounds on other limbs, is the judgment like what we have said.
regarding the protrusion of the abdomen
The belly decompositions are large and medium-sized and small;
From a major wound, sometimes the bowel jumps out, or the nerves of the intestines, by which there is an intrusion of them;
And the suture is more troublesome, and not once is it as bad as a small wound compared to a large one.
Therefore, when putting the intestines back in, we would not place them directly, but rather little by little; Because when their intestines swell up as soon as they feel cold, they return further into the anus,
And because of this, they stimulate the abdominal wound, for thus we must move their intestines back to where they normally are, as is done with other cases.
Know that there are four ways a rupture of the belly occurs:
The two common stitches happen at the abdominal stitch,
And the suturing of other wounds from the body, and two other types of suture specific to their own kind, are common for other wounds;
And yet, they are more appropriate with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and explain.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine sticks out, And if the injured area can be repaired, this can be done through one of these two methods: because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when he is cold, warm him up in this manner: moisten a sponge or half a pound of cloth only in water, when you cook with boiling water streaming and cypress and thorn, and as long as the herbs swell so they are cut;
and once this vinegar is strained and made to cook until it frees up, it is ready for reducing.
And when you see the swelling depart, you should moisten the intestines with water or with broth that has been well cooked. for because this allows entry to very little thing;
and if it cannot enter, they will make a small incision with the tool used for removing the worms;
and the first treatment is to grind that which has been cut, that we should not cut without great necessity or cause;
and these are the instruments to split them:
if you cut inside in the bend and not outside, and here is how it should look:
And when the wound has been enlarged, and the intestines have jumped out, If you set it back according to its natural form in its proper place, if you have the ability, because this is what it takes to move it.
When the wound is wide and it's located in the abdominal area, If it is necessary to make the patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head; and if it's in the abdominal region,
and also if there is a rupture in the abdomen in one of the two parts, If you understand this, let the removed part be higher than the other;
And thus, it is necessary to apply what I say in large and medium wounds.
For small wounds, use what suits you,
Then have among your hands .i., a minister who heals the entire wound with his hand, And gather the lips; and this is the common way of stitches,
and this is the common way of stitches, and you should take one needle or more, according to the size of the wound's width, Then leave about half an inch from the edge of the wound and insert one needle with about an inch of strong thread; And pierces both leather cheeks with both needle of the spathula,
then pull through a doubled thread into one part of the needle twice, then gather together both sides of the wound's opening,
and then leave one inch of space, and insert another needle; then weave the thread in the same way you did with the first needle, and keep doing this according to how you need to work with the needles, Until all the wound is contained;
and are of average size, between delicate and thick needles, for delicate needles pierce all the flesh, and the overly large can't enter properly: thus they should be of medium size;
and it is not right to push the needles too far out from the flesh and skin,
let them not pierce and fester the wound before the stitch;
and then remove the heads of the needles, so they do not irritate the patient at night; and place tents or cloths over the heads of the needles to keep them in position; and let them grow until the wound has healed;
and this method of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it requires only one needle.
The second type of stitching is common, And you should join the two shoulder joints with skin and the two elbow joints together on one needle where there is a strong thread in half; and when you have pierced these joints all four together,
and when you have pierced these joints all four together, then remove the needle from the part where you started, in the way one sews with thread;
and leave a space between each stitch as wide as a small coin;
this sewing stitch makes the body,
and I sew a wound where there was once an opening or belly,
which had been cut by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in size, and let them be large for the intestines to fit properly.
And the wound is within the belly. I brought back the intestine, and it was twenty-one hours since its removal.
And the wound healed up to fifteen days, I treated it, and it became healthy.
And when the sight had judged that he would die, and this was a wonder;
and did not cure him with ointment because I was in the first level where one could not find it, nor any medicine; and I changed the cloth under the wound four times a day and washed it with honey water until it was clean.
And I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
Take the needle, and at first place it from the outer part down to here inside;
When it has pierced straight through the artery in the right way, if you find the head of the syringe or causes pain or where you have inserted the needle,
and make it pierce from the inner part to here on the outside;
And as for this stitch, know that you must sew them in the same way as the weaver sews his cloth, And when you leave out the stitch on one side, and take it again from another, until the seam is entirely completed.
The second method of sewing up, as Galen properly stated,
So it is like what everyone does, assembling the two parts naturally together, and apply one end of the thread to the other end in this manner:
Prick with a needle or pierce near the navel, and puncture just that spot. and leave those two joints at the side; then turn the needle, and puncture it from below up to this inside. like those two joints on the side;
Then pierce both on the outer part up to that inside, in two other shoulder joints which are opposite each other;
And this is the common way of stitching and the most usual method.
The doctors say this word, and none testify to it,
One must stitch the abdomen with two needles, or where there is thread in each;
And one must push a needle from one side, and the other from another, like those who sew wounds;
Know that when the rupture is in the midst of the belly, The suture there is more painful than in any other part of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is as follows: (This refers to assessing and treating wounds similar to others.)
And it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as long as the surgeon has moved it, so that he may be placed with his intestines back inside, and the stitches; then put on a powder to soothe the wound,
so that he may be placed with his intestines back inside, and the stitches; then put on a powder to soothe the wound, and if the surgeon has moved them, apply no ointment that might be present, until the wound heals; And heat the thread, and may they sew up the cut, and mend it; Then treat the wound in the same way as others, until it is cleaned;
and if you do not have medicines, put an old cotton cloth, temporarily, when it starts to weep. And shake it twice a day until it is healed.
For you need no other medicine besides in many situations when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound might cause communication with principal parts of the body, then it is necessary for you to immerse a thread lightly in oil heated by fire, or in rose oil, and place it inside the joints, and under the skin;
And if one feels pain or gangrene in the bowels, and this occurs frequently. If black wine enemas are given, and equally if gangrene reaches up to the intestines;
And penetrates within, and remember that when it's in the large intestine, it is easier to heal than in the smaller ones.
The intestines which are called "juvenile" cannot be healed when they are injured, And this is due to the arrangement of veins that they are, and by the subtlety of all the body, and the approach of its nature to the nerves.
And if the heart jumps out of the wound, then place it back inside as with an intestine, while it is still fresh;
and if it is old and has become red or black, then you must tie the area that is black, so that no further blood comes out, because there are veins and arteries;
Then take what is between the link, and place both shoulders up to beyond the wound until they ease the extraction when the joints are cold, and let the wound heal.
from the rupture of the boil
When the intestines are full, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in some places,
because I have seen that some were pierced or wounded in the stomach by a spear;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, And if it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there was discharge and wind flowing out of it;
I applied treatment according to what I could do, and did not stop refining until it was healed, and sealed the wounds.
And when I saw it healed, I wondered if the patient might have pain in their belly; There was no harm, but they remained in better condition, eating and drinking.
And they say that when there is a small wound inside the intestine, it must be treated like this: take large pieces of fat, then join together the edges of the wound, and when the fat has opened its mouth, place it on the two edges,
then makes another vibration in this manner as before, until the wound is completely treated;
and finishes the wound. Those who are so inflamed in the intestines, and do not cause any harm to the patient,
And if one could tie the intestine with a fine thread which has been cut from an animal's intestine,
in a similar manner: take the head of this intestines thread so that it comes out chewed, and then tie its head to this thread with a single strand of fine linen string. Then thread the needle with the string, stitch the intestine together, and realign it at the opening;
And this method of stitch sewing does nothing other than following the way of practice and hope.
And if the wound is large and broad, especially when it's in one of the intestinal cavities, if there's no obstruction or damage, rely on skillfulness.
from a fistula, or wherever it may be. Know that every wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called "fistula", And similarly when it is covered and begins to heal.
Fistula refers to a hard and yellowish swelling that is felt without pain, or where there is no sensation of pain, And it is covered like the feathers of a bird;
And sometimes it leaps clearly, and at other times thickly; Sometimes barely a trickle, and at other times enough;
and I have spoken about the classification of wounds, that any unhealed wound, and if there is no pus, this can only be due to one of the eight reasons:
This is to know by the smallness of the blood or the wound; or due to its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips that do not allow it to grow hair; or because there's too much wax; The limbs are sore, and the substance is of bad quality; or the medicine isn't good in the treatment; or because corruption proceeds like a plague; or due to the slowness in that region of digestion and delay in recovery, it is naturally expelled. where there are veins or bones:
and I have shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicine in this section.
So it is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of a fistula which is done through manual work.
Know that a fistula can occur in all limbs and organs; because there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, and nerves, or in the small intestine, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs, or in the spine at the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the ulcers of this kind are hard to heal, and there is no exception except plowing, and lack of knowledge;
and if there isn't any ulcer that doesn't go up to what I've said, and you have the intention of treating it, and you should know how to identify it. If you use a spider web or iron tent, if the ulcer is straight, inspect it;
and if the ulcer is curved, search for it with a subtle snail's tent; for the dives bend moves along the complexity;
and if it creates a tunnel in stumps of hands and you cannot find it well by trying, if you try to flush it out with one of the stumps,
because moisture can flow from one stump to another, and it can be cleaned;
Then use your skill according to your strength, that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and feel them through the skin.
And ask the patient about the pain they feel when your hand presses on it, and determine where in their body it is located;
And when you truly know its location, and if it's far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the locations I've mentioned, adjust according to what I've told you.
or in any of the locations I've mentioned, adjust according to what I've told you. And in the bone of the other side and the cartilage corrupted that are within; and then the treatment until it has healed,
and if the fistula is well cut straight through, you should follow its course as much as possible, then I put wet bandages in medical ointment and leave them just up to the tip of the fistula.
then I put wet bandages in medical ointment and leave them just up to the tip of the fistula. While the medicine continues to erode what has remained at the bottom;
and then I apply healing bandages over healthy flesh, as long as it remains sound and healthy.
and if it is not healed by this means, then you should cauterize it as we have instructed.
and if the bone is infected by the fistula, operate on it accordingly. If a vein or nerve is obstructed or if the principal limbs are affected, as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed, and there's decay or blackness, until the decay has been completely removed, so the king should do. Then cleanse off everything in that area until it becomes clean;
And if it is not clean, rinse it again as before; Know that you are not going far up to this point:
if it discovers and desires even when you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then return to its place;
and if it is thus healthy, that's well. If this is not the case, know that corruption has gone too far, you cannot reverse it; if there's no other way than to leave things to natural processes;
and if there's a small corrupted bone, and you can extract it with tongs, if the extraction requires an appropriate tool for this task,
And if there are many bones, treat them all, do not leave any unattended;
and if moisture opposes this and there is neither error nor fear, if you manage both moisture and heat, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something on the wound that promotes gangrene, And let them grow until the hairs are completely inside the bone,
Then they will have the bones a little more lightly;
And if it's a large bone, like from the leg or thigh, and only let it rot until all the bone is blackened, Then heal the wound;
and if there is a large portion of putrefaction and it reaches up to the bone; if it should be sown and covered all the way to where the putrefaction is, and then treated until it heals.
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in someone's leg. If you seek an example and assistance for your work.
He was a young person around thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg due to an issue that came from within the body,
Until the contents reached the leg, and there was an abundant abscess, and no external reason for it to open;
But they opened it so much due to their folly that the abscesses burst. And it consumed very little matter, and formed a fistula, and brought about much harm that all sighed at the body's heat and moisture;
And many illnesses took two years for a cure, and no wise person existed in the art of manual treatment,
As long as I was called upon, and saw her leg and the remedies used to treat it, And that which was being consumed by the pus with great body heat; And became red the bodies of youth, and had a yellow color.
I pitched my tent in one of these nooks, and then searched all the nooks,
and found that each was coming against the other from all parts of the leg.
So I hurriedly worked and copied from one of the nooks until I uncovered a part of the bone, And I found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption was reaching to the bone inside;
I realized that what appeared before me from the corrupted bone, and I thought there was no other corruption, because only this which I took out;
And began to restore the wound with medicines over time, and could not heal it;
and then I started again, and uncovered the bone as before,
And I found the continuous corruption within the bone, and the soreness, and then I removed it, and I focused on joining back together the broken area;
but I could only do as much as I copied out to the inside of one palm of the bone, and I treated it with all its flesh, then I restored it with medicines; and he was healed and joined up quickly,
and no longer needed to restart the operation except for due to the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it. And for the fear of death which I have of him. For often there was bloodletting, but it was entirely healed.
For often there was bloodletting, but it was entirely healed. And in the place of the bone there grew a hard flesh, and it was well positioned with no harm or opposition at all from every side, neither inside nor outside.
and hold the tip of the bone so that you pull out the putrefied flesh from underneath, And expose the flesh on the side of the body where you see hair, ensuring the hair does not hurt the flesh; and place a coal or a board over the bone to warm the infected flesh; it is necessary for hair to be as long as one can see and feel the decay, and also to have hair again.
And if the bone is decayed and does not open, and the decay is in the middle or in a part of it, If you uncover all the flesh; then place one coal over,
and then let the corruption spread evenly from one part to another, and may the silk be as long as the length of the corruption .i. inch, just as we have said;
and if corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and may the bone on the other side contain it;
and if corruption is in the connection of the two joints, then cut where you need to, as long as you are able;
And if the corruption is or pinches with the hand, or pinches by the foot, that thing is quite strong. but still it must be asked about this corrosion, how it opened for you; and cleanse in every way that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not oppose you;
know that the incisal and the seams for shaping these bones are many, according to the setting of the bones and their appearance, And their size and subtlety, and their grandness and smallness, and their hardness. And for this it is necessary to prepare each type of work with its corresponding tool;
and know that the work will show you the tool you will need, according to the knowledge of this craft, and it will testify about the ways of diseases; If you intend to use the tool necessary according to what is required.
with fire The shoulders dislocate either from within, or due to fire;
and when you have treated that burn with medicine, and it does not benefit at all, it is necessary to cover that limb up to its extremity where the corrosion comes, so that the patient does not escape through this gate of death, or through wickedness, which is greater than the fault of the limb;
so that the patient does not escape through this gate of death, or through wickedness, which is greater than the fault of the limb; and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they have been burned by fire, and after the blackness, then comes this corrosion of limb to limb, And it affects all over the body; if you are quick with copper,
and if it's due to the impact of certain venomous animals like sea scorpions and snakes and similar ones,
if it's from corroding at the neck up to the second joint, if you address it quickly, and do not give it space to extend up to the hand.
And if it reaches up to the hand, if you address the joint issue promptly, ensuring that the corrosion doesn't extend up to the elbow;
And if it comes to the arm, then cut it with a knife; and if it passes the knife, that is death. and there's no remedy except for the amount of its virtue;
and do it exactly as you would in any case with the corrosion or rust: if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint;
and if it occurs or is iron (rust), then cut all the iron. And if it rises to the leg, then it affects the knee joint;
And if it goes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to force the patient to death;
And the way to fix or support a limb is that you bind it above and below, and stretch one of your assistants under one band, and another assistant on the other band upwards, And you remove the flesh that is between the two threads to one inch wide, until the bone is uncovered;
then cover it with silk or linen, and place one inch of linen on each side, so that the linen does not touch the healthy limb, and have another wound and abscess for him to wear.
And if there is a bleeding during your operation, quickly cauterize the wound, When you place some restraining powders, then return to your medicine until its completion,
Then bind the injured limb with a reliable bandage, and treat it until it becomes healthy;
And I will tell you what happened to one man in his illness:
He had a night where it seemed like fire was burning him,
And this corrosion came first at his second foot, until it consumed all the leg;
And when the disease reached the corrosion, he would cover his leg with it, and became healed;
And for quite some time after that, the corrosion returned to my hand's second part, and it came to me.
And I applied things that caused rebounding after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosion;
And I tell you that I will pass my hand over it, and I do not wish to have hope of removing the matter; and also doubted whether if I were to cut off his hand, he would die. for the strength of his will was weak; and he completely lost hope, and returned to his land. and had them amputate his hand, and he became well again.
And I have included this solely for those who might need it elsewhere, if required.
No abscess forms in the inner flesh, and stays so long as to cause a large gathering of pus; Then it grows and penetrates, and the pus jumps, making its way through the veins, like vessels; The skin above is also as delicate as a single piece of cloth. And do not extend until they reach the bone or nerve, and such diseases are called "blind",
but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone on all sides, it is called 'fistula';
and in cooking, if you make sure to cook the skin all through, and even when it is subtle, as with a piece of fabric; And does not heal due to its decay.
And if you have heated the skin so that it burns, and the corruption is not quite perfect, and if the skin is thick with fat, let him be cured by enemas:
and see if his breasts are large, and the womb that is in it gives off a foul smell, Thus, use an Egyptian enema made like this: Take aloe, and oil, and litharge, equally, and cook them in one vessel on the fire, until the medicine turns red, and thickens as much as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and prepare it with water and honey, And by enemas to cleanse the womb, and restrain the bleeding; And leave the medicine in for two hours, then remove it by pressing out;
Do this many times until the breasts are freed and the milk is removed;
And each time, use water from ashes for enemas; When this treatment is unavailable, and if you take ashes from the vine's wood, and pour boiling water over it.
Then let it drain, and create a poultice, until you know that the lungs are well inflated;
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, if instead you mix water and honey or add a little mercury ash; When you stir with honey and mixed wine, where honey has properties of purifying and cleansing, and the wine makes the healthy one breathe;
and when you have done this, and you have ensured that the chest is well purified, if you stir with what causes meat to grow in it,
And you need to make plaster casts for it, and do this with olive oil and wine; or you should apply various medications and ointments to it, about which I have discussed their properties or written on the use of ointments;
and if the anus is too small and cannot accommodate the enema, if you widen it slightly with a rod, and then insert an Egyptian ointment tent, The use of basilikon balm, until it becomes broad;
and if the wound is too wide, stitch it only so much that a finger or thumb can enter,
and should there be a gap where blood flows above, stitch it as high as the elbow or even lower than I am. And when the wound is in perfect condition, do not allow maggots to infest it; And if you cannot cover his chest as you see, if the instrument is held in such a way that it goes as low down on him as he is,
and if you cannot cover his chest as you see, If it appears in a partial manner: have the bow bend lightly downwards, and do not let anything of the arrow remain; and take strengthening medicines to place within the breast,
and keep it covered with a linen cloth that covers all of the breast; then apply in the area around the tip of the breast, one inch wider than the first. For there is greasing with fat upon one or another cloth according to the quantity of the burn. and place it on the burn on the breast to ease the swelling, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days once;
and the one who is under the burn on the breast, often remove it to relieve the swelling, And know whether the blood that comes from the wound is venomous or little or enough, or digested, or undigested;
And take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is pus or not,
and when your medicine has spread in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps up on the rib above the heart, knowing that the breast is already inflamed, and move towards health;
and then release it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound, If another garment changes, and revives the ointment.
And if after many days, the breasts release an undigested liquid, know that the breasts are not well. And if subtle poisons linger for a long time, do not despair of your health.
for healing is on its way. For there are people who take too long to heal from their wounds due to their actions in love, and for others it's the opposite;
And if the food undigested jumps across after several days into the stomach, know that the stomach is not doing this;
And if the wind in the stomach takes time to pass and is far off, adjust your medicine with dry substances and their properties. likewise as a transparent ointment, for it contains a large part of vitriol, and this is the last remedy;
take a transparent ointment, and make it with rose oil, and season it with old wine of equal strength.
Then he applies and uses it; and this very thing makes it better when cooked thickly, when ointments that harden are present,
or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them together, and the powder is mixed with honey while it's over the fire; and then apply gum to one and a half drams, and spread it on the chest, and each time administer or give an arithmologist length of time. And roots of this celestial, which is also like flour many times and thyme;
And roots of this celestial, which is also like flour many times and thyme; And in using simples or compounds: grind them, make a powder, and put it on the honey I mentioned, and use it; and if the treatment lasts long and isn't treated with this remedy,
and if the treatment lasts long and isn't treated with this remedy, Therefore know that corruption spreads throughout the body and manifests in the bones or hard parts of the body, or in injuries. if dealing with the treatment of a fistula, as we have said earlier.
from the abscess under the nail
Panarice is an abscess that forms around the nail of the hand's wrist. or on the foot, or perhaps forms in other fingers;
And when it has become old, and if one does not take care, if an abscess forms. And scrape and trim the nail until you reach the root of the nail, and by chance remove it completely;
And comes the corrosion down to the bone until there is stinking pain, and the shoulder joint swells to twice its size, and has a changed color.
When you treat it as we have instructed in the section on treatment, and the treatment does not help at all, It is necessary for you to cut away all excess that has remained from the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The fire cautery is quite effective if the bone and nail are healthy;
and if the nail grows close to the flesh, it starts to poke and causes blisters, It is necessary for you to place the rod under the nail so that not a single hair remains. and the sponge at the top, and remove this small piece gently. and place on the sponge medicinal plasters that are hot and corrosive to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is within the bone, you must remove it, and apply force, for as much of the bone that has rotted, cannot heal;
and if you see that the knee is corrupted, remove it at one in two parts as was previously described, then scrape it until it becomes clean;
and if it is hard and painful, and smells greatly of pain, then it should be cleaned first; Then cut across from above on the sharp nail, removing it.
and ensure that the cut does not go through to the flesh beneath the nail, for patients would experience too much pain.
And if this happens, place something above it to soothe it.
The task is to adjust what is born with some men by chance or having thick flesh, and by chance there's a part where bones are present, and sometimes it has a ridge,
And none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birthplace is in no way to be adjusted. Those that are born from any node do not move, And he who is born at the joint of the knee, by chance becomes immobile;
The size of that which is well-muscled can be so light, in such a manner: Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
That which is born at the root of the joint causes trouble to treat: hold on with your copper.
In the case of a birth or delivery issue, if necessary that you first grasp the round part until the bone. then hold onto the bone with an appropriate grip, then treat it as long as it is sound.
The fuses that come together at the joints originate through birth, or through the healing of wounds, or through heat application, or through similar circumstances.
If it is necessary that you repair this fuse, so that it should be restored according to its natural forms; Then place between two wet tents or cloths soaked in rose oil, Or you place between two small pieces of elastic leather, until the ears are sewn together, as is fitting.
Sewing should be done with both hands facing down, if you make that seam as it should be.
Of low quality
The veins are thick, enveloped bundles full of melancholy excesses, which affect multiple body parts.
And it happens more in legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, than in others.
So you should then administer a single purge to him, and then heal him with basilica treatment.
The iron treatment has two methods: one is where you cut open to let out black blood; And another method is that you open the vein, and pull it all with force.
The process goes like this: first raise the hot leg water quite strongly until the large vein becomes thin. Next, gently pull the leg from the thigh up to the part below the knee; Then cut the vein into 1 or 2, or 3 parts, with a width of one's hand,
Then raise and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the properties of the blood can bear;
and then tie it off, and instruct that he soak up the black meat with this ligation.
And repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, which harms the patient.
The method of applying leeches to the affected leg is as follows: lift the leg from below where there are hairs, if there are any. Then immerse it in a hot water bath until she turns red, and swell the veins;
And if you don't have a bath, heat it on the fire, and then apply it along the vein from its origin to its thigh or at the part below to the ankle;
Then scrape the skin with an onion, and blister each side of the vein until you see it when touched;
And it appears red and black, and when it meets with skin it seems as if it is a white string;
Then heat up the cautery stick until it's above the skin level, and then place it gently at the point of hair growth.
Then keep heating for one more time on another level three times; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears. Then move to the next level, just like you did before, and place it on another hook, just like you did at first.
Then take another size, or more if needed, then lift it, and shape it to fit the foot.
Then pull and lift until the second size fits; then increase in size gradually, until all strength has been used, then shape it.
And if you cannot pull and lift it, insert an awl with one and a half strands of strong thread, Then tie it and pull, and insert another two threads, and twist your hand on either side, until it comes out; And ensure she doesn't become stuck, for if she does, then one cannot milk or lift her, and this harms the patient;
And when you have milked her entirely, place wet wool in vinegar and oil on the wound site; and continue to treat until it has healed.
And if her vision is tight, twisted, and wrapped together as a whole, and she is not straight, just like we have said, And it is necessary for you to cut her tormentedly, but do not pinch her; and treat her as we have explained beforehand.
And it is necessary for you to cut her tormentedly, but do not pinch her; and treat her as we have explained beforehand. The shape of the iron with which one works the screw is bent, and does not cut,
And is of great curvature, for if it were sharp, it would pierce the vein, but being thick as we have said, and this is its form:
From the civil vein
This vein is confined to legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil lacking moisture.
And by chance it might arise from another place than the legs, and this occurs due to the corruption that comes from under the skin,
just as if it originates within the body like snakes and worms, lying between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of this vein's beginning are present, so that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to protrude outward, like the root of a plant.
When the shoulder is open, it's necessary to wrap around inside a strip of leather about three and a half inches in length up until seven inches, and fasten it.
and hang the leather down by the leg, and every time there is a little left over, if you wrap inside the leather, and fasten it. and if it's too long, cut off a part of it and wrap again, without cutting its root, until the entire piece is out. but if you cut too much, it goes into the flesh, causes pus and decay or disease in it, resulting in a bad ailment.
For a matter related to her condition, it must be treated gradually and step-by-step up until completion, and not leave anything out or behind;
and there should never be a time when this vein, once it has been treated to the length of two palms or more, or up to ten; and an honorable person came to me, from whom the vein goes out for ten palms, and when you grasp it, if you pull one or two inches or less, then pierce until you reach the bottom,
so that everything can go out; and make the matter inside empty, and apply medicine to heal from within on any day, then treat it as you would with abscesses.
And never at this vein through a rough entry, and equally when it opens at the connection of the foot, or at the heel, And much blood comes out, and when it escapes; then treat it as we have instructed before.
Worms that emerge between the skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "beef sickness", because it occurs frequently to cattle,
And there is a small worm that emerges between skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body going up and down, And one feels it well when passing from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it was going, and jumps forcefully;
And it is infected by rotting fluids, such as coming towards worms and serpents and roundworms or in the belly;
And there is uncertainty about its nature, for when it passes through the body, and goes up to the head, and comes to the eye, By chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being treated and drained, one can only hope that when it is about to:
So then, it must be that you bind the area above and below with a strong tie tightly,
Then, place your hand on it and press down, and if there's a fullness when you press within the muscle, and you don't find any. if you apply fire cautery to it,
and the greatest harms that it causes, are when they penetrate the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming close to your eye, hold something in front of your eye tightly, then raise up and pull firmly;
and one should use the remedy for purging away body fluids using medical solutions to combat bodily disorders,
And if there is a rotting of meats from being overcooked.
Of the pain that comes from wind or cold. This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that affects any member. And it spreads from member to member; and I have seen what I am telling you.
I was called to treat an diseased woman, and she showed her arms to me, revealing a small swelling in the arm vein;
And then, it grew as big as a worm at her shoulder, As soon as possible, just like quicksilver when it is taken from one place to another;
The pain leaves the one there, and pierces into the shoulder,
And then a bit later spreads throughout the body, until it reached the other arm;
Then it was telling me that she twisted inside the body too, just as I saw.
I was marveling much how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner. In every way, I have wished for many things to move pain of him to another, but I have not wanted it, as I see it in the woman;
and I thought it was because of this that women had smooth skin, and their veins exposed, and because of this, the constriction windiness becomes visible;
And they do not appear according to this reason among those who are delicate, and have wet bodies and veins that respond.
And when you see the treatment of this illness, and if the patient feels pain from it, open them as we have said if they show signs of it. If you see that the wind (here likely referring to air or breath) is escaping both up and down quickly, then hold this constriction until the disturbance of the wind in its place subsides. And apply the cautery to it; and if you do not see it working on your eyes,
If one is treating a case of wind expulsion issues, such as stinking pills, venomous pill of the viper, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearance and according to the location of their impact on the body.
The diversity of them is such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and barbed, and soldered; And concerning those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those where there are fragments; And the one who urinates in no member but does so according to two ways: or in the main body it dribbles,
as with the brain, heart, liver, kidneys, lungs, intestines, bladder, and other similar members. And when she urinates in no part of these members, then the signs of death, which I will tell you later, become evident to you: If it is necessary for you to proceed with the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in various dispositions; And when that bad sign does not become apparent, and the arrow is not entirely out, if you pull it, and treat the wound.
And when that brain sign occurs when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and there is a sudden rush of fluid from the head, And when blindness and numbness occur along with inversion and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and muscle spasm and confusion in understanding, and vomiting of bile; And perhaps it affects the nostrils or the ears; and sometimes it causes loss of speech and voice. And there is a moist white swelling resembling a boil, and in that boil also like burnt meat;
And if this sign appears, hold onto the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it hasn't been removed.
The sign of the arrow when it's drawn or retracted is that it is close to the left breast, and also feels like it might be embedded in something hard, not empty; And by chance the heart also beats as do the rabbits, and during black blood loss, and brings on coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: So know that death is near.
And the sign of an arrow that never leaves its path is when blood spurts from the wound without foam, and the throat swells up, and the patient's face changes color, and they sigh loudly while their body grows cold.
And if the arrow stops inside the leg's fur, it is located below the small ribs; and there is great bleeding and great pain and sighing; and all limbs from the shoulders move.
And if an arrow or stomach penetrates it, perchance something of the undigested meat comes from the wound.
And if an arrow or stomach pierces it, and if there is no meat in the intestines after jumping from the wound, then there's no hope for treatment, nor extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrow penetrates into the bladder, and urine flows out and escapes after jumping from the wound, and patients feel intense pain: know that this injury is mortal.
The other body parts, such as the limbs (including arms and legs), neck, throat, shoulder, elbow, back, spine, knees, and feet, as well as any similar parts, are safe according to various positions. When an arrow is in the nerve or artery and it isn't venomous, as I will tell you that this happened to me, because what you did was different.
It happened in one instance where an arrow struck the right shoulder at the root of the neck: I tried to pierce it, and from the other side through the fatty tissue of the ear, causing no sensation.
And pierced with an arrow that struck in the fat near the eye below the paper sheet. And the arrow was returned, and one could not reach even its tip to the shaft, And the arrow was long as a Turkish bow, about one hand's width without an ear; the patient was sound, and he suffered no ill accidents.
And I shot an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and the arrow had ears for this one: Arab style.
I held my breath, and kept it as long as I shot it, and the Christian was sound.
And shoot an arrow through one's body, if it was stuck in their back or belly, and thought that they would die;
and after it had been over thirty days, if it did not change its position; I cut through the arrow, set the instrument, and forcefully pulled it out, without any bad incident.
And if you find one who was hit by an arrow in their back or front, and the wound has healed over;
And the arrow stays within, not returning to its natural position, And finds no harm in any of its natural works.
And to another man, who was struck in his face by an arrow, and had the wound stitched up;
And it was like that, causing him such great pain; and there were other similar situations.
And when you shoot an arrow from half a home distance to the king's prince, where it gets stuck halfway in his nose, and was slightly tilted towards the right side; and the arrow was fully inserted.
I was called to treat it after it had been stuck for three days. I found the wound very tight.
I tried everything with my subtle instrument, but did not feel any change; And he felt pain and discomfort around his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow.
I put on his head a restorative plaster, because the hair did not swell; and I saw the arrowhead in the hair.
and I saw the arrowhead in the hair. I placed a plaster on for many days, and cleansed the wound directly, then kept the patient suffering long thereafter.
Until he felt the arrow passing through his nose; and I told him about it. I placed a corrosive antiseptic on the wound for many days until it was opened.
And I tested it, and felt the tip of the arrow as it was passing through to the other side; Then adjust in the opening of the wound through this medicament, until I clearly saw the head of the arrow;
and pierced well to the inner ends for three months,
then I separated as much of the wound so that my forceps could touch both sides, and applied it from one side to the other, but it could not come out;
therefore I did not stop refining and devising ways of instruments, until I managed to use two well-made forceps for it for one day; According to how its form will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I handle it, and I shall restore the wound.
And the judges decide that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will thus restore it, and then suture the wound, and the patient's injuries will be completely healed.
So I told you about the quality of extracting some arrows, If you place your treatment on what I do not say, because books cannot take everything into account;
but the wise masters compare well to small matters, and concerning what is current and lacking, True to new work, and a ninth instrument, for the removal of foreign things that happen in this craft.
I say that arrows do not lie in the limbs where they are stuck according to two ways: By means of the arm where they enter, or from another side;
And that which enters by the arrow's wound when it enters in their flesh, this is the shaft within them, and now it enters only once.
And if it does not enter now, let her stay until the flesh is fully healed inside, and wait for its release;
And likewise if it's stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, let her stay like that for a few days, and remove it each day;
And then it jumps, and if it does not jump, if you pierce through all with one thin hole, as long as the hair in between is widened, and then insert.
And if the arrow has been returned to inside the body so that we cannot see it, then search thoroughly for all its parts; And if you feel it, guide it with no suitable instrument;
and if you cannot do it due to the tightness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve or vein, so you make it as long as the wound becomes large; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are holes in the arrow where it holds,
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are holes in the arrow where it holds, if you have a bone that's stuck for half an inch, you should know how to remove it. and then break or bend the arrowhead's ears until you can draw blood from it;
and then break or bend the arrowhead's ears until you can draw blood from it; Be subtle so that you do not break the arrow but draw blood more forcefully from it.
And if you can't do it in one go, leave it until its entire length is rotted away by maggots, then try to pull it out, as extraction requires effort. And if blood flow opposes you, then apply what we have instructed regarding treatment as described in our chapter;
and beware of incising near nerves and veins, and make the cut so that you can extract the arrow without risk,
either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient in the position they were in before the arrow struck them. because it's best for them to be as comfortable as possible, and if you can't do that, place them according to what the medical sign shows you.
The arrow that comes from another side, or if it exposes any part of it, or if the skin is swollen in such a place that one sees or feels it distinctly:
So grasp at the arrow from above, as long as the tongs can take hold of it, and then pull it out: if it jumps suddenly.
And if she is held in the bone, twist your hand round as long as she enters the bone and widens the bone, then pull her out.
And if she cannot come out, leave her there still, and start extracting again until she comes out;
And if there is an arrow involved, hold it at the entire shaft;
And if it's bone, and you need to administer thrusting (a method of treatment), then use the instrument that's suitable for bones. so that the tip of the arrow enters the channel of the tool; and then apply force,
and if the arrow is stuck, use another tool with an entering tip to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrow is encircled, it must be that you grasp all the flesh inside or where I come in, if you can, then treat the wound as it becomes necessary.
And if the arrow hits or pierces the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close to doing damage, and you can reach it, then you should grasp it up; if you can.
And watch over not to cover the vein and the nerve, and then remove it, and afterwards suture the wound; that is the task. And keep the treatment until it has healed.
The shape of the pincers used for arrows is similar to the tip of a bird's beak, and here is the form:
And they come in sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
from the horns of common veins The veins from which we cleanse are thirty-one, of which there is sixteen for the head.
This means: Two small ones that are behind the ears, they are called the "two herbs". And the two arteries that are in the two temples visible; And two veins that are in the two eyelids of the two eyes, they are called "aspires"; And the vein that is within the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the head near the nose; and the two jugulars which are at the collarbone; and the two veins that are in the cheeks above the mouth, and these are the veins which are called 'aughershire'; and the two veins that run along the tongue.
The veins which are commonly treated are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic vein, and it starts from the left side of the chest, and they call it 'the common vein' or 'vein of the head'; And the middle one is called 'fast' and is made up of the cephalic and basilic veins, And they call it 'the vein of the heart'; and the basilic either is from or to the right side of the chest, And they call this condition "the vein of the belly", and it's above the pubis, and that which is healed, whose opening becomes clearly visible at the scrotum.
And the salvation tool is the vein located between the index finger and the ring finger, and it has a diameter of two fingers;
And in the leg and where the patella is, there are three veins: one of which is below the knee on the left side of the body, And this is the second sentence which is at the ankle bone on the right side; and this vein, which is called 'nurse', is in the ankle of the other side.
And in the other leg are three veins next to those ones.
The health of the veins that are after the ears helps with fevers and migraines; And the qualities of a healer, as I tell you, it is so that you heal the head of the patient.
And the qualities of a healer, as I tell you, it is so that you heal the head of the patient. And rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then pinch the patient's neck at the base of their head. until you see the two veins behind the ears under the second ear to the forehead: place your hand there, and where you feel the pulse under your hand, if it beats strongly.
Then take the lancet, and hold the needle right above the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all the way up to the vein above. And cut and loosen the skin and the vein well two inches deep, and let blood come out as long as you see;
then hold and bind it until it heals;
and I have already discussed the incision and the cauterization in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are in the temples, if it resembles an old embolism, And indeed, and to the eyes accustomed, and on the body of feverous tears, to the eyes;
And that quality of the surgeon is such as I say: And it happens that the patient strains their throat until both two veins are clearly visible; and feels the pulse twice on each side, and then gives judgement on it;
Then lift your hand above the vein near your elbow and hold the scalpel steadily, and lift the vein at the top, and the flap, just like you did in other veins, and let out the blood according to your need;
then release the hair, and place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put cotton there;
And then the wound forms, and you should leave it until it heals; and we have spoken about this before in terms of its care and removal, or beginning of the book.
The vein in the forehead heals just as much as the temple vein when it comes to diseases of old like migraines and hives;
And its quality is that the patient constrains his neck by twisting, until the vein appears; then take the tool called "awl", which has this shape:
And place the tip on the vein, or extend your hand, or another thing, and let out blood according to the amount you see. Then release the neck of the patient, and tie the vein as long as it is healthy and without any operation has not left a broad wound.
Always remember, it is not right for the flames to be too close; and the skin should be cut diagonally because the bone is nearby. By chance, they may break the flames when they are subtle.
The incision for the two veins that are in the eye sockets aids the eyes, and at the nose, and around the mouth, and at the ear canal, and for diseases of the face;
And the quality of their healing is such that the patient twists his neck by binding a certain ligament, as before;
Then the healing occurs, and so the wound passes through, somewhat along the length of a small flame somewhat wide, for there is no flesh.
And if the flames are thin, suppose they break; then pour blood, as much as you need, and then cover with cotton, and bind it well.
The healing of the vein near the nose is good for fever, and for hot baths, and for stomach illnesses, as when there is headache and heat coming to the face, and indeed when she is old;
and it is that the sick person so constrains her throat that they pinch her nose with their left hand. and take a subtle flame and insert it between the two nostrils into the space inside the lip. for the mouth does not open properly yet, and the operation will now begin to correct;
And do not proceed too hastily with this, adjust your treatment according to necessity then leave them alone for a night, because it is very quickly restored;
The health of two gallbladders helps with constriction of the bile ducts and the beginning of mixers, and much disease, and in putridity, and corrosion, and herpes, and emesis;
and the quality of health is such that diseases are stretched in both their necks from one to the other, as we have said; And may the masters being on top of the head of the patient, and the patients lie flat on one side for an hour,
Then open the vein as long as somewhat wider, then drain the blood moderately, or as much as is needed;
Then make another incision in the other vein, then release the knot, and restrain moderately the veins. That the patient doesn't strangle themselves; and leaves them until morning, so that the wound heals.
Regarding the healing of ears The care of veins in the mouth aids in collection within the mouth, and contributes to gum decay, and splits in lips, and nosebleeds and internal bleeding.
And the quality of this care involves making the patient sit before you, and supporting their neck as I have described; Then turn the mouth, and look at these two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left. and you can recognize them by their blackness, and by the fact that inside they contain small black veins: Now handle both of them, and if you do not know which one, and you are in doubt,
Now handle both of them, and if you do not know which one, and you are in doubt, If you handle the larger one of each part, and do likewise with both veins above and below, because it is the same method.
Of the health of the tongue The health of the veins located on the tongue aids after the head's health, and this is done by constricting the throat. It also deals with diseases of the eyelid, and diseases of the mouth;
And the quality of a healthy person is such that when their body parts are examined with the sun shining on them and they move their tongue, one can see black veins on both sides:
Then indeed both of them are healthy, and do not extend too far down; because there are the arteries beneath.
The veins of a cut, which are generally healed, are treated according to two methods:
or by applying a broad, smoky heat from one type of flame (like that from animal fat), or from a fine olive oil if it's like the blades of a knife, and these are called 'anisel'. and they are broad or fine depending on the width and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the mirtin flame is very well known, and it's quite wide as you see:
And it requires to open veins filled with large visible blood clots, and those containing large amounts of thick blood. and this is the shape of olive oil flame:
And it's more refined and pointed, used to heal fine veins, or one with fine yellow blood.
The healing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that occur in the throat, and neck, and stomach, and abdomen;
And it is necessary for the surgeon to heal skillfully, and to beware of the artery which is nearby. And if he cuts the artery, and bleeding occurs, it is necessary for him to stop it, as I have said; and must not be held by the flame, but cut in such a way that it resembles a knife.
And if the basilica does not open clearly, you should extract it and change to another one; You want no blood from him, or you release it through his arm under him. It becomes clear clearly; And the incision on fire beforehand, as we have said.
And if you know where to make the wound heal, it is necessary that you straighten the arm, touching the place until you find the pulse; Then mark where to cut, and then bind the arm, making a cut on the vein as we have said before.
And make sure you do not cut into the artery when you see the limb swell, for this is from the artery: hear then.
And if you see it bulging up as high as a child's urine, and the veins are red and subtle, know that these are veins from the artery: Hasten then, place your finger for a while, then remove your finger when the bleeding stops, as has often happened;
Fasten his arm and leave it like this, don't move the patient's limbs; stay ready for fear, don't move until he is healed.
And if the wound is not bleeding, and you need to do so, and the medicine is not at hand, if you open the artery when it opens, because the head of the body withdraws; and stop the bleeding on the wound.
And take a bark from a broomstick, and cut it, and take one of the halves and bind it well up to the other side.
If the wound stops bleeding, that's good; if not, apply it as we have said, with powders that stop the blood.
And the remedies should not be applied in more than a few locations for the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's joint.
The treatment of blood flow takes place in the middle where she aids in the treatment of blood near the head above, and the heart below. Because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic parts, as we have said;
And it is important for the surgeon to be aware of the nerve that's located there, and if he doesn't go far enough, and he finds the nerve, And it inflames and damages health, and in case of accident, can't heal;
And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any of them due to its subtlety, then you should cut the patient near the tool; and listen for the sound of the nerve with your power.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make the incision long.
The treatment for headache helps, as it draws blood from the head, and assists with the eyes;
And it is advisable to treat with the oil flame or with the mint flame, as this is the safest of all veins, because there is neither beside the nerve nor artery.
Always, it's necessary to seek the lightest method, and one should not be troubled if they have to try once more, then retry. And sometimes, swelling occurs in certain limbs after the first attempt, but one should not be troubled by this. The quality of health depends on your thought.
The first thing you need to know about surgery is that health is managed through means only to preserve health,
And to avoid future illnesses; and let the healing take place in one of the three veins that are or cut: namely, the cephalic, the facial, and the basilic; and let healing begin at the start of prayers on one's knees, and in autumn and after meals during winter, when the sign of fullness is observed;
and let healing begin on the first or third day, after two or three days.
The healing that is administered for illnesses does not have a set time, but only when need arises during the day or in terms of sustenance, at all times and in every situation;
And it is not suitable for a surgeon to heal children until the age of 13 years, nor women who are pregnant for only one quarter of a month up until seven weeks. And it is not suitable for surgeons to heal the elderly who have surpassed sixty years.
And when any wish to be treated, in whatever manner it may be, if it is necessary that they evacuate their intestines with a gentle cathartic. If there is a bit of fat retained, so that the veins pull out excesses from the intestines harmful to the main limbs;
Neither does one recover from those who are too full of meat, nor those who are drunk, until they are strong, or have dropsy;
And if one is well informed about the healer after colic passion, and vomiting, and bowel loosening, and frequent urination in women, and work, staying awake and exercising, as well as whatever consumes the strength, or due to something from the arm or injury;
Then make subtle the fluids, if they are excessive through meat and drinks and medicine, provided you have the means;
Then within or during a bath, if no thing breaks outwards, to thin out the blood,
and heal her of the vein from below up to the middle third, as we said;
and guard that day from labor, pain, and excess, and similar things;
and tie yourself and rejoice, and let the nurse be higher than whom you are being healed, and rub your arm twice or three times.
Then adjust the tie above moderately, for when it is too tight or too loose, it cannot correct itself without;
and then rub your arm with your hands until the veins swell up and you can feel them;
then moisten the wick with a little of old oil flame, then place your left hand's index finger on that vein slightly above the elbow; so that the vein does not burn or rupture from being hit. For there are veins that flow as cords on the bowyer, and there are such that are full of wind, so that when put over the flame, they retract towards the flame, and cannot open the vein, thus one is of those;
and if it opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, for in such cases, the bowyers must be skilled in these matters.
And if the vein opens for the first time, it's good; if not, try again a little around that spot or quickly, as long as his arm isn't swollen.
And if the limbs are swollen, and the veins appear, let it rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: By chance pus-filled blisters may come out; do not enter water, then start the cleaning if it pleases her.
And if the pus pocket is small, or if there's a slight hole and you doubt that it doesn't drain as much blood as you see, if you pierce this pocket itself all the way to the root;
And let the wound heal a bit faster, so that the limbs swell; because this happens many times, when the wound is small.
If you see that the body swells, if you do not restart the healing process, and apply a little of olive oil, because it alleviates the body's pain from blood, and makes the oil stick in this area of the body.
and thus apply the olive oil to each healing you do on veins, to stop the flow of blood;
and similarly apply vinegar and wine when you put them on the body; if the oil is too thick, it separates from the blood.
And when there comes about large abscesses, which occur often, just as when healing has not been completed, especially if the opening of the vein is small. If you are prepared, place on the limb a sponge moistened with water and wine for an hour and then remove it.
It is necessary that you perform this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if it stays in place for several days without any blackness or greenness, then it does not harm it. And if you see so, place on it something of myrrh or aloes, ground and made into a juice from comfrey, or similar.
Many times pus and appearance of healing were seen in the cure of the basilica: so place your hand there, and if you find the limb soft to the pressure of your hand, this indicates an unhealthy condition. Therefore, you should not apply anything from what we have discussed here, for fear of harming the artery; but have it properly plastered dry to harden the area, then proceed with another treatment until it heals.
And for each one give blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
And if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see that it's large, let it continue flowing until it thins out; and if it's too hot, let it cool down.
And for the one who is full and free, needing blood extraction, it's necessary to make the wound larger and have wide flames.
And for him who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits better to serve him with small and frequent doses, and he must be cured by cutting across, not straight.
And this way of treatment saves from the spreading of blood and the entrapment of nerves, and is preferable to prolonged rather than broad cutting.
And for the patient whose body needs surgery, you should give them moist bread in the juice of pomegranate apples; if they are heated, let them drink three or four times this mixture.
And if they have a cold constitution, they should be fed moist bread in syrup mixed with honey or aromatic syrup containing spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and grains of paradise, along with a well-smelling syrup.
And if it loses strength after bleeding from some amount of blood, then it should inhale broth of fat and a subtle, fragrant syrup.
and use the other things that we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if they wish to exercise their arm and strengthen it again, whenever applicable, when they are weakened by great bleeding, they should recover gradually, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
And if one wishes to exercise their arm after the first recovery, and they are in good health, they should recover for 7 hours after the first recovery, or after the new hour.
And for those who wish to heal elsewhere, if they must heal on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood within the body that has now heated up, and it causes fever; if one must drain a large amount of it, and widen the puncture site until it discharges through the stopper; Then when you fulfill all conditions of healing, and place your hand on the heart as it beats, so that death does not occur in its place, And this happens many times when healers are careless;
And it is not right when you see the arm being pulled out, and blood coming out the second time, and the wound is closed, that you press forcefully above; nor if it is broken, to immediately stretch the arm, for this would be badly done;
but let it until it heals the second time; or you place its tip at the end of the flame, until the blood which has frozen in the wound starts to flow, and put on one finger's breadth of salt immersed in water, and gently press it.
And if the vein is swollen, let it alone and do not squeeze it, until the abscess subsides.
And if you need to bleed again from the first place of bleeding, direct it onto the same spot or into another vein, or on the other arm.
The vein in the arm is clean at its point of connection with the main vein because it is separate from the neck vein due to its composition.
And the method of cleansing involves having the patient soak their hand in hot water until the veins become red.
Then tie it somewhat, so you can see the vein clearly, then cure now through it, not too wide nor too long;
and make the cuts narrow, and cure very close to the wrist joint, and if it does not bleed out, then place the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the water as long as you need.
and if it's swollen, do not place the hand in hot water either, because one puts it more in winter than in summer;
and healing this vein is safer than with any other veins, there being neither artery nor nerve.
The treatment for saving the right hand from liver diseases is as follows:
Stretch the hand and immerse it in hot water until the vein is swollen, if you can see it; and if the veins are diagonally strained, and if you apply this treatment thoroughly all over, without causing any discomfort;
and don't press too strongly, for the nerves are entirely bare of flesh,
And then put your hand in warm water, if there is freezing in the wound, it cannot escape.
And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, place a cauterizing agent or a seal on it to quickly solder until it stops bleeding, and thus do this for each case.
The treatment of the right hand is equivalent to the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you for the left.
The treatment of the stomach suits all diseases that exist in the body, Like diseases of the stomach, and retention of flowers (possible reference to herbal medicine), and disease of the bladder, and in old legs and feet, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of its health is such that the patient bathes in hot water, and rubs it on the body until she sweats, And above the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot, it goes into several parts of the bladder;
So heal wherever there is a larger vein, or at the ankle, where you would apply treatment.
And if you heal it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are there, and heal through the middle just as when cutting wood; let the flames be extinguished.
And if it cannot pass without difficulty, then place the foot in water, and allow for thorough bleeding of the vein.
And if the healing process needs to be done for the first time, then restart it on the second occasion a little higher up because the legs are salty; Do not doubt about nerves, as we have said before, and do similarly with the other leg equally.
The veins of the sciatic region are at the ankle bone, and their health corresponds to the pain in the hip; when it is due to blood congestion.
And the quality of its health is such that the veins enter or expand, and are constricted above the ankle bone for four inches when twisted,
for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it does open, heal it in all ways that you can, and across; and remember to grasp it when you do this, for the veins are there, and she responds greatly to human hands.
and remember to grasp it when you do this, for the veins are there, and she responds greatly to human hands. And if you cannot find it, if there's no opening or depth on either side of the heart, and towards the small diaphragm, and guard against the nerves;
And do such a thing with the blood until you see it, then loosen the tie and put on cotton to press; she is now healed.
Pleas note that "des sainies de ventouse" in Old French refers to treatments involving suction cups (like using a suction cup for medical purposes). But it's an obsolete term and isn't directly translatable into modern English language. This might be referring to bloodletting, or the practice of extracting blood from patients as a form of treatment which was common before modern medicine times. In essence, this could refer to procedures like leech therapy (where leeches are used to suck out blood) or the use of suction cups in medical practices.
Ventouses are made from horns, or spiders, or leeches; and suction cupping is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
And this ventilation which can cause injury is done in two ways: or it can be at all fires, or with fire;
and two others on both sides of the neck; and the sucking action under the chin. and the suction tool for the two shoulders; and the suction tool on the boils; and the suction cups for the two arms; and the suction cups for the two legs; and the suction cups for the ankles; and the suction tool does not treat of blood, but rather small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
and because of this I did not weaken myself, just as one would treat with a vein; And it should not be administered, nor with any fire or without fire, in any illness that comes from overfullness, until all the body is drained.
And if suction is necessary due to diseases or out of habit, we should perform it every hour at the beginning of each month, or at its end, and continuously during any period.
for there are those who, when they need to suction, start weighing after much effort;
and if for such individuals there is congestion and redness in their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and discomfort in their eyes;
And those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have fainted, and are coughing up blood; And if there are such things that worry them, and they see by their noses blood and nostrils and death-like things.
And when we see these signs, and especially at the beginning of each month, we command to drink after three hours during the day.
The treatment of the nose helps with inflammation in the head... bringing the eyes, and it is not right that this should be done after the elimination of everything from the body;
And this ventilation is at the location of the head's health,
And it is not suitable for those with a cold constitution, or who have diarrhea, because this causes them much harm;
And it is also not good for someone to use it if they suffer from cold conditions or diseases.
And whoever uses it often becomes forgetful, and due to this, it's necessary to place the suction cup slightly further down by the suspicion of forgetfulness.
Ventilation near the neck is located beneath the head and the basilica, and for this reason it is beneficial to tighten below the elbows. and in cutting through the channel of the pulmonary artery, and everywhere, and in replenishment;
And you should barely push it, for if she holds too tightly, it may cause obstruction or stomach and heart.
Ventilation at these two ribs near the neck alleviates pains in the head, eye and toothache, and in strangulation, and in pain at the root of the teeth,
And it is in the place of the healing of the basilica; and you should instruct the healer to extend their hand upon putting it, not to touch the artery, and not to wait for blood to appear.
The ventilation under the chin corresponds to mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the healing of the two lips.
Ventilation under the shoulders corresponds to disease brought about by heat and congestion.
Ventilation under the axilla is as important as three veins of the arm, for it deals with blood from these large veins;
and instructs the surgeon not to cut too deeply because the muscles are bare and sensitive to cuts, knowing nerves and arteries are located there.
The suction cup that is on the buttocks is effective for bleeding from the bottom and diseases around it. It is necessary that the suction cup be large, and made of animal skin, as it needs to be well treated; if by chance it were thin, it would break and cause large wounds.
The leg suction cups are applied directly because they draw blood from the entire body and are beneficial for old pains in the kidneys, bladder and uterus, as well as reducing swelling; they are located at two shin points and the ankles, and all the while they weaken the body after long use, leading to pale complexion in various conditions.
The method for using the suction cup is as follows: place it initially in an empty state and apply continuous suction. Quickly put it on the wound, move it evenly, and keep doing this action without stopping until you see the area turn red and swell. Then remove it, and reapply the suction cups; take care of the position of the organs because there are those with thick skin and clear pores: for these, one must pierce once only, make broad incisions, and go somewhat deep; suck gently.
And if the lump is large, it might require two piercings: once to subdue the path of thick blood.
And if the lump is very dense, it might require a third piercing; and when we wish to extract a little blood at a time, we should only pierce once.
And if we wish to remove some blood, we often reinitiate it; and if the heart is weak, we firmly press down on it, and the ends are such that they pierce through instantly.
And it is necessary for one who has thick skin and hardness, and those with tight pores, that you grease the hands with sucking cups from which an opening is seen and dissolving: if it's in the form of a bluish oil or an almond sweet oil, or an oil from the seeds of cucumber;
and if it's in the form of grease or oil, from mustard seed, or lily, or chamomile, or any similar.
And if the pus is large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or balsam, or anise oil, and similar things.
And if the patient needs to strengthen flesh and large pores, there should be no use of oil at all,
But it is advisable to wash afterwards with pink water, or cold water, or water from a rose, or water from a cucumber, or water from porcelain, or any similar thing.
And for those who have some moisture, if they rise with it, or from wormwood water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large excesses can be treated with old wine or water from sulfur, or decoctions of nettle or chamomile, or others like these;
and there is no benefit in using suction cups before or during the bath, but rather afterwards for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after suction treatment.
and it must be done when he should be suctioned and when he has been suctioned. And watch over those who are getting better if they were choleric, and let them not be too vigorous and inflamed; If it requires cold things, like apples, endive, lettuce in broth, and similar items;
And snails, meat from a castrated animal, and moist meat.
And for those who have a cold constitution, they should consume honey syrup and aromatic wine that is halfway between old and new, along with small portions of snails, snails, and small birds like pigeons.
And on the day when they feel thirsty, they should drink more than eat;
And it is necessary to give some men no licorice or mustard before or after bleeding, in order to strengthen the main limbs; And desanitize the air, but it is not appropriate for those who are hot to drink.
The suction cups that are placed to cause irritation are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and in gout, and on the abdomen and uterus, and kidneys, and hip, because this body does not tolerate being pricked by needles on wounds.
and only do it forcefully to draw blood from limb to limb, As when we place them on the nipples when the child is born; to remove the viscosity that's in the body, as we attach suction cups on the belly and on the buttocks to reduce the size of the body.
And ease the pain when there's an obstruction or stone, if it eases the obstruction by its attractive power by chance, or empties the stone from its place;
And thus does this when placed on the liver and stomach when there's retained wind.
And these suction cups are used empty to draw out only liquid; and they are not used together with fire in any way, and sometimes they are filled with water instead.
As with ailments of the tears in, and in such manner we make the suction cup filled with hot water, or with water that has cooked suitable herbs for this purpose.
The shape of the suction cup used heated like this is:
And has two and a half spans in width, and at its center it is hollow halfway through, so as to be able to stick out like one would when piercing with a needle,
and let it be made of iron or steel in such a way that it does not hurt the skin upon placing it on the limb;
And there is in the middle a rod across of an araignee or iron, for placing a candle taken hold.
and befit both large and small according to the diseases and the condition of those who take them;
for the suction cups for children are different from those for adults, and the thin ones differ from the fat ones.
And one must place this suction cup thus on the limb:
Take the wax stick or one thread, and place it inside the suction cup over the foreskin which is under the suction cup. Let the heat reach to the bottom of the suction cup so that it doesn't burn the penis;
Then place it on the member and you should do so at the point that we have mentioned. So when one wants to use it, if heat goes up, and removes the suction cup;
Apply the thread in the same manner as described before, and repeat this often, if you need to.
In the suction cup method used in pleurisy disease, during all stages of fever, there is neither a sharp nor a dull pain, and it is administered only when the body is full of water, being placed solely on the member.
and this is its shape:
Wounds are not treated with suction cups except in limbs where one cannot place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and on the naked skin of a wound, like in elbows or knees, and other similar areas;
And if you find veins that are in clear water without inflammation when they are clean, take them.
and place them in lukewarm water until they become accustomed and have nothing in their abdomens; then use bloodletting and suction cups, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place the veins on it.
and when they are full and start to ache, if there's a place where you can put suction cups, do so, because this helps very little afterwards.
If not so, raise the patient first with solid help, then with liquid aid, quite well, then proceed to incision.
And if the patient dies too soon after the movement of the joints, due to bleeding. Apply one liter of cold water in linen cloth, and place it upon them, until the veins are swollen;
And if there are multiple veins, apply powdered vitriol or garlic, and similar substances, until the veins become swollen.
Or put half a peeled pea on the patient's skin and leave it until they heat up on the body, this will stop bleeding now.
And if you need more knowledge, take other instructions.
And if the veins are unwilling to be taken, rub with a fresh blood source, or insert an awl until blood begins to flow. Then place them and soon as they feel the blood, you stir them;
And when you see that they are bleeding, sprinkle a little myrrh and flour on them, or ash, they will bleed now.
This begins the book of fractures
This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and restoring and resetting of fractures and dislocations.
Know this, dear child, that the leaves of this chapter have been turned by you, and you saw nothing from the old books, nor did anyone ever read a letter of it;
And for this reason, the knowledge has been taken away from our land, because I have never found anyone good in this regard;
And I know nothing of this, for by the knowledge of old books, or with which I have studied so much that I dealt with the art, and through experimentation, and through my life's habit;
And I have described in this chapter what is contained, and abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the shapes of the instruments that are used, as I did in these two previous chapters.
Therefore, it is necessary that we outline or provide an introduction to this book containing the essence of knowledge and the chapters where the wise person applies their understanding, staying true to reality. So that those who have experienced it may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I state that when any fracture or dislocation or twists or contusions occur to anything, it is necessary for you to quickly treat the patient on both sides and parts, without allowing anything bad to happen, such as weakness in body, children, or elderly individuals;
If the place where you're tightening is too tight, or too cold; and consume cold meats, this means cold cuts, and liver and venison meat, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty foods. Do not fill up with too much meat that fills veins with blood, until you doubt of an abscess forming hotly, or spreading of matter in the limb; if the patient feels better according to their initial treatment as they have been using it.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you feed the patient with meats that cause significant nourishment, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and onions, and chestnuts, and pies, and veal spleen, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For such nourishment leads to movement and more quickly heals the breakage.
And know that the bones of old and weak people cannot be healed or joined properly according to their nature due to the drying out of limbs, nor those also who are too tender, such as the bones of young children;
but take care, reset the broken bone. I.e., firmly apply and join the limb together, as long as it strengthens just as it was before; and do not rush with his work, for this requires feeding on large meats, as we have said.
And know that breaks come in various ways.
For a break at the neck is different from a break at the knee or leg, and in this chapter I will tell you all ways of breaking. For there are breaks leading to war, and others through preparation, as with the size of a feather for writing.
For there are breaks leading to war, and others through preparation, as with the size of a feather for writing. And in cases of injury along with breaks, and breaks resulting from a small crack.
And each way has its own method, and its proper tool for restoration, according to what memory brings to its place;
and the break of the bone is known by the fact that the limb is twisted, and opens well through the skin, and hurts when pressure is applied to it;
And when there is no twisting or deformation of the joint, and the patient does not feel great pain, should there be no breakage;
but it can well have twisting, or a crack, or small breakage. If it is not suitable for you to move it by hand, but apply the remedies that come next, and then gently constrain it now.
And know that the break that went in the arm, and are two parts out of joint, it is suitable for you to put them at an equal point, thus that abscesses have to be worn inside or outside;
And if abscesses are pus-filled, if he leaves them for no day, until the abscess becomes calm; Then place them evenly with what you can lightly and wisely do, knowing that the restoration of this is easier than the restorations when he has pieces; then extract it, as is fitting after this.
And if within the bone are broken pieces, if they have been separated by two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or at your hand if it's a small member, or by two strings, or by one string and at your hand;
and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the injured member are healed, you can gradually reintroduce additions into their places as long as you can, and remember to ensure that in your work there is no harm or pain inflicted upon the patient.
And adjust well the two shoulder joints of the bone according to the best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if you think it's not quite right: if you treat it beautifully, and don't strain it too much, don't press it as those who bring it about by their method of pus evacuation and muscle contraction do to the limb, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limbs are ready, carefully restrain the patient so they do not move, whether awake or asleep, while turning or in any other way; Make sure that the limbs are securely fastened so that there is no pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not properly adjusted, and it must be placed in an appropriate position so that he does not feel any pain;
For when he feels no pain, it is not properly adjusted, and it must be placed in an appropriate position so that he does not feel any pain; and keep it straightly set, ensuring no twisting occurs when you reset it;
and the quality of the limb broken is as I told you.
You know that limbs broken are diverse in smallness and largeness, and in shape.
For there are small limbs such as arms and legs and alike; it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths.
And those that are larger, such as the chest and thighs: it is necessary to wrap them in a broad and hard bandage. This wide bandage embraces all of the large limb, and constrains it evenly from all sides, ensuring there is no unevenness;
Then bind them with lighter bandages, perhaps three times or four according to the limb, and hold your hand on for a moment all across the bandage. Then go above the wound and constrain less there, so that the wound can move slightly away from it;
And soften the bandage gradually and gradually, until you have made a large part of the healthy area, then take another bandage and return around it to the wounded limb;
Then return to the part of breaking and slightly squeeze it, not too hard nor too gently, as we have said in the first instruction above.
Then place the twisted linen bands or cloths between them until they are evenly matched in size, then secure everything by tying it with an additional band of cloth. And place your well-made stars on top; if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there's swelling or pus, then place something soothing for abscesses on top, and that relieves the swelling, and leaves it like this for a few days;
Then apply pressure to the stars, and they should be half as wide as a small cane or stick, or made from what is used to make sticks, or from palm leaves, and they should be shaped like this:
But it is necessary that the hot iron used on the burn mark outsize slightly more than the others.
and should also be as long as it is needed according to the size of the limb, whether small or large;
then hold it on the hot irons in the same way you did with the first application, then bind an additional thread over it, just as you did on the burn mark.
make it tighter, but not too tight; and it is necessary that the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, and should be made of soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as I have wished for works of hemp that twist their lines together, and this is great error, because the line cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it does not suit to have less than half a denier's space between each thread.
And if the muscles are stretched by the bones after constriction in their joints, put over them bandages of linen or coarse wool, so they do not blister.
When a wound is bleeding and the joints are broken, I will provide the treatment below.
And know that it is not proper to strictly bind all broken limbs on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not proper to tightly bind them for the first few days or even up to seven, or more depending on how serious each abscess that occurs is.
And here is the way of applying old plaster to restore breaks, dislocations, and twists: take some flour that stays on mill walls and mix it with plenty of eggs. Create a paste neither too thin nor too thick, use this application method, which is the common way of applying restorative plaster in various situations, equally suitable for men, women, and children, as it isn't overly harsh or cold.
Another way to apply plaster that restores fractures and dislocations: take 3 parts of barley, dahlia, rue, and asafetida, and add gum Arabic and mint, with a total of .x.З.; myrrh and aloes, totaling .v.З.; garlic, in the amount of .viiij. З.; grind these ingredients to make a powder, then mix it thoroughly with eggs; if the consistency of this plaster is warm, use it for treatment, as it has a good composition, quickly sets broken bones right, and is effective on many people.
Another method of plastering suitable for twists: take mugwort and wild savory, in 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, in 8 parts; cassia, in 6 parts; balm from Armenia, in 10 parts, grind well, mix with water or enough egg white, and apply.
Another method of dressing joint injuries and exposed bones, to alleviate pain and help heal wounds: take new wool, cook it in fat and oil, then apply it on the wound. These dressings don't fully heal but are better for soothing abscess pain, and properly relieving bone pains.
Another method of dressing broken bones for healing: take dried fig leaves and terrestrial elm leaves, grind them together, then apply as a plaster.
Another method for dressing in the restoration of bone fracture and reducing pus discharge. Take root of wild marjoram, chamomile, violet flowers, groundnut flour, each of one part; grind them, mix with wine, and if your limbs are warmed, mix it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Another method for dressing better than the first one when pus is being restored within the limb. Take roots of wild marjoram and sesame seeds, balm, melilot, and mint, as well as violet and chamomile flowers, from each take a part; grind them, mix with salt water or sweet water, or wine according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras in his book states that only balm made of beeswax and oil should be applied to the broken limb for restoration purposes, and nothing else. He also indicates it should be between two substances that are neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems like Galen suggests we should apply something to the broken limb for restoration; some things that are dry but a bit warm, such as mirr (myrrh), aloes, and incense, and similar substances, just as we have said.
Another way to plaster for injury and pain: take maguey (agave) and wool from human corpses, or bird feathers, and mustard leaves, and equal parts of these, grind them, and make a plaster with them and apply it.
And then remove a little later, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor does the bone of its place move; if not removing with hands soon.
And if pain comes to the limb, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry, and remove it, and apply the plaster now; take a light cloth and a wet sponge from the sea, and immerse it in water, and hold over the area until the itching stops and the pain is soothed. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool, soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it with a cloth until you are sure of removing any pus.
And let the inflammation and pain in the limb settle, then relieve the discomfort, then continue with gentle re-bandaging, and a little plaster, but do not bind it as tightly as before; proceed with great care until it is healed.
And if you notice that pus and redness, pain, swelling are still present everywhere in the area, indicating inflammation, then you need to apply plaster and bandage again, so start doing this as you did before, equally.
And if you don't observe any of the conditions we've mentioned for the limb, or if it doesn't resolve until after three days, four days, five days, seven days; and each time, let it rest for twenty days, according to what is observed, as long as the healing process continues, approaching adjustment with flesh.
Therefore apply the constraint more than initially, and let his flesh grow bigger, as I said before; and if you see that his neck dries out more than it should, know that no improvement can come. Apply hot water every time you reset the neck, and do this once a day, and loosen the joint a little.
Through this process, then cut the dislocated limb and treat it immediately as the laymen do, which results in permanently twisting the member back into place: this is harmful, and such treatments are dangerous. I see no other solution than to rest and properly open it.
Through various methods of breaking up Many methods of fractures exist, and various shapes occur, with their causes being distinguished;
There are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and necks crush all the bone up to the syfac which is below the bone, such as what a hammer or staff does; for this reason, this method of fracture is called 'crushing' or 'smashing'.
Or when the sword crushes the bone from above without piercing it, this method of fracture is called 'absolute' fracture; and both large and small wounds result from these two types of fractures.
And if there is sequential impact, or a crack or neck of stone, or through stone, or other similar occurrences.
And if there is a break at the bone, which comes up to the membrane beneath the bone, or above it, and this wound is either large or small.
And if there's a wound that reaches into the bone as thin as a hair, and this crack is small, and because of this, it's called this 'hair-like' break;
And if the wound is made by striking with a stone or falling, or from some other cause, causing part of the bone to be pushed in and resulting in fractures where the limb ends like candle holders when they crack on the vessels; it happens inside the stone.
And this happens more frequently in those with softer bones, such as children's bones;
And occurs in all these ways of breaking where small fragments are extracted as with nuts; and I will speak about it in its proper place.
And know all ways of breaking through extraction from them, and investigation with attempts, and through the corrupted matter which is upon them.
The appearance of hair is known by this: when one has exposed the bone and rubs it together, then the dark fracture opens.
In the treatment of fractures, be vigilant about maladies and if you see no adverse event such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, stretching, swelling, fever ague, and if the eyes emit and turn red or other similar symptoms in various conditions, it cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you do not see an alarming occurrence, yet still hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the nose comes to you first, and it's in winter, it is fitting to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the month you could.
And if it's in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the pus under the bone becomes infected, and the accidents we have said occur.
And if the bone shatters up to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary for you to split the broken part like this: and take hold of the head from the patient's side, and uncover as much as possible on the bone in all ways you can, and more than enough according to the shape of the wound.
And if the flow of blood comes to reveal the bone, or pus pocket, then assist with what is required, and it is that you fill the wound with moist cloths infused in rose oil; And let the wound rest until the pus pockets are relieved and there's assurance of blood flow; then begin inside the bone to extract, and this is done according to two methods: one method is that you cut in a narrow incision at the front, and it's the shape:
And then make another cut of about double the size of the first one.
And the second method involves making various cuts of different sizes, some narrow and others wide, with sharp points, made from iron; and you should do this gently so as not to injure the head.
And if the bone is protruding and hard, it is necessary that you puncture through it internally, in such a way that you administer cuts with needles, not entirely so that they do not pierce beyond the bone's edge, and must have above the point a margin or one circle, which does not let the point pass beyond the bone; and you must have more than this, so that each goes into its place of the thickness of the bone, so that you have needles for all its edges; and this is the form of the three ways of using needles:
The quality for piercing through the bone internally is that you place one needle on the bone, and twist with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced. Then put the needle elsewhere a little after, and do this all internally. After that, cut out the space between the parts of the bone using the incisors, and do so more finely and gently than possible, as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand or any tool you have such as forceps, tweezers; and be sure not to touch the brain nor the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced and cut the bone, it is necessary that you refine what remains of the bone with all one other tool resembling an incisor, but it must be stronger and more delicate than the other incisors;
And if it stays without any small bones, or no scales, then gently manipulate with two fingers. Then heal the wound with bandages and treatments as we have said.
And another way of treatment is this which Galen stated, who says it is safer; and he pulls very strongly, and that's his word. It is necessary first to uncover part of the bone, where the break opens and moves, so that once you have uncovered that part, you will place under the tip of this oblong incision, which has this form:
And do not cut from one side only, and make the cut on both sides of the bone, so that when you cut it is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer upwards, so that you gently scrape the entire surface of the bone, and take care not to damage the mesh that's there.
If it's close to bone, gently squeeze it, for bone reacts well without harm, and without fear.
And if the bone break doesn't go through the membrane, and only part of the bone is cut above, with small pieces remaining, after smoothing that area it is necessary to remove the scales using a fine shaver you must have in various quantities. To apply the most suitable for each place according to the work and the shape of the break.
When facing large shavers, then proceed to finer ones, and never cease this practice until it's done well.
In each of the other hair cutting tasks and subtle breaks, you must adapt according to their direction; and this matter is not resolved for him who has devoted his study to this craft.
And if the scar is uncovered, it is necessary that you take one linen bandage according to the amount of the wound, and smear with oil of roses, and place it on the wound; Then take another bandage doubled up to two or three layers and soak it in wine and oil of roses; place it on the first bandage; do this as gently as you can without burdening the scar, then apply another layer over it, without pulling it too tightly so that it only touches the wound.
Leave it like this for one or two days until the abscess has subsided, then remove the bandage and administer remedies such as the roots of lavender, flour of myrrh, incense powder, and other similar items; make a powder from these things, apply it to the wound, and then administer further gentle medicines without causing irritation.
And see that the wound is clean immediately, do not leave any pus or allow it to coagulate, because when blood clots on the brain's tissue, it circulates and spreads, causing great mischief to the patient; for when one places something sharp there, it pierces through from above.
Therefore, take heed, if no accidents befall the patient as we have said, if it is doubtful, then there should be no fear.
And if the illness does not come from anything that we have applied to him, given its nature of effect, should it be that case you must take a part of honey and three parts of almond oil, mixed with one spoonful of glue, then place this on your wound. Following are the methods of treatment until it becomes healthy.
Know that neither of the two neck bones above, or one by itself, should be broken for this reason; they are two bones. The one below is cartilaginous and does not break, even if you try to bend or twist it, and afterwards it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you should bend your small finger or part of the neck, and make the same break inside with your index finger, and in front to the side, until the neck revives according to its natural shape; Do this gently, and be sure that the patient does not feel pain through your operation.
And if the break is in the part above the nose, and cannot come to his nose, then it's necessary that you place him level with the head of a rod a bit thick.
And if the break is in two parts, then remake it, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can;
But if not, after the seventh or the eighth day, when the abscess has calmed down, then apply a poultice of linen to the head near the nose; if the break is in one part.
Or you apply another poultice on the other side, if the break is there; and let them be large enough to fill the depressions near the nose.
And it is said that one must moisten the tents with butter and change each day. I do not think this is right, but they should be moistened in the preparation of an egg yolk mixture and powdered flour; then let the tent remain until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes one uses goose feathers instead of tents, and if it is one egg's worth of fat in the middle, and the wound heals, and breaths through the patient; then do whatever you see fit.
And if pus comes out through the nose as you are working, then put moistened lint or cotton in oil mixed with rose water, or a spoonful of almond oil.
And if abscesses do not occur, then apply a poultice on the surface, made of sawdust flour and incense powder mixed with beaten egg yolk. Then place light bandages over it but do not tie them tightly.
And if the fracture is small and broken into many pieces, then use tools suitable for this when extracting them, first cut along the break, and treat things that are in the contaminated flesh, and suture it. Then cover with suitable poultices or ointments.
And if there is no wound within the bone, then treat with lint, until it has healed. Then place on it pieces of plaster, while it is still healing.
On the rupture of the jawbone
When the jawbone is broken outwards, and there is no wound outwardly visible, only the break is outwardly present, not being split into two parts externally but cracked internally. If one knows this lightly.
It is necessary; if the breakage occurs in the right part, you press your index finger into the mouth near the wound. And if the breakage is in the left mandible, then press your index finger of your right hand, and gently press the break internally, and perform this action with the other hand outwardly, making sure it's even.
And if the breakage of the jawbone is split into two parts, it should be treated with an extension of both hands until they are even.
And if the movement of the teeth occurs, or a rupture, hold them with a thread made of gold, silver or silk. Then place on the broken mandible wax, and place underneath two double cloths; then place on one cloth a large triangle well made, or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the mandible's size. Tie it in place as much as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and have them eat light meats.
And if you notice that the figure changes, release it on the third day and then reposition what has become distorted; apply plaster with some powder from a mill mixed with plenty of egg or saffron flour after removing the wax; place wool under the plaster for warmth, and if the plaster hardens and the patient's position does not change, let them remain like that until they heal; many recover in three weeks.
And if it comes to incision at the foot, then apply what we have instructed many times.
And if there is both fracture and wound together, reward is null for any bone fragment that has been removed; such subtlety of extracting requires instruments suitable for this.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there remains none, if the wound is wide, place one poultice suitable for this over it to encourage flesh growth until healing occurs.
by the strength The force breaks multiple times in front of the shoulder, towards it, and the breaking occurs in three ways: or it is broken and severed in two parts, with pieces present, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break accompanied by injury.
And for the procedures when the break is due to injury, have two ministers, so that one examines the shoulder where the force has broken; and the other extends the neck towards the part. Then set the break equal with your hands, so that its form be as it should, and let not any appearance or movement be seen.
And if you need to extend further, place a round sponge of cloth or wool under the shoulder towards the leg; make its size according to your needs. Stretch and lift the broken force, hold the sponge in your hand so that you can set the break equal, as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the force to the outside due to it coming forwards, then the patient should lie with their head on their shoulder blade, and place a pillow under one shoulder. The attendant should hold the shoulder down as long as the bone of the force is raised.
And then address the break with your fingers, and if you find debris inside, it is necessary to cut through. And pull the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join by any means of pressure, then cut at one of the incisors that you have; but place this instrument against the force so as not to damage the gum:
It should resemble a spoon, not being inside the cheek, and be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two tips, as you see, and make one wider, and the other narrower, just like the cut made in the wound when treating the bones.
And when you are assured of the incision's presence, if you cut the wound, and if the wound rupture is small, or if you doubt about the incision, if you cover the wound with bandages and tents, according to its quantity.
And if there are incisions from them that come out, if moisture one, apply oil and rose water and wine, and place it on top.
The grinding of the bone, when it involves wounds and surgery, is to put on the bone a plaster made from powder from the mill and beaten egg white, and place light bandages over it, and put a ball under the armpit if you need one; Then take a very large bandage of one palm in width, then put two layers of cloth over the bandages and apply plaster; then take a slender stick of three inches wide and long, wrap it around this bandage so that the tip of the bandage hangs down. And place the metal plate on the burn, and turn the bandage around the neck, and over the healthy arm, and over the diseased arm; and correct each part separately. And when you see that the healing is approaching the injury site, and you clearly see that the metal does not move above the broken bone, then reward yourself every day, and when you have removed all the bandages, then keep it restrained.
Let the disease heal on its back, and apply it when he sleeps. Place a small pillow under the shoulder to lift the shoulder up; this will relieve the strain of healing by aligning the shoulder blade, or tie his arm around the neck, and do not untie him lest any unfortunate events happen, for at most 20 days;
Then restart the plastering if you see that it is needed, and apply and leave him like this until he recovers. And she/he will recover at best in 26 days, and less in some cases for certain individuals.
From the breaking of the shoulder
Sometimes the shoulder breaks at its end or in the middle, and if it's damaged only on one side; you should handle it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, using any methods that are possible. Then apply with powder from the mill along with beaten eggs, light layers, and place two cloths over it; then place a wide and subtle slab, slightly larger than the shoulder, and ensure there's no movement in any part of the shoulder, applying linen strips to cover the slab evenly; and then compress tightly into one large band firmly, so that the slab doesn't move from its position, check each day; and with every slight loosening, you should compress again, ensuring the slab remains in place if it has moved out, and have the patient lie on their side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25. And when this number is completed, you can release them, provided you are sure, for it's not bone that quickly sets easily.
And if a piece of the bone is exposed and not covered with skin, then it should be handled like an abscess from a broken wrist, and you do what we have said about treating a wound in the first chapter.
From the break of the foot
The feet are sometimes broken in the middle but this happens rarely; it does often occur at the end. When it is broken inside, it declines downwards and outwards, causing great pain for the patient, loss of consciousness, and vomiting blood, and opens within the broken bone, and one can feel well that something has happened.
And for the restoration, if the limbs lie flat on his back, and you place him, then between the shoulders, press the shoulders, and join the ribs of both sides to your hands, and apply gentle pressure in all manners that you can until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then place plaster and bandages over the delicate salted essence or a lighter kind of paste, and wrap it with one cloth, and fasten it onto the broken bone so that it does not move. Then return his back to its original position, bind it together properly, and reward each hour by turning him gently on his side; if he shifts too soon, then you would restrain him again; and if it suits, remove it due to corrosion or itching in the area, or pain or abscesses that come about at the back, or if he needs it, quickly release it, remove the plaster, and reposition as per treatments. Then reapply the plaster until it becomes sane.
Of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of the ribs only occurs behind the large spine and inside the back, and does not bend in this manner because they are oily; one can sense this well during examination at the chest.
And for the restoration if it is necessary to place the broken ribs evenly, just as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and tighten with a strap if needed.
And if the breaking of the ribs is occurring internally, the patient feels intense pain and punctures, like from crying, because the bone presses on the lining; and there are pimples, and sudden vomiting and a large amount of blood discharge, and this indicates serious illness, and the elderly have experienced great distress.
And if someone says it is necessary to give foods that fatten the stomach, in order to expel the gas outward.
We do not do this; if no abscess was there, then no chaulze (a type of cauterizing agent) should be used. And if it did come about, then heal it.
And it's said that none of us puts on suction cups around the neck in order to suck out phlegm, and this is considered reasonable; still, there's doubt as to whether the suction cup attracts excess phlegm into the neck due to its position.
And they say that for the body of any one who must have a wet wool cloth with hot oil over it, and place cloths between the ribs to make the wound evenly hot inside, then apply the treatment for bleeding wounds, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels intense pain that cannot be borne by the bone piercing the skin, there is doubt in the patient, whether it's necessary to cut into the body near the broken rib, and it's advised to place one instrument between the ribs to hold back fluid; then one must cut through the bone, drain lightly, and then stitch the two wound edges together, if they're large, and treat with plasters until healed. And if pus forms, one should put wet cloths in oil on the body, and place them over the wound; and treat while taking into account what's suitable for pus formation, and be careful where it is necessary on the ribs or anywhere else until healed.
Of the breaking of the neck
No fracture occurs at the neck's bones, nor does bending occur. And similarly with the spine of the back. And when this happens to none and you wish to determine if it will heal or not, be cautious as you observe if his hands are swollen and dead, and cannot move or stretch. If you stick them with a needle and they don't sense anything, know that it is more dangerous in many conditions. And if he remains insensitive when they are restrained and then released, know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and the patient has been cured, provided that proper treatment was given.
And when this sort of thing happens to the spine in the back, and you wish to determine if it will heal or not, be cautious as you see that his joints are softened and that there is a condition resembling windiness and weakness along his back; and if one observes him over his belly, he experiences an inability to void. And when he attempts to sit on his back, he cannot do so. Know that this is dangerous: if there's no work in its treatment.
And if such an event does not happen to him, then it is a simpler matter.
And the treatment is that you remove any abscesses if they are there, if you put on clove or egg yolk oil on the spine where it's done or on egg yolk oil, until it calms; then apply one of the soothing plasters and let them dry, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. And do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until he recovers. And if any bone splits open, you must cover it with a cloth; and remove the bone, then join the two sides of the wound together if it's large, using stitches, then treat with greased ointment until he heals. And if the tip of the bone is broken, which is called 'the tip of the knee', you should pinch your left hand's pouch against your right at your strength, then apply a plaster and bandage as needed; then squeeze it tightly, and for any split bone, cut and remove it, treating the wound until it heals.
From the breaking of the bone in the hip
Sometimes the hip bone breaks and when it does, if there's a slight discomfort in the head; and stretches out long, declines towards the kidneys, comes to the patient's pain in the limb, bruising, and swells up where it is broken.
And for the restoration, you must extend your hand upwards as far as possible when you are over the breakage area; and know where the breakage is and its shape. If the breakage is only in the head, apply an equal pressure to that breakage point until it returns to its natural alignment.
And if the breakage is along the length or it declines towards the inner side, guide the patient so that their abdomen supports it, until you achieve the restoration of this breakage. And when you have placed it evenly, put it on the plaster, then place it onto a stick or a piece of charcoal, and hold the wound steady so that it does not move. And support the limb under the ribs, until the wound heals evenly.
Instruct the patient to sleep on his side or on his back.
And if the abscess bursts and pus comes out, do not touch it until the pus in the abscess is relieved. Then place it on what we have mentioned before; then return to the treatment and apply according to how it should be done, as long as there are no bad incidents; this is the method.
of the breaking of the shoulder
The assistants are those that lie between the elbow and the shoulder head, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of these two methods: where one method is for you to hold a rod evenly in the middle, like this shape:
And fix as two shoulder joints, and bend them upwards, placing the patient's elbow on one spot; then let your broken arm fall onto the rod until it reaches the armpit, having made a bend of the rod halfway. Then position yourself above any heavy object or with the support of your attendants hanging downwards; then place the wound's breakage in an equal state to their hands together, until the broken part returns as it should be.
And the other method is that one arranges the wound on their buttocks, and ties their hand to their neck, then instruct two attendants that one shaves where there's a breakage at their hands, and the other removes from each side up to half an inch, and extend each person to their respective sides.
And if you see that extraction is more forceful, hold one band near the wound and another above it, spreading each of the assistants to their part. And if the wound lies close to the head of the shoulder, it is necessary to place half a band midway on the socket, and another towards the knife, near the wound; similarly if the wound is facing the knife, then one should gently apply force, without strain, until the wound is level with the top and the knife edge; afterwards make the incision equal, as fits, and restrain it, so that abscesses do not occur.
And if sores occur on the heels, do not restrain them for more than seven days, and place wet linen and rose oil over it until the sores on the heels are relieved; then you should restrain them, and the way to restrain them is that you put plaster over the sore. Then assemble the arm against the shoulder support, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest; apply a cloth and restrain it over the shoulder support and the arm, so that the arm is in its natural position, without anything preventing it, or if the bone is not displaced.
And if you suspect that the bone does not move, use a brace, and place a wider and stronger brace under each wound compared to others, and leave an inch of space between each brace. Make sure each brace is large enough to pass through the wound by three inches from either side; then apply force on the braces as I instructed at the beginning of this chapter on wounds, applying more force than less when pulling apart.
And if you see the setting of the teeth, and the constriction, as we have said, in the ear that you restore the broken member, and you doubt about incision pus, if you leave it to be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine every three days the bind, ensuring no itching or swelling appear at the site, or no ulcers can come to the limb because of its being too tight. If it's correct, as we have said.
And if no such events occur, nor the setting of the dislocated joint, then let it heal for two or more days and allow the patient to rest on their back with their hands on their stomach; and place under them one cushion full of even wool, and watch every hour during the day that the figure of the broken limb does not move or soften the ligaments; if it heals by the virtue of medicine, and gives meat as we have placed before, in such a way that the meat is at its finest stage; and when they begin to recover, let them be large. And usually, the shoulder joint and leg should be recovered within forty days altogether; then one must release the dislocation and administer baths and medicines for the wound to heal properly. If there are ugly or tangled ligaments, it may need to remain under dislocation for two or four months.
"Of the breaking of the arm"
The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the "foscile" pair. Of these, one is small and it's this one that surrounds the hand; and the other is large, and it's this one that is underneath, in front of the small finger. Sometimes only one of the large fosciles breaks, or sometimes the smaller one does, and occasionally they both break together.
When the small bones break, the treatment is light, both for restoration and healing; and when the large ones break, the healing process is poor, it's worse than if they broke together. If it's only the small bone that breaks, then it's sufficient to gently extend it a bit and make it even.
And if it's the large bone that breaks, you should strain harder; and place him on one cushion, and raise the hand of his side higher than the others, and make each finger lower than their counterparts, and have the patient cross their fingers with themselves, and another cushion in front slightly higher to prevent any discomfort. Then extend both the doctor's arms towards the elbow part beneath their hands, or at a single elbow point, and one assistant at a single point above. And then place them even, according to their best form.
And if in the breaking into pieces, you place each piece in its own place, and if there is none of them that holds onto his sense, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut on top of and through the bone, as we said previously.
And if with the wounding in an injury, I spoke about it in the singular chapter; then take care of the treatment.
And if during the beginning of the restoration, abscesses appear, then apply a dressing. And if any bad incidents happen to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you immerse the limb in hot water until that itch is relieved; and let the limb not be allowed to rest. And then resume tightening, and once the ligament has been severed and the bone exposed, and similar actions have occurred, guide them accordingly.
And if precautions are taken so that no injuries can come to the limb because it is too constricted, it is necessary to soften it with heat for a short time and leave it like this for several days until the pains disappear, and then you restrain.
And if none of the things we have said come to pass in the patient, or if he is not cured after twenty days, then allow him to move his hands towards his neck, and make sure that his neck muscles are evenly aligned, while taking care to avoid movement and digestion, and sleep on his back; know that this healing process takes place in thirty days or thirty-five, and by chance in twenty, depending on the compositions and the nature of the virtues.
Of the breaking of the hand
You know that on the back of the hand and with us the bones suffer little breaks, and no more than bend many times.
And when the heel of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the muscles heal in line and straight ahead just as they are; then place your hand on the stretched bed, and stretch out the fingers of the broken bones, and place them evenly under the eyes, until they are well joined; and apply the plaster and bandages, if there are no abscesses, then put an awl according to the size of the limb; and wrap it in one strip of linen.
And if the break is in the webbing between the toes near the belly of the hand, make a roll of linen cloth, and instruct the patient to place it on their broken toe; then stretch it with a long strip of linen, and position the awl as large as the hand's heel, stretching it accordingly.
And if the break is at the front, it should be that you place a splint above and another underneath in the foot part, so that your hand is opened and straight, then bind them entirely around the hand, and seal off the connection between the fingers.
And if the break occurs at any of the feet of the fingers, it's if they are splayed, as it should be; and you hold them with the foot, and if you see fit to place a small straight splint for lifting the breakage, and not let it move; and if the break is on other fingers, like in the index or among others, treat them equally, and bind with the healthy finger that follows; or you bind all together, so that nothing moves, or you set it on a splint, as when you hold up; take care in the restoration and arrangement of each abscess, and prepare for what comes to you, as I have said.
Of the broken thigh
The bone of the knee is often broken, and one can see it when it turns frontwards and backwards; and its repair consists in .i., tying above the breakage, and .i. another below it. And the glands lie on her face, then extend each minister his link to its equal part; and this is when the break is within the bone.
And if the break is close to the root of the knee, then have one link towards the foot and the other links below the break. And similarly if it is close to the elbow, then place the ligaments behind the elbow, and thus apply the plaster from above; then put the bone into its place equally with its two hands, as long as it follows its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and the bandage, and if no abscesses come about.
And if there is pus at the site, let it heal then return to your work and treatment; the wound is made in such manner. It is necessary that you wrap over the burn. I. e., bandage it with two or three layers of a thick material, leaving excess aside. Then place your leg until the heel reaches the ankle bone, and insert one long thread between the calf and leg, under the knee downwards, then lead the thread to the top above; after that wrap the bandage around both the leg and the calf, then put a stone on top of the burn wound, and place a stone over the bone of the leg. Then insert the remaining length of material under the calf and the leg with the sole facing upwards for equal pressure. Begin to wrap tightly in three or four rounds around the burn; when going beyond the burn area, do so with less tightness; then take two threads that you have inserted between the leg and calf, bind them with three stones placed above each other, after which return under the thread as far as you can go underneath the foot; and then tighten it, until it doesn't move from its place, then leave it like this until no further pus, inflammation or similar symptoms appear.
And if it happens that the bones are dislocated, you should reassemble them in their correct position as we have mentioned many times; and if there are pieces of bone that are displaced, they must be treated accordingly if possible; and if not, it is necessary to cut through the tissue and draw out the bone; then treat it according to what we have said until it heals.
And no time is broken the egg until these are put in, such as in the shoulder and at the elbow; however, when restoration is made this way, there is no pain to the patient.
Know that the egg is restored in one day, or somewhat less, or somewhat more, depending on the diversity of body types.
from the garden alley
Know that in the garden alley there is little breaking, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it's usually just a crack or two small fragments, and occurs with or without injuries, and one feels this well.
And in restoration it means to place equal what is round on its fingers until it can move again. Then apply the plaster, and put a round bandage if necessary, then tighten it as seems fit. After that make every arrangement you have said concerning other injuries, like abscesses or similar; with each incident, use what suits each one until it's healed.
of the breaking of the leg
You know that in the leg there are two bones. The one is named straight by right - "hammers" and the other is called "shinbone"; and every kind of injury or breakage can occur just as it does with an arm, and for this reason the process of restoration is done similarly to that of an arm, and the operations are all the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all sides.
And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn in front.
And if the large bones are broken, one feels great pain and sees it clearly; then turn sideways. Therefore apply extension, set them equal, and fix the braces equally; however, when the break is irregular and there are multiple fragments, the extension should be smaller and more gentle; and adjust according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two sticks of wood that will support the leg on both sides, and they should be as long as from the knee to below. Then wrap around them with two lengths of leather, and tie in the middle so the leg cannot lean to either side; thus it is well done. And no one should administer a splint longer than the leg, made of wood, and place this on the leg to prevent movement; do this directly where there was an injury; and move the leg each day to check for pus or any other complications; heal as long as you are able.
From the breaking of bones due to injury
Ankle injuries do not come from breaking bones, but rather due to certain positions that the feet can be in, and there is only strength when in multiple dispositions.
And if there is a breaking of bones due to injury, and you see these bones mount over one another, place the injured feet on the ground as they would like to go. Then put your foot on their position, at where the bones are lifted, press it down until they regain feeling in their toes; then apply plaster and bandages around there, and place a small table under the belly of the foot. Afterwards, pull them up towards the foot insertion point, once you have wrapped the dressing tightly around, and do other things that you need to do.
And when three or four days have passed, if you release the bandage, because you will find that the bones are even, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the ribs are broken, repair them, as we have said about the ribs in the hand. Then place a rib under each broken rib according to their length and make sure it's slightly wider than the broken one, then put down beneath it the board that I mentioned, and hold firmly with its edge; and if there are two or three, or more, broken ones, break them too, then place above each rib one corresponding to its quantity, wrapped in a linen sheet, and hold the board with its bottom. And stay standing on top of the table above the pit where the belly is, so that it cuts well.
It must be noted that you should not forget the other matters I have mentioned about other injuries, once we have discussed them; and assist each situation as it should.
regarding the breaking of the bone in the hand
When the bone of her nature is broken, if it makes itself to swell, then lean her toward the lower part of her back, and hold her behind. Then fill the hole that was made by nature with cotton, and also put in as much as one egg; then turn out the woman, and lift her back slowly and slowly, and then let the cotton jump until it reaches the entrance of nature, and brings the bone along with it; and when she wants to urinate, take out the cotton, and once she has urinated, put her back again, do this for seven days or a bit more: thus will the break be healed. If you see, take a goat's bladder, tie a stick at one end of it, fill the bladder entirely in nature; then inflate it forcefully using the stick until the bladder is full inside: nature will heal the break. Then fill it with cotton and leave it like this for some days, till it is healed over.
And when the bone of the thumb is broken or that of the hand, if it is restored in the same way as we have told you for the hip bone; and do not ignore these injuries near this to whoever devotes their study and use them, and listen to my book. For a break indicates more than several positions the right path of restoration: therefore, understand it.
In the case of a broken penis, take an goose's throat and fill it with the penis; then wrap it tightly around using bandages, and let it be for three days or however long you can tolerate, and it will heal quickly.
Of breaking with injury
It is necessary for the one who has a break with an injury, even if it's large, as with bones of the wrist or shoulder blade or similar, that they be now treated, so that the treatments we have mentioned testify to.
And if the wound has healed, you should reapply vinegar, and if there's no other remedy, then start restoring the break in the same hour or day. If abscesses occur, apply them immediately.
And if abscesses occur, allow the restoration up to a new day, until the abscesses are pacified. Don't touch them on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about bad accidents.
And if the bone is broken and visible through the uncovered thigh, it must be gently placed with your hands, in a small extension.
And if the extensions are not yet equipped for your hands to make them even, take this iron tool you have, which is .vij. or .viij. inches long, and its width should correspond to the size of the wound; and it's necessary for the surgeon to grip around .iii. or iiij., according to what he needs for each treatment of a broken bone; and may be round and somewhat thick, so that it does not bend under compression against your limb during operation, and have sharp points ahead, and thick at the middle in front, like this:
And it is called "palainche" because the curved ends should be placed on the visible part of the bone; and strike once, until they return, and ensure that they are even against each other. And if the breakage is subtle, and the instruments cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must hold the tip of the bone as long as the instruments have control.
And if you cannot return the bone back, as we have said, if you have an appropriate tool for this purpose, such as a scalpel or a knife, at your power; then cut the one that is stuck in the bone with hardness and small shavings.
And when the bone is returned, and if there's great pain afterwards in the limbs, know that it hasn't been placed naturally. Do as much as to place it correctly, then moisten with one part of a black wine stiptic, and properly if it has healed; and don't put any ointment or other thing on the wound when there's an open sore, so that no infection or corruption occurs; then apply these remedies after you've restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely according to the size of the wound, and be well aware not to restrain the wound with pressure; many times people have done this and brought about death or corrosion in the patient; and let your handings be softer than usual, as they do with other injuries.
And if the wound is bad or large and you suspect that harmful occurrences might have happened there, just like we've said before, and pain is felt in the limb, then it's not fit to apply remedies; but cover it completely instead of applying them. And when after one or two days you see a boil form on the wound, remove whatever you placed over it entirely with wine, and apply a healing ointment for wounds, like a tetrachemical ointment, and similar ones.
And you must dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at vespers, until it is united and sound.
And it should be that the limbs are placed so that the wound heals in such a way that the bone comes together lightly.
And if the days pass and it cannot heal otherwise than at once with the bone, know that there are small fragments of bone, which is why you should work on the wound with traction, and remove all these unnecessary pieces that cause pain.
And if a fistula forms in the wound or there is another form of corruption, you must treat it according to what he instructed before in this chapter. And when the bone breaks and opens on the limb, such as in the bone of the foot or shoulder, or other similar large limbs, do not attempt treatment because many times death ensues from it; however, let it heal by itself until it discharges pus after about 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it alone.
The blows that come from sweat
We often come across various effects after the healing of injuries due to the breeze. Indeed, it is something to see how the limb's shape changes; and by chance, cannot perform its natural tasks on the limb.
Take care then in dealing with these things: if they are inflamed due to heat or cold, administer stictic medicines like aloes, frankincense, myrrh, sarsaparilla, senna, and similar others, as you see fit among any of these substances, or all together, and mix them with stictic wine or with plenty of eggs or with garlic; and apply them to the wound in poultices, pressing it well, but not letting it move in your hands during the day; then remove it, and repeat another one until the pus is extracted; or you can apply on a well-made piece of plaster; for the properties of plaster are that it removes all swellings from the limbs; and if the pus has hardened like stone, so it needs to be removed, then scrape off any excess above it, and leave the treatment as long as it heals.
When the breaking of the bone is restored, and after that the limbs are weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: due to one factor being that they were tied too tightly, not as they should have been; or because there were too many bands, not allowing normal circulation in the limb; or because of an excess of swelling; or due to too large movements at inappropriate times; or because they have little blood in their body, making them weak.
And the treatment involves making the patient eat well, and make the body tender until the pulse grows in him; then give them baths, and bring him joy and comfort. Afterwards apply ointment to the limb so that the ointment attracts to the large swelling, and cleanse it with water often, until the swelling corresponds to the limb; and restore its natural shape.
If the member is twisted after recovery.
When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and if the bones are broken apart, while the shape of the body is ugly afterwards, it does not lose its natural function: nor should you believe those who say one must break the limb anew; many people do this in our land; these operations are criticized and cause great harm, even to the point of death. However, if the bruises and injuries are fresh, then they should be treated with hot water or softifying herbs, like leaves from valerian, roots, and thyme, among others; and apply a poultice made from them; you can also take fat figs, grind them with flour from rye, and similar medicines that reduce inflammation. And make an ointment for poultices, as properly done salve, and take valerian root, mix it with grease from lard or oil of safflower, and apply this as a poultice; alternatively, you can take fat figs, grind them with rye flour, and similar remedies that reduce swelling.
And each time the joint is dislocated, it should be treated by rubbing continuously and for a long period with wet hands. And let there be one movement of the limb every hour.
And if the twisting is old and hardened, like bone, and needs to be removed with the iron, if it suits one must cut up until reaching the bone, with a slight, gentle incision. And apply concentration and study in the treatment.
This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, because it cannot move then, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
When dislocation affects none, if it suits now to bring back without hesitation.
For if one delays, the limbs swell up, and by chance should it be necessary to reset them at their current location; for this does not suit when trying to move them while they are swollen: many times it brings on pus and other pains;
If this happens, instruct the patient's attendant to heal them first, allowing until all abscesses subside; then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, gently reposition it, and treat each part as their treatment would come naturally to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on shoulder dislocations up to this point.
of the jaw
It happens that the jaws are dislocated downwards, and the dislocations of both occur in two ways: either they are somewhat bony at their roots and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the chin, and expel saliva from the mouth so that one cannot hold it, nor close their mouth, and wrap their tongue with speech.
When a dislocation is small, it can return through various positions.
And if it's complete and fully occurred, you should reset it quickly without hesitation.
And in such a way that the surgeons cut near to where the hair grows, and place their thumbs under the root of the jaw dislocation within the mouth; if the dislocation is at two inches, one hand should be inside while the other remains outside for balance; command the patient to soften his jaws and move them around.
And hold the thumbs in place until they settle back into position.
And if bringing them back causes pain, especially when the two jaws are together, so that the heads of bones from hot water and oil, as long as they are gently brought back; do not overly force it to bring back, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is well closed to be softened, place wet cloths in a poultice made of rosin oil and beeswax, then bind it loosely with soft bandages.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and keep the head between two cushions, so that it doesn't move neither to the right nor to the left, nor strain itself in any way. Instead, please feed them light food until the pains have subsided and the jaws are stitched together;
And then taste this to be lightly lifted, and does not struggle with opening the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well set and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be placed in their proper position within an hour, and are not returned to them, it leads to fevers that become habitual, and at times abdominal pain, and at times vomiting of clear contents.
And when you see this, then know that it is loss; and many times, death has befallen those to whom it happens, within eight days.
from the forceful (context unclear without more information)
The forces cannot relieve the pain from within the body's continuity or from its backside; it can only be relieved once outside, and this is clearly felt.
And the cure is that the patient lies on their back, and extends their arms; and then presses onto the affected area with your palm, and it will return; then place them on the plaster bed and the bendings, and hold them firmly.
And the head that is towards the knife cannot be relieved; if not, and if it can be relieved once, then you must reset it to its original position, as we have said; then place them on the plaster bed and the bandage, and hold them firmly, and command the patient to rest until they are well.
And similarly, bring back the shoulder blades, when it has returned to its original position.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: of which one occurs when it dislocates from the part of the scapula downwards; and the second is at the part under the heel; and by chance dislocates from the upper part, which happens rarely;
And it never dislocates behind the shoulder or inside the nerves; and often dislocates downwards towards the scapula, even for those with little flesh, because in these cases it jumps quickly; for those with enough flesh, it jumps to points and returns to them.
And by chance happens to some men through impact or bruising, and swells the shoulder with an abscess, and they think it is dislocated due to this.
Therefore, you must verify it as long as you are certain; then you may begin treatment.
And when the shoulder is pulled towards the back, you recognize dislocation. You'll notice a clear distinction between the diseased and healthy shoulders, and you will find various differences among them; You will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder. From the back to the neck, you'll see the protrusion of the top part of the shoulder like an opening; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose or move it in any way;
And if it's dislocated from above and not covered, you will clearly find this at the back;
And this way of dislocation can only be remedied when it is new or if the child is unhealthy.
And the method is that the ministers lift their hand from the flesh at the top, then place their palms under the armpit, and raise the joint up to its full height by force; and the ministers lift their hand and extend it up high, placing it underneath; if it comes too quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in our hands for several days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the attendant should apply soothing and calming treatment, such as decoction of fennel and fenugreek and milk thistle in water, and the treatment should be applied.
Then bandage the patient's back, and place a flat piece of wool under their armpit, neither too soft nor too hard. Then put the heel on top of it, and lift the shoulder joint in a virtuous manner, and pull the hand towards them.
And another minister cuts the neck of the patient, so that it doesn't move down; this shoulder comes back right now, and if you see to reset it according to this manner:
And make sure the place where you are is larger than the patient's injury; and have it straight towards the side, and push the shoulder upwards from under the collarbone, then lift the collarbone up so that the injured area hangs in an arc. And other ministers pull the hand from the injury downwards towards the belly. And if the injured area is too light, support him with something heavy, and the dislocation comes back now.
And you also reset it in another way: and is this you stick a long piece of charcoal in the ground, so that the shoulder is as wide as a bullet, and neither too large nor too slippery; Then let the patient lie down on their side but make sure there's a support underneath them, and keep the affected limb long up to the body. Then extend their hand from the other side downwards, and the joint will return to its place promptly.
and if she does not want to return with all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: take one leg of .ij. arms and .iiij. sticks that are broad, which should be able to enter quite smoothly on the side opposite the dislocation, according to this shape:
then tie the stem near to the body where it's covered by cloth, so that the stem doesn't hurt the patient, then place the stem on the side opposite the dislocation; and extend your arm along the stem up to its end, and fasten the brace on the stem, and the arm at the head of the hand, then place the arm on one stick about as wide as a stick, and let the hand hang down below, and leave the torso hanging from the other side: the joint will now return in this manner.
And when it is done, no matter how it was done, if it should be that you place upon the joint a rod of hair equal, then apply an adhesive plaster with ground powder from the mill, along with incense and egg yolk, over all the shoulder and around, then remove from the joint addition, and rebind over the plaster, and hold your hands in this way. And let your hands remain like this.
It should be that he eats little, until the limbs are strengthened, because it will heal faster; and then eat more after five days or seven, and move it; and if it is firm and it is not softened, it will be healed.
And if the joint is weakened by the left due to moisture that has come or for another reason, it should be that you apply three rounds of cauterization on it, as was mentioned earlier in the chapter about cauterization.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint doesn't hold, and cannot lift your arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or extended or weakened; and know that the joint would never be fixed in its place.
Dislocation near the buttocks, and breasts, or behind, is caused by pushing, extension of hands, and administration in another place; treatment should be applied as long as it's clean.
And if after the healing comes redness to the limb, and delayed movements, then immerse the patient in hot baths many times, until that redness is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
of the shoulder joint issue
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and it returns to those points; if it has been dislocated from all sides, as well in front and behind, and dislocation does not respond because you can see it clearly and feel it clearly; and it is dislocated according to each figure. And when you unite the arm bone with the good side, if you can see it clearly. Because the joint is bony, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder to any extent.
And you should reset it this way that the abscesses are closed, for if they were to be left open, there would be trouble in closing them; and sometimes it cannot be brought back completely, especially when it's at the back; it is worse than other dislocations and causes more pain, and by chance it brings death.
And restoration occurs like this when you can bring it back: extend their hand with both of your hands; and their arms are spread out, and the hands face towards the body along the length of the forearm, in and out, and hold the joint at its natural place or at the base of the palm, until they return to their original position.
And when it comes to dislocation in front of the body, it returns as soon as he doubles his hand on his own and holds the joint at the base of the palm with a tool that is set back.
And if it does not wish to return to its place, administer strong extension; and when both hands extend the arm, and bend them both, so that they do not move during the extension. Then turn the arm in each part, then once you have wrapped a double length of cloth long and wide;
And when you grasp the joint with your hand, if you apply some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint back into place until it heals;
And when it's at its place, place dry plaster with an egg yolk on it, push it back into place firmly, and let the arm hang down by the side of the body for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is firmly in its place, release the ligament and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not sit well, redo the plastering and the bandage, and let them stay like that for some more days until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if it feels sore after the return of the joint and it moves again, wash and rub it nicely, pressing until it is relieved; or you can place a layer of fatty mutton fat on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then re-apply heat, and let it enter or take a bath. And when it sweats, you should rub the joint gently, then place the bone back, and then immerse it in water; and do this twice or three times until it heals; and if possible, apply moist cow's fat mixed with butter on it and keep it there; if it works, it will return to its proper position.
the dislocation of the hand
The hand dislocation has occurred and the recovery is faster than for other joints, throughout the body. It's necessary to return it to its place as soon as possible, while it's still dislocated, so that the fingers swell or an abscess forms.
And the process is as follows: you place your hand on a table and extend the minister's hand, then inspect it by making it equal, so that they position their palm against the appearance of the joint, and hold it until it returns to its original position.
In every case, it is necessary to ensure that they look at whether it is in place; therefore, have the patient place the back of their hand on a table during extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, have the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and inspect by placing their hand against the appearance of the joint. If it returns to this position now, then it is correctly aligned.
If not, if you hold back with soothing plaster applications, and leave it there without needing to start over.
And if they cannot bear it, and you can't put it back in place after some days, if the joint remains twisted;
And it doesn't harm the patient so long as their hands are in plaster, and they can't apply any force at all: then you'll know that a nerve has been cut, or an artery; if there's no other way to relieve pain than with fire cautery, and by chance there isn't anything else.
And when the hands are in plaster, apply what we have said on plaster, then apply it and leave them for five days, then remove it and leave them as is.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no pain, if the water is warm, and rub it until it becomes clean.
Regarding the dislocation of the fingers of the hand.
The fingers of the hand are never dislocated from each other, neither at the back of the palm nor at the belly.
Therefore keep the fingers intact, and prevent the dislocation from spreading to his pockets until it recovers. Then support the head of the fingers, and bend it towards the part that is separated;
And let it be for two days, and then make him equal on that day; and without tie him up, as we have said, and loosen him each day, and make him move, and bind him again at night; and do this often until he becomes constricted.
And do it in the same way, if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you did before until it heals; and do it similarly, when it is dislocated on another side.
Dislocation of the ankle, dislocation of the back
When it is dislocated in the back or neck, or when there are multiple dislocations, if no cure is applied, because time rushes the patient into harm.
And the symptoms are that the evacuations start suddenly and against one's will, not being able to hold them, and many times various parts of the body, or both hands, or either arm, or one foot become weak.
And many times the calf muscle splits into four parts; that which becomes stiff at the back is called 'gibbous'.
The treatment is to reward if this 'gibbous' has come from childhood: without any treatment or healing until then.
And the one that comes from falling, impacts or similar things, according to old curing methods with big words, it did not bring any great benefit in all.
But I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the illness coming before the belly, none has health or strength;
And also that which comes straight to the two ribs, and cannot cure from anything else than what directly affects the back, as I say;
And it is that if the disease spreads across his flank in one length equally and has strain under him, so that he does not get wounded;
Then place a coal in the ground at the head and one more on the feet, and tie with a bandage around the armpits near the hair, and another by the hips, and knees, and ankles;
and two people hold the bandages in place, one at the head and the others on the feet, between the two coals;
and make sure they are well closed, the coal as we have said, and she should place her palms on the back until she regains consciousness.
And if this cure doesn't revive her, take a board of three arms long and place it over the back, and if she's on her side, position the head at one end of the board over the back. Then put the center of the board under the spine; Place the eyes of his feet onto the other head of the table, and press firmly, until he regains consciousness in its place; and if you can see, perform it on the wrist that turns towards the hand.
And when you place two pieces of charcoal on the head of the leg from one arm across, and towards the feet of another, with each piece of charcoal, put in between them an arm's length of space.
Place one piece of charcoal (or the part that turns) on each coal, or where the wrist turns, and ensure the coals are firmly in the ground so they don't move; between the two coals place a turning coal, where it turns, and between the two turning ones have two small pieces of charcoal of an arm's length for turning the wrist.
And then secure the first ligament between the elbows and head, and the second ligament towards the feet at the other elbow, and each servant turns their elbow to all the ligament, and the masters place the spine evenly as we have said.
And when they are even, place a desiccative plaster with plenty of egg on it and then coat it, then cover it with a tablet of three inches long, which makes the area of the boil and the healthy part of the spine visible. Then secure it with a ligament as we have said, use the patient's natural sweating process until it is healed;
And if anything comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines with the decoction that we have said earlier. And every time you administer one piece of plumb.
And sometimes there appears the appearance at the bottom spinal bone of the back, and one should consider that it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, for which reason we must not have any assumption: an accident might bring about death.
dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and shoulder only suffer dislocations, unlike other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: internally and externally, in front and behind; and more internally elsewhere, and less dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation internally is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and the diseased knee opens more than the healthy one, and the diseased knee cannot bend to touch the fire; And it is when the limbs are swollen due to an abscess, because the shoulder comes there.
And the sign of him who approaches death, so it is that this event is contrary to what was before.
And the signs of him who is coming towards death are such that his leg is well according to its fulfillment; still though, he does not double bend his knee without pain, and if you try to make him walk, he cannot move forward and retains his urine, and swells at his ankle, and when he walks, he steps on his heel.
And the signs of him who is behind are such that he cannot spread his knee or double it, and that leg is more curved than the other, and his ankle is flattened, and that shoulder comes up under his back.
The correction of this semblance of dislocation involves you rewarding it if the dislocation is old and remains according to its position, without any treatment needed; and there should be no assumption about it.
And for those whose dislocation is recent, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you act quickly to restore the joint, and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it towards the right and left; perhaps if it returns on its own and no further treatment is needed.
And if it doesn't return in this manner, then you should apply strong remedies, and hold the leg strongly with both hands or around one knee where it is tied to the thigh; and apply other remedies while holding his hand above in such a way that he extends his hands beyond his knees, then he forces the body with one blow of force against the calf; and another holds the head at the strap.
And extend both upwards and downwards at once, until the patient lifts off the ground in one movement, and stays hanging.
This method of extension is typical for four similar situations, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it's correct.
But if it's not like that, then treat according to its appearance. When dislocations are in the pantedens (chest), you should have the patient lie on their healthy side and secure them at the root of the arm, then place the head over the armpit, extend the bandage towards the throat and against force;
Then take another assistant to hold the patient's arms, and wrap around the fleshy part of the diseased arm, stretching it upwards in this formation: if it returns to its original position now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot squeeze it this way as we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the afflicted side together with a strong bandage below both the heels and above both knees, and ensure that the diseased leg extends an inch more than the other;
Then have it suspended from the head of a post, and let it be two arms' length above the ground; then instruct one minister to embrace the head of the leg, and have another ministers hanging with the afflicted side, who should embrace around the leg forming it into place, as now the joint is coming back quickly.
And when the dislocation is at front, if you place the afflicted side as we have said in those with agility and strength, and pull one bandage properly on the diseased leg and also around the foot.
Then put two needles, one on the head and the other in the armpit, then insert a needle between the thighs of the patient in their shape. and place wet cloths around them, so the patient doesn't blister, then extend each limb towards themselves, and set their dislocated hand in line with their body.
If it returns to its place, that's good. If not, put them on a table and press them like we have instructed in the dislocation of the shoulder blade, then lie the patient down on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it should be extended as quickly as possible, following what I have said; and place their suffering limb on the back of their shoulder blade, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards their knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it does not require extending the body backwards or lifting up from the ground, rather it should be placed in the same position as when the hip was dislocated behind, just like we have said about lying on both hips. And if it's in the face, and the neck is stretched as we've said before, and pressure should be applied at the joint on the table;
And it will be right when the limbs extend their legs and they are equal; then adjust the thighs, and apply the plaster, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip doesn't move;
And let it rest for three or four days, then release and apply the plaster; and if you see that they are equal, strain again as before, and leave them for three more days; then release and allow them to move fully until the limb is strengthened.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder joint can be dislocated in three ways: one should know that it can dislocate internally and externally, and behind; and does not dislocate forward.
And the signs for this are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their knee, and if they cannot straighten it at their knee, know that they have dislocated.
And the restoration of all this is that you have the patient sit straight, and if they can extend their leg, place your back on their buttocks, and put their foot on your feet;
Then take his knee in your hands and pull it between your fingers. Then bend the two knees gently, forming the shape of the knee. And have other attendants extend his foot as far as possible until the knee returns to its place and there are signs that he has correctly placed his leg slightly below the thigh.
And place the dressing on it, and have him stretch his leg to the thigh, then firmly unite them for three or four days. Then let him rest; and do not move any of the limbs until they are strengthened.
And if the limbs are not yet ready, administer strong extension exercises, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they recover strength.
On the dislocation of the heel
The heels are never perfectly reduced or completely dislocated, both inside and outside.
And the signs for this are that the ankle is swollen, and it tries to move towards the part where it has been dislocated:
The reduction is gentle, and one should slightly extend it with their hands only when the heel is reduced.
And when it is dislocated completely, it must be that you make the patient stand straight, and hold him two assistants off by his leg, above the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then twice with the left, then lift him up, and firmly push the foot upwards;
and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is well; if not, start over with the process, for it will return.
and if it cannot return like that, then have the patient lie down on his back on the ground, and place two stones firmly in the earth between his buttocks, and tie cloths around him so he does not hurt the patient.
Then the surgeons cleanse the wound, and some other surgeons stretch his feet or at two inches to the leg bone, so that they lie on the neck of the leg bone; Then each surgeon stretches them equally, and the ladle shall always be placed between the thighs of the patient to hold the limb when it is stretched.
Then place the mirrors equally at the point of dislocation with both hands, and another surgeon cuts the healthy leg above it, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the right position, apply the plaster and put the bandage on top, then tighten it properly, bind the leg to the body, and watch the nerves that are behind the ankle so that the bandage is not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if they relax, pull them out; then release it on the third day or fourth, and let the patient walk around for four more days; And if it goes beyond that point, it is not safe that it will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses are pressing on him and it comes to this, you must soothe him, as we have said elsewhere, until he feels better.
Of the fire cautery, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When the arms are dislocated, if they need to be properly stretched as part of their work, it is a simple matter.
And if the dislocations are in no bone of the back or foot, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their full length or on a table entirely straight, and place your foot where it opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly until they come to themselves.
And when they are even and do not open anything, place under the foot of each pig a table with two heads, then hold them in shape, and let them for three days, then release it; and make it rest until it is well healed.
regarding wound care and dislocations together
When a wound accompanies a dislocation, and one seeks to restore it, many times the patient has died:
if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, and if you are knowledgeable in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful but also patient, do not be rash.
And at first apply soothing remedies to the abscesses with cautery, and let the patient remain in God's hands, if you do not see hope of healing; And when you see hope, then reset the limb into its place immediately, so that the abscesses stick and heal.
And when the limb is in its place, apply soothing remedies to the abscesses and treat the wound as it should be done, using dried ointments.
And if there is a break with dislocation and small bones are exposed, set the bones, and do as we have said for simple diseases.
And guard yourself against the path of fear, according to what I've said, for this is your duty as per your Creator, and through knowledge arm yourself and know your body. Amen
