After completing this book for you, my sons, and finishing the last part of the science of medicine with its completion, and following its explanations and declarations, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this Treatise which is a part of operation, namely surgery with hand.
Because the operation with hand is lying prostrate in our region and time, and entirely private until perhaps it will perish along with its knowledge, and the track of it will be cut off: and there are left from it only small descriptions in ancient books which have been altered by hands: and errors and hesitation occur to them until their intentions are closed and the power of it is gone. It seemed to me that I should bring it back to life with the arrangement of this Treatise in accordance with the method of position, declaration, and abbreviation: and that I may come along with the forms of iron instruments Cauterii and other tools of the work: when it happens through the addition of declaration and due proportion which is necessary.
But the reason why a good craftsman of that kind is not found with his own hand in our present time is: because the art of medicine is long and requires its author to be exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy, as Galenus narrated, until he knows the benefits of members, and their forms, and their connection, and separation, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, tendons, and their number, and their exit and return, and the pulsating and quiet veins, and the exit places of those.
And on account of that, Hippocrates said that a name with a name is much, and with work it is little, and especially in the art of hands.
But we have already spoken about him at the introduction to this book.
Because whoever is not knowing what we have said about anatomy does not escape, but rather falls into error, by which people are killed: just as I have seen many of those who claim to be knowledgeable in this science, and boast about it without knowledge, and without experience.
What happened was that I saw a stupid doctor cut open a scrofulous abscess on a woman's neck and lacerate some arteries in her neck. Therefore the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead under his hands.
And I saw another doctor who presumed to remove a stone from an old man's bladder, and the stone was large. He therefore came to him and removed it with a piece of bladder. Therefore the man died on the third day.
And I myself had already been called to remove it; and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the patient that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was receiving payment from a certain Duke of our land in exchange for his medicine; and it happened to the black eunuch who was with him that he broke his leg near the heel. And the doctor hastened with his ignorance, and bound the fracture over the wound with poultices, and bandages tightly tightened, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he discharged him according to his own desires. After that he let him go after a few days and ordered him not to loosen the bandage; and it stood thus until his leg and foot became gangrened and he came to ruin.
I was therefore called to him; and I hastened to loosen the bandage; and as a result there was calmness, and he was delivered from his pains.
However, corruption had already set in on the member; and I could not prevent it.
So the corruption ceased to spread through the member until it died.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess; and it ulcerated after some days until its evil quality was greatly magnified with his lord.
What is this? Because when the cancer is pure from melancholic humor, then it should not be approached at all with iron, unless it is in a member that can tolerate it, so that the whole of it may be cut off.
And therefore, oh sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation is divided into two divisions with hand: namely, an operation which is accompanied by salvation, and an operation where there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already stirred up everywhere in this book, where the operation comes, in which there is fear and trembling.
Therefore it is necessary for you to beware of this and leave it alone, lest foolish people find a way to speak and be ashamed.
Therefore take measurement with solicitude and protection, and treat your weak patients with ease and firmness, and use the better way leading to salvation and praiseworthy succession through the grace of God; and leave off dreadful griefs difficult to cure: and lift up your souls from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation may enter upon you in your faith and advantage.
For it is more remaining for your glory, and higher in this world, and finally to your possessions.
Galenus indeed said in some of his admonitions. You will not heal bad illness: lest you be called evil doctors.
However, I have now divided this Treatise into three Chapters.
First Chapter.
Concerning cauterization with fire and cauterization with sharp medicine, divided and arranged from head to feet, and the forms of instruments and tools of cauterization, and all that is necessary for the operation.
Second Chapter.
Concerning section and perforation, bleeding and ventosities, wounds: and extracting arrows and similar ones: and the whole chapter, arranged in forms of instruments.
Third Chapter.
Concerning restoration, and dislocation, and cure of twisting, and similar ones: chaptered, arranged from head to feet, and in forms of instruments.
But before that, I must first recall the nature of its usefulness and harm, and in which complexion it is exhibited.
I say therefore, that the discourse on the quality of the usefulness and harm of Cautery is a lengthy and subtle one, requiring knowledge and hidden secrets.
And many wise men have spoken on this subject and disagreed among themselves. And as for me, I am content with a little of their words, fearing prolongation.
I say therefore that Cautery agrees with all complexions, both those with matter and those without matter, except for two complexions which are hot without matter and dry without matter.
But in the complexions of heat and dryness with matter, they disagreed among themselves. For some have said that Cautery is beneficial in it. And others have said the opposite of this, namely that Cautery is not suitable in an illness which arises from heat and dryness; for since fire's nature is heat, it is incongruous to heal a hot and dry illness with heat and dryness.
And the one who said the opposite of this has said that through Cautery a benefit is achieved in every hot and dry illness which occurs in human bodies; for when you compare the body of a man and his humors to the complexion of fire, you find the body of a man to be cold.
And I myself say this through his discourse; because through experience it has revealed itself to me on several occasions.
However, it is not proper that someone should come to attend to that unless he has already been tested and trained in the last exercise of Cauterization, and has known the diversity of human temperaments, and the disposition of illnesses within themselves, and their causes, and accidents, and the time span of these.
But there is no fear for the other temperaments from you, especially in cold and moist illnesses. For now all physicians have agreed on these matters and do not disagree with cauterization in treating them.
And know, children, that from the secret of healing by means of cauterization with fire and the excellence of it combined with medicine that burns: because fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the part that is being cauterized, and does not harm another connected member unless a small harm.
The action of the medicine that burns reaches what is distant from the member, and perhaps makes an illness of difficult healing occur in another member, and perhaps kills it.
But fire, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do that unless it is excessive.
And now it has become known to us through experience, because of the length of service and study with art, and standing on the truth of things: and because of that, I excuse myself from the length of discourse.
And if it were not so, because it is not allowed to this book of mine, I would reveal to you the secret hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation in expelling diseases from bodies, by which it drives out illnesses through philosophical demonstration, which would be clarified in your minds.
And know, children, that they themselves disagree on the time when it is proper to perform cauterization, and hold that a better time is that of truth.
And I say that cauterization is fitting at any time: therefore, because the harm that occurs due to time is submerged in the benefit that is attracted with cauterization. And especially if the cauterizing instrument is for pains that are necessary, strong, and stubborn, which do not tolerate delay: therefore, because one fears from them that a greater harm may occur than slight damage done during the time.
And let it not fall into your minds, my sons, that which is not esteemed by those people and foolish doctors, namely, that the illness which is cured through cauterization does not always return: and they place this consequence, and it is not as they think. Therefore, because cauterization is not, except in place of medicine, which alters the complexion and exhausts the humors that are the causes why pains occur.
However, cauterization is superfluous over medicine because of the speed and power of its own operation and the intensity of its dominion: and it is possible that illness returns after some time, according to the complexion of the infirm person, and the location of their illness, and the power of its cause: and what is prepared in their body from an accumulation of excesses within them: and what reaches them through food and similar things from their causes, unless there is a condition where cauterization is administered.
A subtle illness in a few excesses and humors of the member, such as tooth cauterization for pain, and similar ones, it is possible that the pain does not return in that one. But this happens in few cases.
But the common people's talk is again, that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, and their speech is correct: not with regard to what they intend in it; because they believe that there is no cure which compares with medicine, nor with anything else after the application of cauterization.
But the thing itself is contrary to that and their intention, because cauterization is the last resort of medicine not because when we administer modes of healing in some illness, and those medicines do not help: then we administer cauterization at the end of things, and it helps; so it becomes clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding which the common people and many foolish doctors have.
The ancients have said that a cauterium with gold is better than one with iron: and they did not say this unless for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance. And they said that a cauterium does not make pus. However, this is not absolutely true: for I have already tested it and found that it does not do so in certain bodies without other things.
And the cauterium with this is good, and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you put the cauterium with gold into fire, it is not revealed to you how much heat you want, because of the redness of the gold: and when it's cooling down, and if you add more ignition on top of it, it melts in the fire and turns into plates.
Therefore, the craftsman falls into occupation with that, and because of this, we make a cauterium with iron for ourselves faster and closer to the operation, according to its straightness.
And I myself have already arranged this chapter on cauterium according to chapters: and I arranged it from head to foot, so that the one seeking may find what they want from it.
Book Two.
Here cauterization serves to counteract the dominance of moisture and coldness over the brain: which two are causes of swelling, and the abundance of fluid flux from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and the abundance of sleep, and toothache, and throat pain: and universally all kinds of illnesses that occur due to coldness, such as paralysis, swelling, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar ones among those illnesses.
The method of cauterization is that you precede the patient by administering a purgative medicine to cleanse the head for three nights or four, according to how much the patient's strength requires, and their age, and their habit.
Then tell him to make his head bald with a razor. Then make him sit between your hands square, so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger reaches, mark that spot with an inkstone.
Then apply the olive cauter to fire, which has this shape.
Then place it on the marked spot with an inkstone, while you slowly withdraw your hand and turn it. Then quickly lift up your left hand and look at the place.
What if you see that a quantity of bone from the skull or a quantity of zeuberi has already been exposed, then lift up your hand. And if not, repeat with the same iron or another one that is not chilled; until you see the bones which I told you.
Then take something from salt and dissolve it in water, and pour it on the wound, and put it over the place; and leave it for three days.
Then put the soaked cotton on top of the butter, and leave it over the place until the scab is destroyed by fire. Then care for that with the ointment of tetrapharmakon, until it heals.
They have already said that the more a wound remains open, the more pus is emitted; therefore it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone, and the cautery held until something thickened like bone is burnt.
Then scrape off after what has been burned away from the bone, then treat it.
And others say that it is necessary to arrive at the end with a cautery, so that it impresses on the bone an imprint like a form of kyrate: or an instrument which women put in infusion of small letters, and they think that vapors of the head escape from this place, and that the wound remains open for a long time.
Then it will be treated until it is consolidated.
But to me these two species of cauterization seem to be entirely useless except in certain people according to the way of fear.
And it is better for him to leave with his own safety than to be treated by me.
For the head is weakened by the dissolution of its natural continuity, just as we have testified in other limbs; and especially when an invalid's head is naturally weak. And indeed, the first species of cauterization is more safe and better for me to use, and I employ it: therefore I will work with it for the sake of salvation.
Chapter 3.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the whole head and it is prolonged in an invalid, and he uses herbs, and poultices, and purgatives, and oils, and embrocations. And especially if it has already been cauterized with one cauterization, which we have narrated, and brings him no relief from those things: then consider. For if an invalid's head is strong and natural, and not weak, and it finds a moderate coldness: then cauterize with another cauterization under that slightly. Then cauterize it over the whole horn of his own head with a cauterization, so that it does not penetrate the skin and opens up from the bone the quantity which we have narrated. And cauterize it with one cauterization at the back of his own head, in the place which is called the "vas": and this is the location where the "ventosa" is placed; and elevate your mat there, and do not open up the bone. For an invalid finds that because of this pain is very intense and different from the pains of all other cauterizations on the head.
And I will say this about the Cauterion in its place; and it is necessary that it be a cauterization by which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of his head is cauterized more finely with a cauterization by which the middle part of the head is cauterized.
Chapter IV.
When pain and swelling occur on the head, or when the pain extends to the eye, and the head is cleansed with purging medicines, and the rest of the treatment, which I mentioned in the divisions of afflictions, is administered, but that does not provide a complete cure: then cauterization is done in this case by two methods: either with medicine that burns sharply, or with iron.
The cauterization with sharp-burning medicine is this: you take a single tooth of garlic, and peel it, and cut off its ends from both sides. Then divide the painful area with a broad lancet at the proper time, until there is a spot beneath the skin where the tooth is captured.
Then insert it into the spot beneath the skin until it is hidden: then tie a cloth over it with a gentle constriction and let it be for fifteen hours. Then release it, extract the garlic, and let it sit for two or three days afterwards. Afterwards, place a poultice submerged in butter on top of it until the area becomes pus-filled. Then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to do this with some burning medicines which I wrote about in the 12th treatise, On Blistering Medicines.
The cauterization of it with iron is done according to this method. Fire Cautery, whose form is this.
And it is called Clavilis, because the form of its head is like the form of a hook, in which there is some curvature, and in the middle of it is a small prominence.
Then place it over the spot and hold your hand steady. And you should turn the iron slowly with speed, and let the part that is burned be as thick as the skin's middle portion. And lift up your hand so that the artery which is below is not burned, and a flow of blood may occur.
Then soak the cloth in salt water and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days. Then put the cloth with butter; afterwards care for it with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish, cauterize this headache with the extremity of a second-edged cauterizing knife. And beware of cutting into an artery in this headache, not properly old-fashioned.
On the manner of cauterizing in ancient headache.
When you are treating a headache, following what we said earlier in the previous treatment and in the divisions of illnesses, and the cure does not help: and you see from the illness that what we said about the first cauterization with medicine or with fire is not enough for him, then it is necessary to use the Ignias Cauterium with a knife, until it becomes white after you have marked above the place of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger or so: and put your hand on one side, and tie it tight until you cut into the artery and reach the mouth.
However, it is necessary for you to beware of the continuation of the jawbone which moves during mastication, lest it be burned or the nerve that moves it, whereby a spasms may occur.
And be on guard and take care to prevent bleeding from the severed artery. For there is fear in its severing, and especially for one who is ignorant of what he is doing, and not studious or experienced: and he abandons the operation at once.
And I come with a reminder of the regulation of bleeding from an artery according to its own manner, and in its place in this book.
If you see that from sickness a wound is not being healed by this cautery, and you see the sick person bearing with patience the cautery in the middle of their head, just as we have narrated, then treat the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, apply the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on extracting an artery with a cautery having two knives. For this cautery is better and more effective.
On the manner of cauterizing in earache.
When pain occurs in the ear due to cold and is cured with salves and the rest of the treatment we mentioned in the division, but the pain does not depart, then apply the fire cautery: and that is what is called a Point, whose form is this.
Then make the point with it after its ignition on the entire circumference of the ear, as it revolves; or on the circumference of both, if the pain is simultaneously present in both. And stretch out with the cautery from the root of the ear for a little bit, after you have marked the places with wax: and let the length of the cautery be ten points on each ear, and so forth.
Then cure the places until they heal.
On the manner of cauterizing in torture.
Chapter 7.
The torture that is cured by cauterization is not excepting those species which occur from phlegm, according to what we mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
And having applied the cautery to the species that occurs from dryness and nervous spasm.
When you treat this species of torture with hyssop, and powdering the head, and gargling, and your treatment does not bring relief, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient three times: one at the root of the ear, and a second a little lower than that, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cauterizer on the contrary side of the weaker part. Because softening does not occur unless it happens in a part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it directly at the tip of the upper ear, a little below the horn of the head: and afterwards, as long as the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the cauterizer until it burns a quantity equal to the thickness of half the skin.
And this is the form of the cauterizer, and it is a kind of small knife, whose shape is as follows: although it is not much finer than what you see: and it should be so that the knife is a little above the excessive thickness.
Then take care of the place with what preceded: until it heals.
On the manner of cauterizing in Ancient Apoplexy.
When ancient apoplexy sets in and you treat it as we have said, and your treatment does not take effect, and the patient has no fever, then cauterize him with four cauterizers on top of his entire head, and one in the middle of his head, as we have said, and another at the back of his head, according to what has preceded: and the manner of cauterizing is according to what has preceded.
And also cauterize with the cauterizer above the mouth of the stomach: and this is the final one.
Then treat it as what preceded.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in the drink of the first patient, there should be given great hyena and purifying pills for the brain.
Then quickly dress the entire head of the patient and place on the back of his head an ointment made from vinegar, as described in the treatise on ointments: and place it several times.
This is the correct method of cauterization; and do that in the same order as I said there.
If it is then healed through this, it is good. If not: then make three cauterizations on the back of his head, which are descended from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye; and put between every cauterization the thickness of a finger.
Then care for the cauterization with what preceded it.
But if you wish to add more and he is weak and endures this: then make a cauterization in the middle. What if you want to add more: then cauterize it above both horns.
Then care for it until it is healed: and make the cauterization with oil according to the form that was previously mentioned.
About the way of cauterizing in Paralysis, and softening.
Head X.
You should proceed with the cleansing of the head with hyssop and with what we said.
Then shave the head of the infirm person: afterwards cauterize it with a cauterization in the middle of the head, and a cauterization above every horn of the head, and a cauterization above the back of it, and three over the vertebrae of the neck.
But if you are desirous of a remedy for the softening of the body and the infirm person endures it and the illness is strong: then cauterize him with four cauterizations above the vertebrae of the back, and the last one along with a cauterization, until most of it is burned off from the skin, and lift up your hand. Then care for him until he is healed: and thus anoint with oil.
About the way of cauterizing in Epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless he whose epilepsy is from phlegm.
Therefore, it is necessary that you cleanse his brain first with myrrh and with the other cure which we mentioned in the division; when he is very weak or is enduring in the acceptance of medicines.
However, if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then a gargling substance and cleansing chewings are administered to purify the brain, many days beforehand with the improvement of food.
Then quickly shave his head, afterwards cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of the head, according to what has gone before; and another cautery on the back of his head, and above all the horn of his own head. If the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize him with the cauteries which I mentioned in the case of paralysis, and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and back; and let the cautery be olive oil according to the method that went before.
But if the patient is a child, then place a subtle cautery according to this method.
Of the manner of cauterizing in Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries which we mentioned in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessiveness tending towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid and weakened, then give him to drink what will purify his brain, according to what went before in the division: afterwards quickly shave the head of the patient, and make a bandage after that, well-made from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the patient sitting square, be held firmly by all parts.
Then apply the liniment. And it is more worthy from old sheep's butter. And warm him over a fire with tempered heat measurement, as much as his finger can tolerate when it is inserted into him. Then remove him from the middle of his head, in a circle, and let him be until he cools down.
Make that to every infirm person once a week, with his entire regimen being good, until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cautery him by making small punctures on most of his body, except that you will hold your hand with the cautery, and so it smells.
For this kind of cautery moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place a poultice that has been soaked in butter or goose fat on top of him.
Of the manner of cauterying in descending water to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When you are shown the principle of water in the eye by signs, as I said in division, then begin and pour the patient with what cleanses his head.
And watch over him from all moistures, and make him sit in a bath on several days of fasting.
Then command him to shave his head and cautery him in the middle of his head. Then cautery him above both temples with two cauteries, if there is an onset of water flowing down from both eyes simultaneously: or from one side only, if there is an onset of water flowing down from one eye: and cut off with the cautery all veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauteries be long in breadth equal to the temples: and beware of blood flow.
And if you see anything from that, then cut him off immediately with any medicine possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and their cutting off, and caution against blood flow.
And sometimes it is cauteryed on the neck, under two bones, with two final cauteries produced.
Here is the translation:
When the tears of the eyes are old and frequent: and they are above the veins and arteries which are visible on the outer surface of the head, it is verified that this is from excesses of cold and phlegmatic things. Then cauterize with the same cauterization that I described in the beginning of the flowing water, cauterizing in the middle of the head, and two cauterizations above the temples, and two cauterizations on the neck under two bones. And if there is need of addition, then cauterize it on all sides cautiously around the eye, above the outer corner of the eyebrow with a small cauter.
On the manner of cauterizing in nasal discharge.
When you are treating that with what we said in the division, and the treatment does not agree: then hasten and give three infusions of vinegar to drink for three nights. Then gently massage his head, and cauterize it with a medium cauterization, with olive oil cauterization. Then cauterize it with the cauterizer of nails, two cauterizations, above the two eyebrows under the hair a little.
And keep away from the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of the nail cauterization.
On the manner of cauterizing for relaxing the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye is relaxed from illness or moisture: then cauterize the eyelid with one cauterization, with lunar cauterization.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows a little with two cauterizations on all sides: and draw back from the two temples: and let the length of the entire cauterization be according to the length of the eyebrow: and do not leave your hand with the cauterizer, but rather according to the quantity that is burned off the third eyelid.
About the manner of cauterizing the eyelid when the eyebrows are turned backwards and pierce the eye.
The cautery is in this case according to two modes: either a burning cautery with fire; or a burning cautery with medicinal combustion.
However, in the burning cautery with fire, first instruct the patient beforehand to remove their hair if they are one of those who pluck it, until it is lengthened and equalized. But if they prick him at the beginning of his growth: then bind up his eyes with a bandage, so that they may not be moved until they are developed.
When they are developed and equalized, then place the patient's head in your bosom: afterwards mark on the eyelid of his eyes with encaustic, marking it so that it is according to the shape of a myrtle leaf; and let the beginning of the mark be near the hair.
Then place the cooled cautery in white of egg or in psillium mucus on the eye.
Then set fire to the cautery, whose form is this.
Then cauterize above the figure which you marked gradually in many places, until the surface of the skin, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, appears properly.
And the sign of the success of your work is: that if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs raised at the point of the eye.
So lift up your hand then, and let him go three days.
Then place on top of it a compress with butter, until the scab is eradicated. Then care for him with ointment, until he is healed.
What if some hair returns after an hour and the eyelid becomes soft: then repeat the cauterization over that place, just as you did at first.
If however hairs are on the lower part: then cauterize it, until it is raised to its natural place: and it will be equal so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
It is necessary to make a person take out the hairs until they are lengthened and equalized. Make from cloth of linen the shape of a mulberry leaf.
Then take from known soap and from unimbibed chalk one ounce or almost that much: then mix them together with good rubbing and make it quickly, so that it does not cool down. Then spread it over the cloth which you made in the shape of a mulberry leaf, and place it on the eyelid of one eye, or two. And place it under the eye a poultice soaked in egg white: and the head of the sick person be in your bosom.
And place your index finger on top of the medicine, and press it a little bit. And you move it as often as the sick person feels the bite of the medicine, because its biting is like fire.
While therefore this biting which he finds continues, then let go of the medicine, and move it with your finger. When therefore the biting ceases, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And then consider if you see the eyelid lifted, just as it is lifted with contraction by fire or incision, and that is good: and if not, then repeat over it with medicine on a different place where the medicine does not imprint and does not leave a mark, until your operation is equalized and the eye contracts.
Then place over it a poultice with butter, until the burned skin is eradicated. Then take care of it with diaphanic ointment or another, until it heals.
And it is necessary for you to keep watch during the operation, so that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye.
And if the eyelid becomes soft after a few days and something from the hair enters the eye, then apply medicine to that area which becomes soft because of the eyelid itself, just as you did at first. Then take care of it until it heals.
And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And know that human eyes differ in size and smallness. Therefore, your consideration should be according to this: and the path of righteousness is not hidden from him who has a zeal for this art.
Of the manner of cauterizing in the tear duct.
When you cure the tear duct as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not bring relief: then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to put their head in your shoulder, and have a servant hold their head between your hands in such a way that it is not moved or agitated with their head.
Then place the infused caustic in the white of the eye, or on the mucus of psillium above their eye: then apply fire to the cauterization, which has this shape.
Let it be concave, like the shape of a vulture's feather cane, from one end with which the cauterization is made: and if you wish it to penetrate up to the other extremity, and if you wish it to go up in such a way, then try.
However, this concave shape is better for your work.
Then express the tear duct, if it is open, and drain the pus from it, and dry out the duct itself: and if it is not open, then open it, and drain its pus.
Then place a cauterizer on top of it which becomes very hot.
And hold your hand near the cauterizer at the eye, towards the nose, so that your hand does not stray or disturb the patient; and place the cauterizer on the fatty part of the eyelid, and destroy it.
If you then reach to the beginning of your cauterizer all the way up to the mouth, it will be well. And if not: then repeat your cauterizer once or twice, as needed; and leave it for three days.
Then place a poultice with butter, and care for it with a drying ointment, until it heals.
But if it has passed forty days and is not healed: then place a sharp corrosive medicine on top of it, until the mouth is uncovered; and scrape it according to what comes in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which some first ones said. Approach the place of the fistula and find it; then place in that opening a fine cannula, namely, a thin tube, whose form is this. And pour into it the quantity of a drachma from molten lead; and hold your hand with good retention on the cannula, so that the patient is not moved at all, nor does he run or bring the molten lead to his eye.
And it is necessary that you place a poultice infused with egg white or water on top of the patient's eye.
For lead burns the location of the fistula and cures it with a wondrous healing.
And if the fistula is healed, as we said by cauterization and cure, that is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer the nostril and guide the fistula back into its natural course through the nose, according to what comes in its own place.
On the manner of cauterizing lip fissures.
Many times, fissures occur on the lip which are called "Pili", and especially on the lips of boys.
When you are treating these fissures as we said in the division of diseases, and the treatment does not agree, then take a small cauterizing instrument, fashioned thus.
And let its concavity be according to the fineness of the knife.
Then place the burning instrument hastily into the very fissures until the cauter reaches to the depth of the fissures.
Then care for it with cerate, until it is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing mouth abscesses.
When an apostema occurs at the root of a tooth, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth: then pus forms and bursts forth: afterwards it becomes corrupted, and the pus runs and forms an abscess: then you should care for it, and the treatment does not agree in this case, then it is necessary that you take a cauterizing fire according to its size, which fits into the abscess. Then insert the burning instrument into the orifice of the abscess, and hold your hand, until the hot iron reaches to its depth and end: do that once, or twice.
Then care for it afterwards, as we said about the treatment until it is healed.
If therefore the abscess is lanced and heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what will come its head.
On the manner of cauterizing gums and softened teeth.
When the gum becomes softened due to humidity and the teeth are moved, and you care for it with medicines, but it does not agree: then place the head of the sick person on your shoulder.
Then apply the cauterizing tool, which will be shaped as follows, so that you place a cannula on top of the tooth: and insert into it the hot cauterized tool quickly: and hold your hand for a moment, until the patient feels the heat of the fire has already reached the root of the tooth.
And lift up your hand: then repeat the cauterizing tool several times, as you wish.
Then have the patient fill their mouth with saltwater and hold it for one hour: and spit it out.
For the tooth is strengthened by movement, and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
On the manner of cauterizing teeth in pain.
When the toothache is caused by coldness, either there is coldness itself or worms, and treatment does not help with medicines: then cauterization is done in that place according to two methods: either with butter or with fire.
However, the cauterization of it with butter is, that you take goat's butter and boil it in an iron kettle or on a brazier. Then take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the finger. Then submerge the cloth in the boiled butter: and place it on the painful tooth quickly, and hold it until it cools down: then repeat it several times, until the heat of fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you want, immerse a wool or cloth in cold butter, and place it on the painful tooth: and place a hot iron on top of it, until the fire reaches the depth of the tooth cavity.
The cauterization with fire is, that you direct the hot cauterizing tool to a bronze or iron cannula. And let there be something thick in his body, so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
Then take the cauterizer, which will have this form, and place it above that tooth; and hold your hand until the cauterizer becomes cool.
Do that several times, for the pain will be removed, either on that same day or another day.
And it is necessary when the cauterizer makes an impression on that tooth, for the sick person to fill their mouth with good betony and hold it there for one hour; then spit it out.
And this is the form of the cauterizer.
Cauterize with whatever extremity you have possible; and this is the form of the cannula.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in strophules.
When the strophules are caused by phlegm and cold humidity, and they do not obey digestion through medicines, and you wish to hasten their digestion: then take a concave cauterizer with this form.
Having two open extremities, so that smoke may come out at the cauterizer from the other extreme; and place it ignited once upon the swelling, and again if you need it, until it reaches to the depth of the swelling.
If the swelling is small, then place the cauterizer according to the size of the swelling.
Then leave it for three days, and place on top of it a poultice infused in butter until what the fire burned is removed.
Then care for it with tooth ointment, until the form of the cannula heals.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in hoarseness of voice and constriction of breathing.
When moistures overcome the canal of the lungs, and especially when this is accompanied by coldness of complexion, then it is necessary that the sick person be purged first with soluble medicines.
Then cauterize him at the back of the throat, near the root of the tongue, in a depressed place; and beware, lest with the cautery you reach the throat or skin, except for a little bit of it.
Then cauterize him with another cautery at the junction of the neck, at the very end of his spine; and let the cautery be a nail, according to the manner that preceded.
Then care for him with what came before, until he is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing in chest ailments and coughs.
When cough and chest distress are from cold moistures, and the patient does not have fever or consumption, nor is it an old affliction; then cauterize him with two cauteries above the shoulder blade in depressed, soft, empty places. And cauterize him with another one in the middle of the chest between two breasts; and let the cautery be a pipe-shaped one, according to the manner that came before.
And if you wish, make your cautery by pricking with the instrument called Punctum, whose form preceded in piercing pain of ears; and let the pricks be from thirty to almost sixty.
Then care for him with what came before, until he is healed.
And now let the cautery have three branches: according to this shape. Why should one be alleviated with him when you do with him a series of three cauteries.
Chapter 27.
When the head of the humerus is displaced due to moisture and does not return to its place within an hour from the start of displacement, until it becomes his habit of returning, then; afterwards it is displaced by a small motion which happens as we have already testified, then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation at first. Then the patient should be placed supine on his back, or on a healthy side. Then lift the scalp, which is inside the tentorium, upwards with your left hand's fingers; and if the joint dislocation occurs towards the inside.
Then take a cauterizing instrument with two handles. Whose shape is this.
Then cauterize the scalp until it penetrates to the other side and a figure of cauterization appears with four caustics.
And sometimes a cauterization is made with a cauterizing instrument having three handles, and so a figure of cauterization appears then with six caustics; and the handles are according to the subtlety of the net.
And this is the shape of the cauterizing instrument having three handles.
And sometimes one more is added to this method, and so there are eight caustics.
Then place crushed thorns with salt on top of the cauterizer. Then make sure the patient remains calm and quiet so that the limb does not move at any time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is above, and this rarely occurs, then cauterize it on top of the shoulder with a cauterizing instrument having a hinge, or with multiple small punctures.
For the joint is strengthened, and moisture is removed: and the patient is healed.
Of the method of cauterizing the Stomach.
When coldness and moisture occur in the Stomach, to such a degree that they extract it from its natural balance, and multiply catarrhs towards it, and constant methods of treatment do not benefit: then it is necessary for the patient to be placed supine on his back, and stretch out his legs and hands. Then cauterize with three caustics, the first being under the ear of the breast as long as the first finger, and having a hinge; and two below, on both sides of one caustic, until a triangular figure of caustics appears. And stretch between both so that they may not join together when they make pus.
And let the depth of the cautery be the quantity of three thicknesses of skin.
And let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without addition; and if you wish, apply a great cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cautery which makes this cautery be one according to the shape of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by piercing it with one who is terrified by this cautery; and thus signs are made above the stomach at the point according to the quantity you wish with an encaustic: then cauterize it with a puncture cautery: then care for it with the cure that preceded until it is healed.
¶ On the manner of cauterizing the hypochondrium cold.
When it happens that in the hypochondrium there is pain from cold and moisture, or from a thick cough, until the patient's natural excretion proceeds excessively and is cured with what we said, but does not benefit him: then it is necessary for the patient to be placed on his back, and three cauteries with an encaustic are marked according to this figure, and of the same quantity above the lower hypochondrium, where a man's elbow reaches: and let there be space between each cautery equal to the thickness of a finger; and let the cautery be straight according to the length of the body; and do not press your hand much with the cautery.
And let the quantity of what is burned be the thickness of skin, the middle part of it not added; and let the patient stand over his feet.
But if he is not standing, then let him lie down, who has already stretched out his legs and lifted up his arms.
This is the form of the cautery.
And it is possible for you, that you may cauterize these wounds with a cauterizing knife, when subtlety and prudence are with you in the art.
And take care that you do not proceed too late in cauterizing, and that the thickness of the skin is thoroughly burnt, so that the body is thoroughly burnt and reaches to the intestines; for the skin there is thin, therefore know this.
On the manner of cauterizing apostumes of the Apis.
When it happens that exitura occurs, and you wish to know if the aposteme is in the flesh of the Apis, or in its tunic; then if it is in the flesh of the Apis, it invades with a pitiful pain, and gravity without sharpness: and if it is in the tunic of the Apis, there is sharp pain with vehemence: and you see now that its cure has fatigued its physicians.
Therefore the patient must lean back over his own neck. Then place the figure of the aposteme with an encaustum; then apply fire to the cauter that is likened to a ray. And this is its form. And cauterize with that cauter one, until the skin is thoroughly burned and reaches to the siphac, until all pus has gone forth; then care for it with a cure of exiturata, until it is healed.
And it is not right for this kind of cauterizing to be used, unless the study in the art of medicine is prolonged in him; and through whose hands these diseases concur with some experiment several times: then indeed he may dare to undertake this operation.
But rather to leave it, that is better with me.
On the manner of cauterizing in Pleuresis.
The ancients have said that a cauter with the roots of Aristolochia should be used for a cold Pleuresis in this manner. And it is, that you take from the dried roots of Aristolochia long ones, one root longer than those which are found from it, and let it be like the thickness of a finger. Then immerse it in oil, and burn it with fire. Then cauterize it with a cautery one on the spot where the wing of the jawbone meets the neck, and two small cauteries slightly declined under the guilezzi slightly to the side towards the part that is below the beard.
And two small cauteries also on the spot where it is between the fifth and sixth ribs slightly declined towards the back a little bit; and another cautery in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach. And three cauteries from the back: one on the spot where it is between two spoon-shaped bones; and two small cauteries from both sides of the chest, with the lower one being in the spot between two spoon-shaped bones.
And it is not fitting for you to press your hand with the cautery, rather let it be in plain sight, smoldering on the surface of the skin.
And now some ancient people have said that there are men who use a cautery made of iron similar to a ray: and they heat it, and insert it into the spot between the ribs, until they reach with it to the abscess itself, and let the pus exit: just as we said in the case of apostema Epatis.
But in this operation with the cautery there is a risk, that either the sick person dies immediately, or an opening occurs in the place of a fistula, for which there is no cure.
Of the manner of cauterizing the Spleen Chapter 32.
When you are treating the sickness of the spleen, as we said in the division of sicknesses, and your treatment does not take effect, then there is a cautery in it according to three modes, all of which are straight.
One of which is, that you make three or four cauteries, lining them up according to the length of the spleen, following the figure of the cauteries of Epatis, whose preceding figure we have described.
And let there be among all cauterization a quantity of thickness equal to that of a finger, or somewhat more.
And let the mode of cauterization be as we said it should be for cauterizing the liver.
And do not compress your hand with the cauter, and let the patient lie weakly on his back.
And another method of cauterization is: that the cauter having two prongs, as we said in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder, you raise the skin which is directly above the spleen, where the patient's left arm lies; and let your elevation be such as to elevate the skin according to the breadth of the body, so that the cauteries fall along the length of the body.
Then insert two fiery prongs deeply into the skin, until they penetrate to the other side; then withdraw the cauter; thus four cauteries are made.
And if you wish to cauterize with a cauter having three prongs.
Then care for the cauter after you have released it, allowing it to discharge pus over many days; for this is more beneficial than any preceding treatment in the cure.
Of the method of cauterizing in Hydrocephalus.
A cauter does not fall into Hydrocephalus unless it is properly applied.
When you are treating Hydrocephalus with the methods of treatment which we mentioned in the division, and the treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize it four times around the navel, and one cauter above the stomach, and one cauter above the liver, and two cauteris after the spine between the vertebrae, and one on the direct of the breast, and another on the direct of the stomach; and let the quantity of depth of the cauter be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then release the cauter open, so that it may discharge pus over a long period of time.
And do not remove the sick person from treatment after cauterization with him, because it is necessary that two intentions congregate to him; and healing will hasten to him with God's help.
The form of the cauterizer with which the belly is cauterized should be a key; according to its shape: and that with which the back is cauterized, should be olive-like, according to its shape.
On the method of cauterizing Feet, and Legs.
When they apostemate in hydropic and fill with citrine water: it is necessary that you cauterize above the dorsal part of the foot at night, which is between auricular and ankle; and raise your hand with the cauterizer, and do not twist him: then raise your hand: and do not repeat it entirely.
For the water citrine will drizzle, and let the cauterizer be according to this shape.
Then make two cauterizers on both legs, one on each leg, and let the cauterizer be with the edge of a knife-shaped cauterizer; and let it be according to the length of the leg, one below the knee and another above, about in the middle of the leg: and above all the hip, make two cauterizers: and leave the open cauterium without treatment for a long time, until some water drips from it: then cure it with the rest that we have said.
On the method of cauterizing in resolving the Abdomen.
Chapter 35.
When there is a resolution of the belly due to cold and humidity, until the retaining and digestive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines, are weakened: and it is cured with methods of treatment, but does not heal; and you see the sick person tolerating the cauterizer with excessive vigor, then cauterize him with a great cauterizer above his stomach, according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with a circular cauterizer, and four small cauterizers around the navel, with a small key-shaped cauterizer: and a large cauterizer or two over the alcatin above the hips.
And if you see excessive moistures and the patient tolerates them, then cauterize him with a cauter on the breastbone and with another on all his hip; and perhaps add two small cauterizers near the great one on the stomach.
For indeed the cure is advancing, whose benefit does not stray.
On the manner of cauterizing Hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are old and many hemorrhoids in the anus, or one, which are formed from thick, cold, or corrupted humors, and they are cured as we said in the division, and not by cure: then cauterize three cauterizers on the lower back of the loin a little triangularly under the armpit, and one cauterizer under the navel almost two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cooled and his food is not digested, and you see his face breaking out in boils, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cauterizer, as before; and one on his spleen, and another on his liver, with a small cauterizer: and leave the cauter open for some time: thereafter cure him until he is healed.
Chapter 37.
When you remove the altitude, then apply a cautery fire that is similar to a ray. Then insert the burning thing into the removed altitude: and your last hand, until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows: do this once, or twice.
If therefore there are many altitudes, then cauterize each one with a cautery as we have described. Then cure them, with that which benefits them from ointments, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a great cauter on alum, it is more beneficial for his sake.
On the manner of cauterizing an anal fistula.
Chapter 38.
When an invalid does not obey the section and operation that we have described in his place, and is terrified by it, perhaps he will be healed with a cauter.
When therefore an abscess occurs to someone, and becomes old, pus flows out of it, and corrupted moisture. It is therefore more noble that what is necessary is that you probe it with a fine probe. Then know the quantity of its depth with a probe.
Then bring forth the fire-catheter, which is similar to a rod. Then insert yourself, ignited, into that abscess and note the quantity up to which you have entered.
And apply the cauter to it again and again, until all those corrupted bodies are burned away, once, twice, or thrice, according to your own necessity.
And be careful not to burn the nerve if it is there, or a great vein; or if the abscess extends to the bladder or to the intestine, then be careful about all these places.
And do not do that unless the abscess is in a fleshy place; and consider, because it is not penetrating.
Then take care of the place until it heals.
But if the place is sealed and the materials are removed from it, and remains thus for a long time: then you will know that it has already been healed entirely.
And if the materials are not removed from it, then you will know that it is penetrating, or that there is a corrupted opening deep within it, or almost one of those things, the remembrance of which will come to its place.
On the manner of cauterizing kidneys.
When it happens that there is pain in the kidneys from cold or from gross swelling, and it diminishes due to the weakness of the person, then it is necessary to cauterize the area above the membrane over the kidneys, cauterizing both kidneys with a caustic clavicle, the reminder of which precedes.
And perhaps we cauterize it again on that very membrane. Why three lines? Therefore they will be more beneficial for healing.
On the manner of cauterizing the Bladder.
When debility and softening occur in the Bladder, caused by cold and moisture, until the infirm person no longer retains urine, then cauterize it on the lower part of the abdomen above the Bladder, where the pubic hairs begin, and with a caustic from the right side of the abdomen, and another from the left side of that; and let the length of this cauterization be according to the size of the thumb's knuckle: and cauterize it with an inferior back caustic, or two caustics if needed: and let it be done as the preceding clavicle caustic.
On the manner of cauterizing the Womb.
When cold and moisture occur in the Womb, and they prevent conception through that, and the menses of hers are corrupted, and their promotion is delayed, and pain comes to her at their arrival, then it is necessary to cauterize with three caustics around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and with a caustic on the lower back, or two caustics: and let there be a clavicle caustic.
On the manner of cauterizing the Shoulder in dislocation.
When the mucous humidities flow to the socket of the Shoulder, and become the cause of its exit from its place: and the sign of this is that the leg extends over the other when they are brought together; and a vacant space is found at the site of dislocation.
Therefore it is necessary that you cauterize the patient over the almond-shaped anchor of his own cauterio similar circle. After you have signed with encaustro around the circumference of the almond, as it revolutes; and so that the almond itself falls in the middle of the circle.
But if this cauter is not present to you, then cauterize him with three cauterizations, using the olive-oil cauterio large; and let the depth of the cauterization be according to the thickness of the skin altogether.
Then take care of him until he is healed.
Of the manner of cauterizing in Sciatica.
When pain occurs in the almond-shaped anchor and there are causes of cold and moisture, and the patient is treated as we said earlier, and the cure does not bring relief, and it becomes old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient from gross humors with foetid pills or with artificial pills, and similar things. Then cauterize him.
And the manner of cauterization in that is according to two modes: either a cauterio with medicines that burn, or a cauterio with fire.
A cauterio with fire is according to many modes.
One of which is that you cauterize over the almond-shaped anchor of his own with three triangular cauterizations, in this shape. And make their depth good or bad. And let the space between every cauterio be the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and let the cauterio be olive-oil.
Sometimes, however, it is necessary to make a cauterio in the middle over the head of his own anchor. Wherefore there are four cauterias.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose form preceded in the cauterization of an anchor's dislocation, one by one; so that the circle contains the entire anchor.
And burn the thickness of the skin entirely.
This is the method for cauterization in sciatica, when the pain clings to the sacrum itself and does not extend as far as the buttock and thigh.
But if it extends as far as the buttock and thigh, then you should cauterize that place on the buttock with two cauteries, above where the patient complains of pain, and your own cautery on the hollow four fingers deep in the left side: and let the cautery be a knife-like one.
And the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the skin.
But if the patient complains that the pain extends as far as the toes of the foot, then you should cauterize him there where he complains with a punctiform cautery, three, four, or more, as needed.
And if the patient complains of pain being below the knee on the side towards the thigh, then you should cauterize him there with a single knife-like cautery.
And beware of this in all your cauterizations, that you do not go so far as to burn a nerve or a large artery, and bring harm or constriction upon the patient through it.
And I myself have seen one or two of those who had cauterized above the hollow and gone too far in their cauterization, and as a result, the leg has become swollen until it reached the foot, and the whole limb was perforated and corrupted: then there followed dissolution of the bowels and death afterwards.
If pain is present on both sides simultaneously, cauterize both sides in this manner.
And some wise men have said that in the cauterization of the sacrum, this is the method. Make a like samai from iron, whose diameter is the middle of a palm: and let it be at its opening according to the thickness of a finger's knuckle, or somewhat less: and within that samai, put another samai.
And let there be space that is between all the bones as much as the width of a thumb's knuckle: and let the bones be open on both sides: and let their height be almost like a knot, or two knots: and make for them an armband from iron carefully fitted into the bones.
Then it should be ignited in the fire until it reddens and emits sparks: then it should be placed over a mortar anvil for an invalid or weak person to lean on, resting against a healthy side. Therefore, burn him with three round cauterizations on one side.
Then let it be released after three days. Afterwards, apply ointments with butter: and let the wound remain open for many days. Then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
Albucasis says: We have not used this type of cauterization much, because of the terror inspired by its appearance: and therefore, we have found few who dare to wait above it.
Yet it is one of the good cauterizations for him who suffers, and finds a place with it.
However, this cauterization with burning medicines is such that you make two bones having a perforated armband, into which the hinge of its gate descends from air or iron, of equal length to the wall: whose height will be two knots, or almost as big as themselves.
And let there be space that is between each one as much as the thickness of a finger, and let them be open below and above: and let them be such that they contain themselves together, according to this shape.
Then place it over a mortar anvil, for an invalid lying on their healthy side. And press your hand firmly onto the mortar anvil. Then pour between two circles of hot water, which has been heated with fire for a little while, and hold it for the duration of an hour: and let the invalid tolerate its biting and burning, for he will find the biting to be like fire, until the biting subsides.
Then raise your hand with the instrument, and wash away warm water from the beginning to the end along with sweet water: then let it be three days.
And place butter on top of it, until the blackening of burning is removed: and let it be for several days, and pus will flow from it. For it is the ultimate in healing.
Then care for it with ointments, until it heals.
But if the pain extends to the hip or leg, make a poultice for it in that which contains water, just as you did at the beginning evenly.
And this is the method of warm water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Take alkaline and unextinguished calcis, one part of each: grind them both, and put them in a new pot, whose lower part is perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the radius; and put another glazed pot under the bottom of the first pot: and pour over the alkaline and calcis with sweet water, so that it submerges each by a finger's breadth: after which you compress them with your hand in good compression: and let the pot be, until the sharp water descends into the lower part of the glazed pot.
Then gather up all that water and pour it over the other calcis: and let it be, until it is renewed.
For it will then be very strong and sharp, which is administered in many operations of medicine, and in the cauterizing of other limbs. Because it brings about the operation of fire itself.
And from medicines are made those with which the anus is cauterized, and also like thermises, and honey of anacardium, and lime with soap, so that both are mixed together.
And Galen indeed reported, telling the cure of some ancient man, by which he was cured of the pain in the anus and sciatic vein: and magnified it to be very great. And he said that the patient does not need another treatment and that he was cured from just one remedy, until he brought it back, because perhaps himself had gone into the bath carried and had come out already healthy.
And it is to be taken from a green saffron: and if the green one is not found, let a dry one be taken, fresh: and let it be ground much with a little fat, and put it on the spot where there is pain, or knee, or in the hip: and bind it up, and leave it for a period of three hours, or for as long as the sick person feels relief from burning. Then put him into the bath.
When therefore his body becomes humid, put him on a seat. For the pain subsides and he is healed.
And know that it is not fitting for anyone to use a cautery with these medicines, unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides who said that goat dung, when applied to a person being cauterized with it for the sciatic vein, helps him: and makes a cauterization in this way. Let wool be taken and soaked in old oil, and let it be put on the deep place which is between the thumb of the foot and the heel, and is closer to the heel.
Then take dry goat dung and burn it over the fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then put it on top of the wool and let it go until it is extinguished. Then repeat that. And do not stop doing that until the sense reaches through the application all the way to the knee, and the pain subsides.
And this method of cauterization is called Vaccinium.
Of the Cauterization of Back Pain.
Sometimes it happens that pain occurs in the back due to many causes, or by chance, or by a blow, or excessive evacuation, and similar things, through the infusion of cold and wet matter: and cauterization indeed does not fall, unless in this single species which is made from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after the evacuation of the patient with pills that are fetid and similar to them, so that they be placed on the back where there is pain, three lines according to the breadth of the patient's body, after which signs are marked with encaustic in each line five cauterizations, or more according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient by his virtue: and let the cauterization be done with a cauterizing point.
And if you wish, cauterize three times or four with a cauterizing point of the middle claw, according to this form.
¶ On the manner of cauterizing in cases of Gibbous Inflammation.
This illness often happens to small children.
And the sign of its inception is that it happens to boys as a constriction in breathing at elevation and motion; and you will find it in the last vertebrae of the back and knots of theirs, which has already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When therefore you see this and wish to do it, then cauterize him with a cauterizing point that is a circle according to this form.
And take the cauterizing point over all parts of the vertebra equally: and if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a puncturing point two or three lines: and let them be close to each other.
Then take care of the place until it heals with what we have said.
And beware, lest you apply a cauterizing point to the gibbosity which occurs in a spasm of the nerve.
¶ On the manner of cauterizing in Gout and pains of joints.
When the pains of joints are from cold humidities that flow to any part of the body, and when they occur in the feet, according to the custom of physicians it is proper to call that Gout.
When therefore podagra is cured due to cold causes with modes of cure, and pains are not removed, then a cauterization removes them.
And it is, that he cauterizes him after purging around the joint of the feet with many cauteries; and let the cauter be Olive.
And if you wish to prick on the surface of the foot, then do so with a cauter. But if the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, and often that happens, then cauterize him over all the knee with three cauteries, or four from every part, with the same cauter of Clavus.
But if you need more of this cauter, then cauterize him. And do not immerse your hand with the cauter, rather it should be about as thick as the thickness of skin.
But if the pains ascend to the knees and back: then apply what we said earlier from the cauter, in its own chapter.
What if the pains are only in the hands: then prick around the wrists, as two lines turn back.
But if there remains from the pains in the fingers: then prick them, over every joint pricking and on the palm of the hand.
But if the pains ascend after days to the hips or shoulders: then cauterize both from every part.
And do not purge the patient with a good regimen, nor by taking medicine. For if a good regimen is done, and phlegm is purged, he will be healed with the help of God with this cauter.
¶ Of the manner of cauterizing in Ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestine or bladder descends to the testicle, and it is that which begins to be near: then it is necessary for you to advise the patient to stop eating on his day. And it uses something gentle, whereby dung will descend from its stomach.
Then sit him between your hands on his back: and bid him to hold his breath until he goes out, or appears to be passing stool, or intestine.
Then lead him with your fingers, and mark with an encaustum beneath the rupture above the pubic bone, with a sign whose extremity is similar to the middle of a circle above the body.
Then use an iron cautery, which has this shape, until it comes white and sheds sparks. Then lead the intestine or intestine back to its natural curve. Then let the attendant place his hand on the spot to prevent the intestine from coming out: and you have already opened up between the patient's legs, and placed a poultice underneath him, and another servant above his legs, and another above his chest who is holding hands.
Then place the cautery on top of it with your hand steady upright alongside. And hold him until you reach the mouth with him: or go around him again in a different way if you are not able to reach the mouth with him at first.
And carefully observe the exit of the intestine during your cautery hour, lest you burn him and cause harm to come upon the patient or even death.
And know that when you do not reach the mouth with the cautery, your operation does not matter.
And it is necessary for the cautery of infants to be subtle, according to their measure.
Then take care with the remaining ointments until he heals.
And let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary that you place his food in proportion to the length of time required for his cure, so that it soothes his stomach: lest he excrete intestine during eating and evacuation.
Then when he wants to operate after forty days, then administer a well-made ligament and hold it for forty other days.
And let him be freed from labor, and from taking food and drink, and from loud voices.
For when he uses this regimen, thus he is healed by a complete cure.
And I will say the treatment of ruptures with an incision in his chapter.
But when ruptures occur in the remaining part of the belly, and are just beginning, and it is desired that they not increase, then cauterize the rupture with a rounded caustic according to its size: and let what is burned be as its third from that time. Then care for it according to what we have said, and it will not increase.
And now some of the first ones have said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular caustic, according to this shape.
After it is marked with encaustum, and a line is placed that is across the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with a caustic awl.
But first, the caustic is easier and better.
On the method of cauterizing in cases of pain due to a fall or blow.
Chapter 48.
When it happens in some members due to a fall or blow, and pain persists for a long time, and treatment with medicines does not bring relief: then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the point caustic.
And let the caustic be for every part according to its size, and its softness, and weakness, and strength, and the location of the torsion, and the pain from it.
If then he is healed by the first caustic, it is well. If not, then iterate over this cautery.
Since it is customary for these pains to shift from one member to another that approaches it. Therefore you should follow them with the cautery until the sick person is healed.
About the manner of cauterizing in Leprosy.
But lepers are sometimes relieved by cauterization to the greatest extent. And especially the type of leprosy that occurs due to the putrefaction of phlegmatic and melancholic humors: when therefore you wish to cauterize it, consider it.
So if the leprosy is not responding and you have treated it as we said in the division, and it does not subside or stand still: and you fear for the patient, because corruption may spread to his entire complexion: then cauterize him on the head with five cauterizations: one in the middle of the head, marked; and a second one lower down towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two on both horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And with the last of your fingers and the cautery, press slightly until it makes a small impression on his mouth, and the bark breaks out: so that the exhalation of gross vapors from him may be alleviated, and cauterize also over his spleen, according to what has preceded.
But if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is manifestly apparent: then it is necessary to cauterize with those cauterizations which we said in the chapter, and also cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two on each cheekbone, and two on the vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large on the hips at the end of the spine and one above it, in the middle of the nape: and two on the armpits: that is to say, one on each armpit, and two on each knee, and two on each shoulder, and two on each elbow, and two on the soft parts of his chest: and cauterize him over every joint, from the joints of his fingers, hands, and feet: and cauterize also over every heel of his feet, and toe of his hands.
And beware of the nerves that are above the heel bone, lest you burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery over the hipbone, and another time over the ribcage, and again over the liver.
And know that the more you add to the cautery, the greater is its benefit and effectiveness.
And know that the weak one does not find pain in a cautery, as the healthy ones do; therefore, because his body is already numb.
And it should be that the cauteries are of great size and smallness according to members and joints: according to what preceded from the types of instruments.
Then care for the cautery with flour from a plant mixed with honey, and the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
¶ On the manner of cauterizing in numbness.
When some member is numb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but does not heal, then cauterize the numb member with cauteries, according to the magnitude of the member or its smallness.
And make your cautery penetrate into the thickness of the skin a little bit. Then care for it with an ointment, until it heals.
And sometimes it is cauterized for some numbness that occurs in the hand and foot at the spine of the back where the nerves that move that member are located; and the numbness is removed.
But do not presume over this unless one is wise in the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves that move the body.
Chapter 51.
When a blister becomes old and does not yield to anything from the arts of medicine: then cauterize over it with a deep cautery for a little bit, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whitishness is removed and its color is changed.
Then care for it with the flour of a herb, and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and dove's blood, and heron's blood: each one be part of one: let these all be mixed together, and be spread over a cloth, and stick to the place, until it is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing in Cancer.
When Cancer is beginning to form and you wish to stop it: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circle, as if it were revolving.
But wise men have said that the cancer should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
But it doesn't seem right to me, because I fear that it will ulcers; and I have already seen this happen on a few occasions.
And it is better to cauterize around its circumference with a circle, as we said, or with many cauteries.
On the manner of cauterizing in Adubenatae.
When someone has an Adubenata and it is delayed in maturing, either because of superfluity causing it or because of the weakness of age, when there is a deficiency of blood, or because of time, and you wish to hasten its maturation; then cauterize around its circumference with small cauteries, making many punctures. Then leave it alone. For it will hasten with maturation.
If however you wish to pierce it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery, which has this shape.
And place it in the middle of the Adubenata, until it penetrates the skin; and let the cautery be from that which follows, so that the flow of pus may be eased.
Then care for it until it is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing in a corrupting evil.
Here is the translation:
Corrosion is not anything other than corruption in a walking member, and it corrupts it; just as fire consumes dry wood.
So if you see a corroding wound in a place that can tolerate cauterization with fire, then many small and great cauteries will be applied to it, according to the nature of the place where the corrosion is.
Then cauterize it from all parts until you eradicate the entire corruption, and not a single thing remains of it completely.
Then let it be for three days, and place over the cauterized areas sulfur that has been ground with oil, until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption.
Then care for it with ointments producing flesh.
So if you see that after three days, healthy flesh is born, without corruption, it is good.
And if not, then reapply the cautery over what remains of the corrupted areas.
And corrosion is healed sometimes with acute medicine. Itself rises in the place of the cautery.
However, the cautery with fire is more expeditious for relief; and I have already said its division with acute medicine: therefore, take it there when you need it.
Of the manner of cauterizing in Claws and Warts.
Chapter 55.
This illness often occurs in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a thick, filtered substance that injures the foot.
And there is indeed a cautery for them in two ways: one with fire and the other with hot water.
But when it is done with fire, make the cautery cone-shaped like a vulture's beak, which should be made of iron, according to the size that contains a claw from all sides; and let it have a thin edge.
Then place the heated instrument over the nail. Then turn the hand with the cautery around the nail, until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail: and let it be for three days, until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply ointment to it with the juices of wild rue, crushed with salt: and let the dressing be on it at night. For it will be rooted out from its roots.
Then care for the place with a unguent of generated flesh, until it is healed.
But if they are not converted and often occur on the surface of the body, especially in hands and feet: then administer to them a cautery with hot water: and it is, as you take a tube made of air, or iron, or from a bird's feather: and place it over the nail, or the ulcer. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube: hold your hand firm and turn it with compressive pressure from your own hand for a little while, so that the margin of the tube imprints itself on the root of the nail, and the hot water finds its way to the depth, to the root of the nail: and let the patient wait for a moment after the stinging of the hot water for one hour.
Then let it be, for the nail is rooted out with its roots.
So do this one after another, until you come to all those that are on the body.
Then care for them after they have been rooted out, with what generates flesh from ointments.
Of the manner of cauterizing in Tremors.
When it happens to someone that they tremble from cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or another such cause: then it is necessary for you to cauterize it four times, or five times, over the vertebrae of the back, and between every vertebra, and on his chest, and above his stomach.
Shaking (tremor) ceases with olive oil cautery, and hastens recovery from cold illness.
On the manner of cauterizing: Albathir.
Chapter 57.
Sometimes the foul things, that is, pimples, which are produced from corrupted thick substances, are purged out of the body by Albathir.
It is therefore necessary at first to cauterize all pimples with a subtle cautery and the wood of myrtle, whose extremity has been ignited with fire. Or with the root of Aristolochia longa. Or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized to dry up at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method: and they do not increase; and the excess is broken forth, making them whole again.
However, it is necessary for that to be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
On the manner of cauterizing in bleeding from an artery in a wound.
Many times it happens that bleeding occurs from an artery which has been cut at a wound, which occurs externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or from a cautery on a member, and similar cases: and it becomes difficult to stop it.
When therefore it happens to someone, then hasten with your hand to the opening of the artery, and place your index finger on top of it: and press it down much, until the blood is blocked under your finger and nothing else comes out.
Then place small and large olive oil cauterias in the fire, and blow on them until they become very well lit.
Then take one, small or large, according to the wound and place where the artery is disrupted, and put the cauteria on top of the vein, after you quickly remove your finger; and hold the cauteria until the bleeding stops.
If the blood is expelled when you lift your finger from the artery opening and you extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery quickly, prepared beforehand among those that are in fire.
So do not stop doing that one after another until the blood is cut off.
And beware, lest you burn the nerve which is there, and another misfortune occur above the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to cut it off; especially if the artery is great, unless with one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we said. Or with extraction when it is not extracted. For when it is drawn out, its ends contract and the blood is cut off. Or be tied with a strong tying thread. Or put on top of it medicines with the property to stop bleeding, and bind with a decent constriction using poultices.
But he who administers its cutting off with a bandage and binding with cloth, or by placing the things that are burning in similar ways, does not at all benefit it, except rarely.
If however it happens to someone and there is no doctor present nor medicine: then he will start by placing the index finger on top of the opening of the vein itself, just as we narrated, and constricting it very much, until the blood is blocked from the upper part of the wound and above the artery. And the finger should not be removed from above it with cold water of very intense coldness always, until the blood freezes and thickens and is cut off.
And meanwhile he should consider what is needed for the cautery or medicine.
About incision, perforation, and bloodletting in wounds, and similar things.
We have already spoken in the First Chapter about every affliction which is suitable for a caustic cautery and burning medicine, and its occasions, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterization.
And I have placed the chapters there from top to bottom.
And I will proceed in this chapter by the same route, so that what is sought may be found for those seeking relief.
And before I begin that, it is necessary for you, my sons, to learn what is in this chapter, which is frightening, just like the one in the First Chapter on cauterization.
And because of this, it is necessary to be even more cautious, since in the operation that is in this chapter, evacuation often occurs with blood, with which life stands at the opening of a vein, or incision over an abscess, or opening of an exit wound, or curing of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision over a stone, and similar things: from all of these fear, trembling, and death occur in many of them.
And I warn you, let not that fall upon you in which there is hesitation, for sometimes such things happen to you in this art, with regard to men and their various infirmities. For one of them is angry with his own affliction, and death is light to him: because of the intensity of his anger which he finds from his weakness and the length of his wickedness. And when afflicted, it is due to fear that signifies death.
And one of them gives himself over to his own medicine, and enriches you with it, hoping for recovery, and his affliction is deadly.
Therefore, do not agree with him who comes to you from among them, whose manner is such. And let your caution be more vehement than your desire and your avarice. And do not presume over anything from that, unless after certain knowledge has verified it with you, which confirms the successful succession to what has been reached.
And use prognosis and indication for the cure of all your patients, so that salvation may be fittingly achieved.
For in that there is assistance to you for acquiring fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God guide you, sons, with his understanding, and not take away from you direction and inspiration; for it is in his hand.
And I indeed arranged this Chapter by dividing it into chapters, just as preceded in the chapter on Cauterization, from head to feet; so that what you seek may be alleviated for you, and where you are lacking.
About the treatment of water that gathers in children's heads.
Chapter I.
Know that this weakness often befalls children at birth: or when the midwife tightens the child's head without gentleness.
And sometimes it happens also because of a hidden cause that is not known.
And I indeed did not see this sickness in anyone other than children: and to all of them from whom I saw it, death has hastened forth: therefore it seemed to me that I should abandon the treatment for it.
And I indeed saw a child from whom, whose head was filled with water, and his head grew in all day, until he could no longer sit upright because of the greatness of his head; and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture indeed either accumulates between the skin and mouth: or it accumulates under the bone above the sinuses.
And the operation on him, if there is moisture between the skin and mouth, and a small apostema is present, then you must make an incision in the middle of the head, making one gap about two nodes wide, until the moisture flows.
And this is the form of a spatula.
So if moisture has been increased and the abscess is larger, then place these two incisions according to this shape.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see a sign of it, namely that you see the edges of the head open from every side; and when you press it with your hand towards the inside, and it does not hide from you: then it is necessary to cut in the middle of the head three incisions, according to this method.
And after making the incision, remove the moisture entirely. Then tie the incisions with cloths and lint. Then pack that on top with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the bandage and care for the wound with threads and ointments.
And do not cease to bind the head with equal tightness. And feed the sick person all dry food with a little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision is, that you should observe where the magnitude of the abscess appears and the collection of water.
Because sometimes it is more prominent on the back of the head, or on the forehead, or on the right side, or on the left.
So ascend with an incision where you see the abscess and filling of water, and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And beware that you do not cut an artery, and a flow of blood occurs, and the sick person dies from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
§ On the cutting of arteries which are behind the ears.
Chapter II.
When someone experiences a discharge from their eyes or chest and it becomes old and does not respond to medical treatment: then the ultimate cure for that is by cutting these two arteries.
It is necessary therefore when you wish to cut them that the patient weakly bends his head. Then rub the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries may appear. Then the patient should tighten his neck with any of his own cloths. Then examine where the vein beats. And both locations are places that are behind ears depressed: and it is rarely hidden except in some people.
Then mark with encaustum over each one: and cut both with a scalp-lifter on either side accurately, the incision reaching to the mouth: and make it along the breadth of the head.
And if you wish, insert the scalp-lifter under the artery, and cut it to the upper parts with an incision.
And let the length of the incision be nearly as long as two joined fingers.
For when a vein is cut, blood issues forth in pulsatile emission, which flows inward with frequent leaping.
If however the artery does not appear to sense, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear a space of three fingers. Then mark with encaustum, and find down to the mouth.
And that which is necessary to be emitted from blood is 6 ounces, and perhaps you may emit more or less from it. The whole thing according to the quantity that appears to you from the strength of the patient and the filling of his artery.
Then examine the wound. Then if something remains at the mouth from the stitch, then cut it so that a warm abscess does not occur: then bind the wound with linen strips from a cloth.
Then care for him with an ointment until he is healed.
Of the extraction of arteries which are in temples.
Chapter III.
When an old hemicrania or acute catarrah occurs in someone due to acidic moistures and heat in the temples of the hands or feet, or old soda, which is pungent and similar to those: and it is treated with modes of medical cure, and not brought to a conclusion: then we are experienced in these afflictions by extracting arteries from the temples, or cauterizing them, as we have narrated.
And the method of performing the operation for extracting ears is, that the surgeon should shave off the hairs which are on the temples, and direct himself towards the apparent artery in the temple. For it is itself shown to you by its pulse, and rarely hidden except in a few men or in extreme cold.
But if it is hidden from you, then the surgeon should bind his patient's head with any cloth of his own; then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or moisten the place with hot water, until it appears to you in a manifest appearance. Then take the spatula that I shaped a little while ago. Then scrape with it the skin with ease until you reach the artery. Then place a hook in it and pull it out upwards until you pull it out of the skin, and make it slip out from the tunics that are under it on all sides.
If however the artery is slender: then wrap it around with the extremity of the hook. Then cut off from it that part according to the length of its extensions and contractions, and that no flow of blood may occur. For if it is not cut off, and if it is not severed, the blood will not ascend thoroughly.
Then evacuate six ounces of blood up to three.
For if the artery is large: then it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a doubled thread of strong silk or from the sinew of an antelope, so that it may not hasten to putrefaction before the wound is consolidated and a flow of blood occurs.
Then cut off the excess that is between the two ties. Do that at that hour or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cauterizing tool up to the mouth, with a culinary knife, until its ends are cut and it remains in the same place of the work.
And it is better, unless the patient has a fever, or a warm complexional constitution. Because the cautery is one of those things that are useful for drying out humors. Therefore it is better to be beneficial.
And after the removal of arteries, the place should be filled with old ashes; and fine lint should be placed on top.
And after the wound is cleansed, it should be treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to form, and with egg whites, until it heals.
But if while you are operating a flow of blood occurs from an artery, then hasten to cut it off with a cautery, or fill the place with zinc oxide: and bind your hand tight until the bleeding stops. But if none of those things is present to you, then place your finger on the spot until the blood coagulates. And dress the wound with water of very cold temperature, until the sharpness subsides and is tied as it should be.
And since it is easier and less painful to extract an artery, it is that you should cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives: let the sharpness of the two knives be similar to a thin thread. However, they are much less sharp than two knives. Because if they are sharp, like two knives, the cold hastens to both, and do not cut through flesh with speed. When therefore there is a little thickness in them, the heat of fire is retained in them, and the flesh is cut through quickly; with this, then, it is better than all work, and easier, and more convenient.
And this is the form of the cautery.
And let the space between the two knives be the thickness of a finger, after you mark out two places with encaustic; and take both hot ones away from each other, until they reach the mouth, and cut through the vein in two places: so that what is between its extremities may be separated. For they are not consolidated with this cautery thoroughly.
Chapter IV.
On the treatment of habitual and stubborn acute eye discharges.
When there are habitual discharges and their course is from the veins above the outer part of the head, and nothing seems to be done for them by medicine with medicines, and you see the patient's face already red, and they feel a sensation in their forehead as if it were the walking of ants: and their eyes are shriveled, moist, so that their eyelashes have already been consumed along with consumption; and their eyelids have become inflamed from the sharpness of the discharges. Then the ancients resorted to this treatment, and called it a cure with a knife.
And one is that you should command the patient to shave off the hairs that are on their forehead. Then cut three incisions on the forehead, equally spaced along the length of the forehead: and let the length of each incision be almost two fingers, and one incision should be equally distant from the middle of the nose on the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little more than the distance between the arms, and the third at the other side; and beware of cutting into the arteries which are on both sides: and stretch out your hand away from the connection of the two jawbones, and let the space of all incision be the length of three connected fingers: and prepare for yourself a piece of sponge or many dry cloths with which you will dry the blood.
Then insert the spatula into the two sharp edges at the ends, whose form is as follows. From the incision that is at the side of the temple to the second incision: and scrape away with it all the skin that is between the two incisions, along with the scab that is above the bone. Then make that also from the middle incision up to the second incision. Then take out this spatula-like thing, and insert another instrument into the first incision again, which is called a sharp knife, blunt on one side, not sharp on the other. And this is its shape.
And place the sharp side of it towards the attached skin with the flesh, and the blunt side towards the bone; and push it until it reaches the middle fissure; and cut off with it all the fatty tissues that descend from the head to the eyes: except for what remains in the incision up to where it appears on the skin.
Then make that also in the middle fissure up to another fissure.
And after an equal amount of blood has flowed out, express the areas from the congealed blood clots.
Then place a linen cloth from old cotton into every fissure, and put over them poultices soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar. And take care that no warm abscess does not occur.
And on the third day, untie the bandage, and administer a great many infusions with warm water. Then take care of that with balsam ointment and the other things by which wounds are healed, until it is cured.
Chapter 5.
Of the cure for sharp tears and catarrhs to the eyes from internal head afflictions.
When someone is afflicted with sharp, severe, and constant catarrhs, and you see their eyes are sunken, small, and already weakened in appearance; and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out from them, and there is a sharp, piercing pain deep within the head, causing suffering and subsequent sneezing: then take action against these afflictions, those materials which do not come forth except through many veins.
And the better cure for them is this. And it is, that you should order the ailing person to shave his forehead. Then cut into one groove in the middle of the forehead, or another slightly narrower on either side, and start with the incision from the left temporal to the right temporal area: and make the incision up to the bone. And stretch out your hand away from the temporal bones which move during mastication, until when the bone is exposed, and dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with a hot cautery, or with linen strips soaked in lard. Then tie it on top with wool threads; and soak the wool threads with wine and oil, so that a hot abscess does not occur.
And when you loosen it and see that the hot abscess is already subsiding: then it is necessary to burn the bone until flesh begins to grow on it.
Then care for it with a regimen of cauterization that causes flesh to grow: just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and prepare an ointment from them, and administer it to the growth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter VI.
Of the treatment for that which falls on the Ear.
All that falls into the Ear is of one or four kinds: either a mineral stone, or like a stone, such as iron and glass; or it is from a plant, such as beans and peas; or it is a flowing substance, such as water, vinegar, and similar things; or some animal.
When then something falls into the ear that is a stone or a type of stone which does not accumulate or grow inside the ear, simply expose the ear to air. But if you see a stone, then distill something from violet oil or sassafras into the ear. Then administer the extraction of it, and cause to sneeze with condiment, and plug the nostrils at the advent of sneezing, after you put a wad of cloth or wool in the ear canal and stretch the ear upwards.
For this treatment often issues forth.
But if it does not issue forth, then administer the extraction of it with gestures, that is, with small pizzicaroli; whose form is this.
So if it issues forth with gestures, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction of it with a small blind hook of slight duplication.
So if it does not issue forth through that, then make a catheter from air, and insert the end of the catheter into the ear canal far in, and plug what is inside the catheter's circumference with a soft wax candle mixed with oil, so that there is no passage except for the catheter: then draw out with your strong wind attraction.
For this often issues forth as we have narrated. But if it does not issue forth in this way: then take from the helkalimbat, or from the veso, that is, prepared glue with which birds are caught, a moderate amount; and place it at the end of the ear canal after you have wrapped a decent-sized cloth around it; then insert it into the ear opening with ease, after you have dried the ear of moisture.
But if it does not issue forth with all that we have narrated, then hasten to divide it, before a hot abscess or spasms occur.
And the method of incision is, that you should make a small wound first in the cephalic part, and then draw out from it according to the measure of its strength. Then make the patient sit between your hands, and turn their ear upwards, and find a small wound in the root of the ear at the fatty part of it in the depressed place itself: and let the wound be of a lunar shape until you reach the stone; then take out the stone along with what is possible to you from the instruments.
Then close up the wound with speed from your own hour and cure it, until it is healed.
If something falls into the ear that grows and swells from one grain of wheat: then perform an extraction of it.
But if it does not yield to you at the exit, then take a thin, subtle spatula, according to this shape.
And administer with it the removal of that type of grain from the grains that fall into the ear, and do not do it when you think that grain is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you place many poultices: then remove them with a hook or with a thin probe or by suction, as we said, for the removal of it will be facilitated.
However, when the water enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use gentle blowing with condiments first; and now he has filled his ear with a little cooked old fat; and he lies on top of that ear where there is water. If it then comes out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many small stones, according to the length of a finger, thin and soft, and warm them with fire for a little while, and the patient should insert one of them into the ear canal of his own ear; and let him sit on one foot from that side, and strike another stone against the stone that is in the ear. And therefore do not cease to do that with stone and stone, until all the water comes out.
And now that the water comes out so, you take a papyrus or a reed, and insert one end of it into the ear; and light the other end with fire, until most of it is burned. Then take another reed and do that many times, until all the water comes out; and remove it with a cannula, as was previously mentioned in the stone.
In extracting an animal that has entered the body, if it is a small creature like a flea and similar to one, treat it as I said in division.
But if it is a large creature of the body that appears to the senses: then administer its extraction with a gesture and a hook; and its outcome is easier for all those held in the ear.
In extracting a worm that has been generated in the ear, when you treat it as we said in division and in the treatise on distillations, and your treatment does not help: then you must look at the ear to the sun. If therefore something appears there from worms, then extract it with a gesture or with fine hooks.
But if nothing appears there, then take a cannula, of this shape, constricted below, broad above; and insert the thin end into the ear according to the quantity that an invalid can tolerate it: then suck with it using strong suction. Do that many times until all the worms go out.
But if they do not obey you to come out, then smear the rim of the cannula with wax, as I said in stone.
But if they do not come out with what we said: then administer the distillations which ancient ones have experienced in the destruction of worms; and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
And let your flow be as when you pour oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose shape is depicted here. As you see, make it from silver or bronze, constricted below, with a small hole, broad above.
So let the pushing thing that is in the concavity of the cannula be made of bronze well done. And if you wish, take a thread and wrap it around the end of it with a decent wrapping: then pour oil, or sap, or what you like from those medicines into the cannula: and let it be in the ear: then insert the thread with the wrapped part above, and express it with your hand compression moderated, until the oil is pushed into the concavity of hearing, and the invalid feels it inside: and that which is poured into the ear should now be warmed with fire for a little while: and beware lest what is distilled in it be very cold: medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter 7.
About the care for accidental injury of gold.
Sometimes, certain infants emerge from their mothers' wombs not perforated.
And it also happens to some people that a piece of flesh is torn out from the ear due to a wound or born with it.
And this piece of flesh sometimes forms in the deep hole of the ear which is not visible; and sometimes it occurs near the outside of the hole and is visible.
Therefore, that which occurs in the deep ear and is not comprehended by sight is difficult to heal in many cases.
And for that which is visible, it is necessary to place the ear of the injured person in the sun and look at it. Then, if you see the piece of flesh appearing, open it with a small, thin spatula whose shape is as follows: its end should be slightly indented, with some part being sharp; and the rest of the spatula should be smooth on both sides, so that it does not hurt the ear.
If the piece of flesh is born with the ear, then take it with a small hook and cut it off with great ease until all the flesh is removed.
What if the piece of flesh is in the deep ear? Then take a thin, smooth reed and warm it with fire for a little while. Then put it into the ear.
If you feel the piece of flesh with that which the patient finds with heaviness of hearing, try to open it gently and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
Then place a lint dressing in the ear according to the size of the hole that you wrapped with Egyptian ointment. Make it last for several days until you are certain of the wound's consolidation.
Or take lint and soak it in rose water, then powder zege over it, and use it.
If you see the ear already suppurating: then it is necessary to remove the linen, and let it be wrapped with another linen that has been dipped in a mixture made with cerate mixed with rose oil, until the supuration cools down: then take care of it until it heals.
But if a flow of blood occurs: then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear: and apply the remaining treatment which stops the flow of blood as described in the treatise on distillations.
The cure for Althel's eyelids.
Chapter 8.
These Altheli which occur on the eyelids of the eyes, are sometimes moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore, you should remove them with tweezers or a forceps, and cut them off at the roots. Then place powdered zinc on the affected areas.
But if blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine lenticular cautery.
And it is better to cauterize them after the incision. For they often return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, the roots are burned away and do not return.
The cure for eyelid granulations of the eye.
Chapter 9.
Many times something occurs on the eyelids which is similar to a granulation in its strength and toughness, and because of this it is named Granum: and it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid.
Therefore, the operation is to examine whether it is a Granum that proceeds from it, which appears on the eyelid and moves in all directions, and its nature is easy.
Find therefore a split or incision over it along its length. Then strip it from every part with ease, until it comes out. Then hang it with a hook, and cut it off.
But if the cutting of it is not prepared for you, except after you have pierced the eyelid with a slight incision, then it may cause harm to the invalid.
But if the wound is great: then gather it together with a suture and take care of it until it heals.
And if it's small, no evil will befall you from it. For ointment restores it and fleshes it out.
And if the stone is inclined towards the inner part of the ear, towards the internal surface, then turn back the eyelid and hang the stone with a hook; besides which you will need an incision, and press it from every part.
For if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, it does not cause harm to anything.
Then wash the eye after the stone's incision, with salted water; and take care of the place with what fleshes it out, until the invalid is healed.
About the cure of Axirnath eyelids.
Chapter X.
Axirnath is a fatness that is generated in the eyelids of the upper eye lid; and it happens to children most of all: and it weighs down their eyes, and occasions them to have cataracts in the mornings, and they cannot gaze at the light of the sun, therefore, because tears press towards them, and for this reason you see them lying down on their faces always, and sleeping on them, and their eyelids are under their eyebrows damp, which has already been covered by swelling: and the Axirnath itself is indeed visible to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel the Axirnath between them.
And the method of operating on it is, that the invalid puts his head in your bosom.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare it with oil of linden, and make from it an ointment circle according to the quantity that contains Axirnath from all sides. Then place it on top of it and press with your fingers all around, so that the Axirnath may gather in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a spatula incidentally splitting fissures by width, and let not that fissure be greater which is made in phlebotomy in depth.
Or it is necessary for you to split the skin entirely, until you reach the Axirnath, for indeed Axirnath proceeds from the fissure according to the shape of white fatty excrescence.
Therefore extract it with the cloth which you had inserted between your fingers at the exterior: and turn your hand to the right and left until it disperses: and beware, lest you add to the fissure, so that you do not come with the spatula to the eye and hurt it.
But if Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, then add a little to the fissure with ease, until Axirnath proceeds. Then extract it, as we have said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them over the spot, and bind it with wool.
And there are men who rub salt, and place it in the concavity of the fissure, so that what remains of that moisture may dissolve.
Then take care of it, until it heals.
But if an ulcerated sore occurs on the spot, then care for it with soothing poultices, until it heals.
Of the methods of Ataxmir for the eyes, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft and the eye is inflamed, so that it is red as if it should not be.
Here is the translation:
When eyebrows grow excess hairs that are added besides the natural course under natural hairs, and they age: then they harm the eye, and cause various kinds of afflictions to occur, such as constant tearing, softening of the eyelids, and a white haze, until it leads to the destruction of the eye.
And indeed the eyesight is cured according to four modes. Or by cauterization with fire. Or with acute medicine, according to what has been set forth in the chapter on cauterization. Or Ataxmir is cured by incision and stitching. Or by cannulas, according to what I shall say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient on your shoulder. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it is turned, it is good. And if not: insert the needle into it, where the thread is from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle pierce through with the thread above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, where hairs grow: and pull the thread up to the upper part with the eyelid, and turn it with the finger.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid, under the added hairs, with a spatula coming from the larger tear duct down to the smaller one.
Then pull out the thread and place a small poultice made of cloth or linen under the eyelid; then mark on top of the eyelid with an encaustum, so that it is like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the figure be made according to the size and elevation of the eyelid; for that already differs among people.
For some of these people are those who need the quantity to be cut from the eyelid which is excessive and softens the eyelid.
Then when you find the spot on the skin above two lines which you marked, and begin from the larger tear duct to the smaller one, and let there be a split one near the natural hairs, as is the thickness of the radius.
Then insert the hook into one of the two corners of the skin. Then scrape off the whole thing. Then gather the edges with a suture, using a needle and fine wool thread; and wipe away the blood, and make what remains from the threads stick to the two eyebrows, with certain substances applied, if you wish to do so; and if not, don't bother.
Then let go of the suture and thread for three days or four: afterwards take care of it.
And if you wish, let the wound heal without a suture, and care for it with something that dries and tightens. For the eyelid is raised in cases of cicatrization and its gathering; but it will be better in the future.
The ancient people taught this method of treating wounds.
However, there is concern for the patient who is weak, and it comes from good workmanship, and there is no fear.
And another method is also in Ataxmir: and it is, to mark signs on the eyelid in the shape of a figure like that of a myrtle leaf, as we have narrated.
Then lift the eyelid with three separate or gathered hooks, according to this shape which follows; then cut off what is superfluous with small scissors, according to this shape, with equal cutting.
But if it is not possible for you to hold the hook and it does not match that; then take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the figure: and insert the thread one near the larger tear duct, and the second near the smaller tear duct: and gather between your fingers the threads with equality.
Then lift up your hand with an equal elevation; and lift up the skin over that which is marked out, as we have narrated.
Then gather together the two edges of the wound with a suture; and take care of it until it heals.
If, however, an abscess should occur at your incision or your cut, cover that abscess with cerate and similar substances, such as ointments soothing to the skin.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelids also turn outward, so that its hairs are turned in the opposite direction.
Therefore you should use what we said about incision on it, but with sutures it is more artificial. Of the care of Ataxmir with reeds.
And so, you will turn back the eyelid and cut through the cleft that is inside, as I narrated. Then make two reeds or two thin sticks by art, whose length will be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width will be less than the width of a spatula: and you have already cut at the extremities on both sides from both parts where you hold the threads.
Then gather both of them with subtlety above what protrudes from the eyelid of the eye, and tie the two reeds tightly on both sides with a strong tightening, and let it be for several days. For a tight skin will die, and become blackened, and rotten, until it falls off by itself.
If then it is delayed, then cut it with forceps. Then take care of it until it heals.
When it has consolidated, the eyelid will be lifted up: and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two reeds which you will make according to this shape and quantity in length and width.
Here is the translation:
Of the elevation of stinging hairs in the eye with a needle.
Operation is this: you take a fine needle and insert into it a thin silk thread, smooth. Then gather up its ends and tie both with a very fine knot: and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then compose another fine thread under it in a short space, and tie up its ends if you wish.
Then the patient should place his head on your lap, and let it be near the sun, that the operation may be revealed: for this is a subtle or minute operation.
Then insert the needle with the thread into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid until you pull it out above a natural hair.
Then pull the hair up to the thread: and insert into the thread that hair, if it is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair comes out with the thread into the eyelid along with a natural hair.
But if the thread is pulled and the hair does not come out with it: pull the thread downwards with the thread that you composed in it, until the thread comes out from the upper opening, and you will see it with your own eyes: then indeed pull the thread and the filament; and extract both, and shut the eye; and let it be closed for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place, and flesh grows over it.
And if the hair is short, then either join a long hair from natural hairs to it, and lift it up with it; or leave it alone until it lengthens after some time, and then lift it.
XIII.
When this Alxatrati happens to an eye, it is called Leporina.
And this is Al-Khatarat, either natural or accidental.
Therefore it is accidental, arising from the closure of a wound, or a section, or a cauterization, and similar things to those.
And the method of treatment for it is that you find this closure, and separate its lips, and place a linen cloth between them, and bind it until it heals.
And it is not necessary to use things that dry and constrict for its treatment, for if you do that, Al-Khatarat will worsen than it was. Instead, use things that soften, such as linseed: and mix it with water in which althea seeds have been cooked; and apply a balm of dyaquilon, which has been mixed with some oil; and wrap it with a linen cloth, and care for it with this.
And your treasure of treatment is to strive with all one's ingenuity so that it may not be consolidated, according to its original shape.
And this operation which we have described is nothing but a correction of Al-Khatarat so that it does not return to its original shape entirely.
About the treatment of Al-Khatarat which occurs in the lower eyelid and is a wrinkling or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter XIV.
This Al-Khatarat which occurs below is what is truly called Al-Khatarat. And it is both natural and accidental.
And it is accidental, arising from a wound, or a fissure, or a cauterization, and similar things to those.
And the method of treatment for it is that you take a needle with a thread double, and wet it in flesh, and make it penetrate from the left lachrymal to the right lachrymal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh upwards with a needle, and cut it with a wide spatula. If therefore the figure of the eyebrow is restored as it should be, that is good.
And if not, take a reed, and place it in the cleft, and turn with it the eyebrow; and make two clefts on the inner side of the eyebrow, and let the ends of the two clefts be at the two angles of the incision, until they meet and form an angle: until when they are gathered together, this figure will result, and it is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh by as much as its lower acute side is below the eyebrow. Then gather the separated parts: or sew it with a thread of wool.
Then care for them with what we said about softening medicines and liquid ones, until they heal.
And if the flesh becomes inflamed from the cleft or suture or cautery: then it is necessary to make a flat incision beneath the hairs of the eyelids, even as before. Then separate the space between two lips with a liquid substance, according to what we said.
And the summary of the speech about treating Alxatrati is this: when it occurs above or below, is that the operation should run in it according to how it is prepared from the form of Alxatrati.
For it itself is a many-colored thing in form: and the skilled craftsman prepares his skill by whatever means are possible to him, until he makes the figure return to its natural shape or nearly so, and even himself weakens according to how it suits him from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter 15.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the eye with conjunctiva or cornea.
At times this consolidation occurs in many people, so that the upper eyelid becomes consolidated with the white of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, you should insert the tip of the radius under the eyelid and lift it up: or extend it with a hook: then cut away the adhesion with a thin spatula, but not so sharp as to cause harm to the sick person during the operation. Rather, let the spatula be slightly dull for a little while, so that the patient is not disturbed by the procedure, and you remove the spatula, and do not injure the eye with its sharpness: and your incision should be like excising that adhesion with ease, until the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the entire adhesion is healed.
Then pour salt water into the eye, washing it clean with water: or let it drip onto it from a piece of sief-made, dissolved with water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a linen cloth: and place over the eye a woolen cloth infused with lamb's white: and after three days, use sief, and with solidified substances, until it heals.
About the cutting of the nail and the excrescence of flesh tears.
Chapter XVI.
Know that a nail is according to two modes. Or it is nerve-like: and is similar to a piece of sief, hard and subtle. Or it is not nerve-like, similar to frozen white moisture: which when touched by iron, or is grasped with a hook, is cut off, and the hook does not stick into it.
And both kinds do not begin, unless from the larger tear, until it gradually goes away, until it covers the sight, and prevents light, and movement of the eye.
And the method for cutting it is: that the patient places his head on your shoulder. Then open his eyes and lift up his eyelid with your hand. Then grasp the nail with a hook of moderate thickness, and stretch it upwards. Then take an awl and insert a bristle from the mane of a horse, or ox, or goat: and let the thread be strong, and double the extremity of the awl for a little while, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and pierce it with the awl, and tie it with the thread the nail, and stretch it upwards: and scrape off with a bristle the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were sewing it with a bristle up to its posterior.
Then cut away the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with a fine forceps or small scissors: and let the natural flesh of the tear duct be left, so that no continuous flow of tears may occur as a result of the incision.
And sometimes the nail is extended with a hook alone, or with a thread, as we said. Then scrape off with a gentle forceps whose shape this is.
And beware that the forceps does not touch the horned tunica, lest there be a tear and the pupil is perforated.
Then after the incision, throw something crushed salt into the eye, or made from juniper, and let it remain until another day. Then care for it with what is needed until it heals.
But if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert an awl into it, nor does a hook fit into it, then this kind of nail is often cured with medicines, and heals as I narrated in the division.
But if you wish to cut it, then open the eye of the patient and take a fine, gentle, blunt forceps, with this shape. And scrape the nail above with smoothness and subtlety. And if you see that it is rarefied and broken off, and leaves an impression on it, then drip from your hour onto the eye made with juniper or red powder, or crushed salt: and close the eye until another day.
Then proceed over that same operation until everything is removed from it. Unless the opposite eye has a hot abscess: then indeed leave that one alone and cure the abscess until it heals.
Then proceed with the operation on that one with caution, until it is healed.
However, if the prominence of the eyelid flesh causes great harm to the eye, it should be suspended with a hook and cut off from that part; and do not make the incision too long so that the flow of tears does not occur.
Then treat the tear duct whether it is red or made from zinc, until it heals.
Of the incision of Alguardenic and the flesh born in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
It sometimes happens in certain people's eyes that red flesh is formed, either composed or superimposed, until it covers the pupil, approaches, or stretches over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward: and it resembles a rose bush.
And the operation in that case is also to have the weak person place their head in your bosom. Then open his eyes and gather up that whole flesh with suitable hooks; and hold it with one forceps or instrument.
Then cut the flesh first, until the entire thing is finished with a cutting tool. And beware of the eye so that you do not harm it during the operation; and let your cut be such as you make it, or with a spatula, as we narrated in the cutting of the nail: or with small forceps, with which the abscess is gathered, according to how its shape will come after this chapter.
When therefore your cutting is complete and the Alguardenic is removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt: or distill into it red powder, and similar things from corrosive medicines; and place a covering of wool with egg white on top of the eye to secure it from hot abscess.
If something remains from the almond gall and hot blood dominates you, and you fear a hot abscess; then let go of the eye and care for it with that which soothes the abscess.
Then proceed over it with an operation until it is healed.
And do the same with added flesh that occurs in the eye of this kind.
However, it is necessary that you let others treat a weak eye from a natural or accidental cause by means of iron, and do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member can tolerate that treatment.
Of the Collection of Pus from the Eye.
Chapter 18.
Pus are red veins that form over the eye and prevent their own operation; and they weaken the eye with the passage of days.
Therefore, it is necessary for you first to consider whether the eye that has pus is strong and not troubled by any illness other than the pus; then collect its pus.
And it is necessary for you to instruct the weak one to place their head on your lap.
Then suspend those veins with one or two hooks, according to your discretion; and the hook should be thin and of double plaiting, in this shape, or there should be two hooks gradually arranged in one body, in this shape.
Then collect those veins with fine forceps, with subtlety, and wash away the blood an hour after the hour, until you see those veins removed from the eye and dissolved; and beware not to injure the eye with the sharp edges.
And let your operation be at noon before the sun, and be very firm in your operation so that you do not cut anything but those veins.
And when you have finished, then pour into the eye whether green or red, so that its sharpness may corrode what remains of the pus.
If it is not possible for you to gather all of that in one hour, then bind the eye with a poultice that soothes the pain of the eye: and let him be for some days until the pain subsides: and keep it safe from warm apostema. Then go back over it in the same way until he is healed.
And this is the form of a forceps.
About reducing an arrow to the nose.
Chapter 19.
The doctor of the arrow wound, which is treated with a cauter or a burning medicine that cuts sharply, according to what has been told beforehand.
And if it does not heal, then there is no talent in it: unless you lay something over the suppurating abscess at its birth and remove all the moisture that is in it and pus, until the mouth is uncovered.
When therefore the mouth is uncovered, and you see in it a corruption or blackness, then scrape it away with an instrument whose form is this.
And it is called Scapocephalus.
Make it from iron hardened in the fire, and let its head be rounded like an asher, which is pierced with a fine file point or a delicate file point: and place it over the corrupted bone site.
Then turn it back between your fingers and press your hand on it for a moment, until you know that the corruption has already been scraped away: and do this several times.
Then restore the place with medicinal astringents and styptics.
If therefore the place is consolidated and flesh grows in it, and the course of healing runs its natural course: and remains for forty days, and does not renew itself, nor suppurate, nor any accident befall it: then you will know that it has already been healed.
And if not, then there is no talent in it, unless you reduce the abscess to the nasal opening, according to this form.
And it is, that you remove from bone second with iron, or with sharp medicine: and when the bone is detected, then take a chisel second in this form, having an iron extremity, triangular; and the wood of it be a narrowed pyramid down to the extremity, as you see.
Then place that on the bone itself: and let it be near the tear duct; and extend your hand a little from the eye. Then revolve your hand with the chisel, until it penetrates the bone, and feels weak by it; because it finds air to come out of it, when he holds his hand above his nose.
Therefore then restore the place with drying medicines, as I taught you.
When therefore flesh grows and the place hardens: then the matter that was flowing outward returns to the nose: so it is lighter on the sufferer.
Paragraph on the Reduction of an Elevation of the Eye.
Chapter 20.
When the Eye protrudes with its entirety and does not cause harm or diminution to vision: then it is necessary to release the sufferer: afterwards bleed him: afterward place poultices on his neck without scarification, but with suction.
Then place a liniment above the Eye that is made from acacia, and aloe, and galbanum, and sarcocola. Then bind the Eye on top with a plaster having many wool fibers.
And the method of wool fibers is: take soft cloths, many, and double each cloth with four of them; make many from them; then place one on top of another, according to the size needed by the Eye; then bind above them with a strong strap.
And repeat poultices with suction without scarification.
Then remove the poultices and leave the eye bound day and night.
If however the ligament becomes soft again, then it is necessary to tighten it much. Then remove the ligament after day and night, just as we said.
If then you see the eye has returned to its skin layer, that is good. And if not, then apply another poultice, and swellings, and tightening, and windings, until it heals.
Chapter on Cutting the Skin Layer of the Eye.
Chapter 21.
When a disruption occurs in the skin layer of the eye, then it protrudes and proceeds outside the eyelids like an eye granule, and disfigures the human form because of it, and one wants to cut it out: then the operation is in that, according to what I will say: and it is, to insert a needle into the root of the eye from the lower part to the upper part.
Then insert another needle into which there is a double thread from the tear-duct side, and make it penetrate; and let the first needle follow its own course.
Then cut the place of the double thread, and tie with it the part of the eye around the needle; and tighten it much.
Then pull out the needle, and place a thread soaked in the whites of an egg over the eye; and leave it until the thread falls off with the skin.
Then care for the eye with that, which comforts it, until the wound heals.
And sometimes tighten the skin of the eye all around with a bandage of cloth, until the eye becomes greatly prominent.
Then perforate it with a thin spatula that reaches to the depth of the eye, and let the whitish humor flow, and let the eye go down, and enter immediately; then tighten it until it heals.
Chapter on Curing an Alconmat.
Chapter 22.
This affliction which is called an Alconmat is not anything except a discharge that gathers in the eye, similar to water flowing down, and it is not itself.
And the method of operation in that case is, that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat or a direct one.
Then take his head in your hands from both sides, and move it until you see blood reaching the lower eyelids with your eyes. Then it is fixed and does not descend, and the light is blocked: and let the patient see things as he used to see them; and if it does not go down below, you will know that it is water.
But if it is not prepared to descend with the bleeding as we said, then make the patient sit between your hands. Then take a thin splinter and insert it with him above the fatty fold for a short time at the junction of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic on the crown, until the bleeding goes out.
When it has gone out, then pour warm water into the eye that you mixed with honey: or water in which you have boiled Greek hay and honey: then take care of him with the rest of the treatment until he is healed.
About the cure for water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter 23.
Now we have spoken of the kind of water for dividing and what is suitable for piercing, as explained and demonstrated by speech; then take that same thing according to health.
Then it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands square, opposite to the light, near the sun; and bind his eye with a bandage, and pull him tightly; then cover the eyelid of his eye with your right hand if the water-filled eye is on the left: or with your left hand if the eye is on the right.
Then take your right hand as a bandage if the eye is left: or your left hand as a bandage if the eye is right.
Then place the end of the bandage near the crown at the thickness of the radius on the apparent whiteness of the small tear gland of the eye; then push the bandage with force: and you revolve with him your hand, until it penetrates into the white of the eye: and feel that the bandage has already reached the empty space.
And it is necessary that there be a measure of the path to the depth, a measure of space from the pupil to the end of blackness: and this is the crown of the eye. You will see these things in the very vision of the eye itself, on account of the brightness of the corneal tunic.
Then place the almagda up to the point where there is water. Then press it downwards with one stroke after another.
If therefore the water flows down immediately, then the invalid will see that thing which opens his vision immediately, and the almagda is in his eye.
Then rest a little while. If therefore the water flows down, then remove it secondly, except that the almagda goes out.
When therefore it is fixed and does not rise: then extract the almagda with ease: and you revolve your hand slowly.
Then dissolve something from clear salt of a gem in water: and wash the eye inwardly with it. Then place all of this stuff outside the eye, or wool infused with rose oil and egg whites: and bind it to a healthy eye.
But we, and those who are of our time, place upon it pounded cinnamon with egg white.
And if the almagda does not obey you at all in entering the eye because of its hardness, since it is made by men whose eyes are very hard: then it is necessary that you take a spatula-like thing which is called Alberid, and this is its shape.
Therefore join it to him with a connecting piece just so much, and do not put your hand too far into the opening: and it is only necessary that you make a way for the almagda to its subtle place.
Then introduce the almagda, as we said.
And at the completion of your work, prepare for the invalid a well-made bedchamber, in which he will sleep on his back in a dark room; and let him be prevented from all movements, and from coughing: and give him that food which soothes his nature: and do not allow him to move his head at all to the right or left.
And let it be a ligament according to its own arrangement until the third day.
Then loosen that in that dark house and test the appearance of it: and make him see things. Then reduce the ligament to its original state until the seventh day.
And it is not fitting for him to do that at the hour of healing or immediately after the incision: rather, let someone else do it: because water rises quickly through a violent appearance.
But if a warm abscess occurs: then it is fitting that you loosen the eye before the seventh day: and straighten it with what calms the abscess, until it is calmed: then release his sight, and place over his face an oral device by which his vision may be regulated for several days, while he remains in that dark house.
Then let him go out from the house gradually and turn back to his own tents.
And know that in greenery a student is not excused from sight several times: then indeed he may venture upon the operation.
And now indeed one has come to us from those who are of Alayrach, who said that in Alayrach a perforated Magdan was made, through which water is sipped.
But I did not see anyone on your land who did that: nor do I read it in any of the old books: and it is possible that it may be new.
And these are forms of species from Magdan, so that they stand over those who do not know them.
Let them be made from bronze properly: and let their extremities be with this same subtlety triangular, and the acute end.
Chapter XXIV.
¶ About the care of a nasal polyp.
Sometimes there arise in the nose diverse added flesh, from which is something that resembles a scorpion with many feet: and from it is the cancerous, stony, reddish flesh; and from it is what is soft, not reddish.
So then, on the person who has a wound from these meats that is gentle, not deceitful, nor cancerous, it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands opposite the sun, and open their nostrils, and put a hook in those fleshy parts: then draw them outwards, and cut off what you have taken with a thin, sharp scalpel from one side, until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
And if something remains of which removal is not possible: then scrape that off with one of the fine instruments with ease, until nothing remains from it. But if blood rules over you, or a warm abscess occurs: then place what is needed opposite it; or if it is from malicious abscesses, then hasten to cauterize it, until the blood ceases and all flesh is removed.
Then a mixture of vinegar, water, or wine should be poured into the nose after the incision. If however the nose opens and moisture proceeds from it all the way to the palate, then you will know that he is already healthy.
If however moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that within him is flesh that has grown in the upper bones of the nose, to which the cutting instrument did not reach.
Then it is necessary that you insert a linen thread with some thickness and tie many knots in it: and place between every knot the length of a finger or less: and let the patient, as he will, put one end of the thread into his nose with a reed or whatever means possible for him after he has done so similarly to ease: and draw out his mucus, until it reaches the throat and comes out over his tongue.
And many people indeed do this similar to that young boy Attomus in schools: and it is an easy thing for one who wants.
Then place two ends of the thread, one that goes out above the nose and the other that remains on the nose. Then tie the thread around the flesh with knots which are found in the thread. Do that until you know that the flesh is now tied with the knots of the thread.
Then pull out the thread and put it in the nose after bleeding has stopped, with the licorice that you have soaked in Egyptian ointment. Do this for three days or more, until the ointment has seeped into all that remains of the flesh.
Then put a lead tube at the end of it in the nose, for several days, until it heals.
But if it needs drying treatment, use that one.
To make a cupping instrument for the head, by which oils and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make one from silver or bronze, which is similar to a small lamp, open like a shell, and its channel similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube, like a reed.
And the bowl of the instrument for cupping should be full and open, with a handle at its end, by which you will hold it when you heat oil or what you want from resin and flowing substances in it.
Chapter 25.
A boil often arises at the end of the nose and grows, increasing with days, until its appearance becomes foul.
And because of this, it is necessary to cut off that boil at the beginning of its appearance and root out all of it. Then place something over the spot, or a cautery, or a medicine that burns where it is.
If then the cutting off of it is delayed until it grows large, then consider whether it is hard, rough, and has a dull color, with little sensation; then do not touch it with iron, because it is a cancerous abscess.
I have often seen someone who had cut open an abscess on himself and as a result suffered great harm to himself.
And if the abscess is a gentle touch, not of deep color, and you see that cutting it open is possible throughout its entire extent, then empty the patient, and cut into it without fear, without anxiety: and care for the place with what cleanses and constricts, until he is healed.
Book 26.
On the Suture of the Nose, Lip, and Ear.
You should know that when there is a separation of continuity in one of these cartilages, this operation is not very helpful unless it occurs in some people.
Therefore, when something happens to someone from that, you should consider whether it is a fresh wound with its own blood. And then gather the edges of the wound with a suture, and care for it until he is healed.
And if the separation of continuity has already occurred and each part is now healed, then you should remove all visible parts from their skin until it bleeds. Then gather the two lips together with a suture and tie them up, and sprinkle superimposed on it dragon's blood powder and powdered olibanum: and place above the powders a piece of diaphanic plaster or another consolidated plaster, and let him be bound for two days or three. Then loosen it and change the medicine, and let him go until the threads fall off by themselves. Then care for him with an ointment until he is healed.
The method of suturing is to gather the separation of continuity either with hooks, as we have described in the suturing of the belly: or to gather the separation with a thread, as I have made you know.
Book 27.
On the Extraction of Lip Knots.
To many people indeed, swellings similar to grains of herbs occur in the inner parts of their lips, some being smaller and others being larger.
Therefore, it is necessary to turn the lip, and search over every knot of it, and suspend it with a hook, and cut it from all parts.
Then fill the place after the incision with powdered papyrus, until the blood is stopped.
Then apply vinegar to it and treat the place where there is inflammation, until the wounds are healed.
Book XXVIII.
On the incision of the flesh growing over the gum.
Much flesh grows above the gum, which the ancients called abuluss.
Therefore, it is necessary to suspend it with a hook or hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, and allow the pus or blood to flow.
Then place powdered papyrus or other astringent powders on the spot.
For if that flesh returns after treatment, for it often does return, then cut it again and cauterize it; it will not return after cauterization.
Book Twenty-Nine.
On the filing of Teeth with Iron.
Sometimes they gather on the surfaces of teeth from both inner and outer parts, and between the gums rough, foul, and yellowish crusts form; sometimes they are worn away, and become bright green, until that corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth are made foul by it.
Therefore, it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands, and his head in the hollow of your shoulder, and file and trim the tooth in which you see crusts resembling sand; until nothing remains of them, and similarly do this for blackness, greenishness, and yellowness, and other things until they are cleaned.
If then what is in them is taken away from the beginning of reason, it is good: and if not, then iterate over them a reason on another day, the second, and third, until finally reaches the study in that which you wish.
And know that the tooth needs razors of diverse forms, many figures: according to how you prepare your operation: therefore, because the razor with which you scrape away the tooth from the lower part is one thing, and the razor with which you scrape between teeth is another, in other forms.
And those forms of razors should be prepared by you, as you see them.
Chapter 30.
Of the extraction of toothaches.
You should cure the tooth from its pain with all your skill and delay in removing it. For it is not as if its place can be filled when it is removed: since it is a high substance: until then, when there is no excuse for removing it, then you should remove it when the weak person is compelled to do so, in order that he may be strengthened and assured before you about the painful tooth.
For indeed many times the pain deceives the weak person and makes him think that it is in the toothache and removes it: then the pain does not cease until the tooth is removed from the weak person.
For we have already seen this from the operation of bloodletters.
When then the painful tooth itself is certified to you, it is necessary that scarifices be made around the tooth with a spatula, in which there is something of power, until the gum is loosened from all parts: then move it with your fingers, or with fine forceps at first slowly, until you shake it.
Then place the large forceps in a good location on it, and have the head of the weak person between your knees, which you have already held firmly so that it does not move: then pull out the tooth according to its straightness, so as not to break it.
If therefore it does not emerge, then take one of those instruments and introduce it under him from all parts with ease, and try to move it as you did at first.
But if the tooth is perforated or corroded: then you must fill that hole with cloth and tie it with the end of a thin reed so that it does not break during your constriction upon it with forceps.
And you must be careful to cut with scarification all around the gum from every side a great deal.
And guard your strength so that you do not break it and a part of it remains, and return to the suffering person from the greater evil which is more painful at first.
And beware that you do not do what ignorant cuppers do in their haste and the boldness of theirs towards its removal, besides what we have narrated.
For they often cause harm to people's great infirmities, which are more difficult to break and for all the roots of it to remain, or some of them; or for them to extract it with certain bones of the jawbone: as we have testified many times about this.
Then it should be washed after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
What if bleeding occurs from the places (which often happens) then take something from alum and fill it with that in the place; and if not, cauterize it if alum does not seem useful to you.
The forms of fine forceps with which the tooth is moved at first should be long on their extremities, short on their handles, thick so that they do not bend when pressed upon a tooth: let them be like those you see of gross handles until when you tie them up, they do not bite themselves nor bend: with short extremities and made of tempered iron or well-made bronze, with straight extremities: and in their extremities should be teeth, some of which enter into others and tighten with a decent, strong constriction.
And sometimes they become extremities like the form of a bird's beak that is called a ciconia, and are strong constrictions.
Chapter 31.
On the removal of teeth, and the extraction of fractured jaw bones.
When something remains to be removed from a tooth that is broken, then you should place a poultice with butter on the spot for one or two days, until the area becomes soft; then introduce into it an algast or forceps, whose tips are like the form of a bird's beak that is called a ciconia. The shape however is that of a forceps.
Let the extremities of these be made like a file inside, or like a rasping instrument.
So if it does not yield to you at the exit with these forceps, then you should, after having cut away the surrounding tissue, and exposing all the flesh, insert a small instrument called Palanca, which has this form.
Let the short extremity be slightly thickened, and not be too wet, so that it may not break.
So if the root emerges through this, it is good; and if not, you should help with other instruments which have these forms.
The form of the first instrument, a triangular extremity, with some thickness to it.
The form of the triangular extremity is fine.
And with other instruments and tools that have preceded in the filing of teeth.
And also it helps with this instrument which is like a great hook, having this shape, a twisted triangular extremity, with some thickness to prevent breaking, and not too wet.
And know that the instruments of teeth are many: and similarly, other instruments do not count, and a skilled craftsman, subtle in his art, finds an instrument for himself according to what the operation demands and the illness itself.
Since there are illnesses that ancient physicians did not mention and for which they did not invent an instrument, on account of the diversity of those diseases.
But if the bone is broken from the jawbone or from other bones of the mouth, or it has putrefied: then examine over it in its place with that which corresponds to it from the instruments and forceps I mentioned for extracting roots, and help with gestures, whose form is this.
Let something of roughness be applied gradually to it, so that it may bind or hold with the bone, and not flee away and go, until the bone comes out: and restore the place with medicines corresponding to it.
But if there is a small putrefaction in the bone, then scrape away from its putridity and cure it, until it heals.
Chapter 32.
On the removal of prominent teeth above others.
When prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and become foul because of this shape; and especially when it happens to women and girls, namely those with venereal afflictions.
It is necessary therefore that you consider. For if a tooth is born after another tooth and does not fit in place, or its removal or trimming is possible; then pull it out: and if it is connected to another tooth, then cut it off with this instrument, whose form is this.
It is like a small plow, and it is made from iron, very sharp at the end.
And let your cut be such that you cut it over many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that another one from the teeth is not disturbed.
But if it is prominent and exposed to its trimming: then trim it with a file from iron, whose form is this.
Let it be all of iron, and the handle of its small points very sharp, like a file with which needles are made: with which the tooth is slowly filed over many days with ease, so that the tooth does not become disturbed and falls; then gently polish it, and finally scrape it off with some rasps.
If there is a tooth that breaks off and injures the tongue, then it is necessary to trim it also, until the roughness of this fracture is removed and smoothed out.
Chapter 33.
On the Replacement of Teeth with Golden Threads.
When the front teeth are shaken and disturbed by impact or fall, and an invalid cannot hold what he has eaten without it falling out; and after treating them with medicinal washes, the treatment does not take effect: then there is a skill in them to be fastened with golden thread: because silver becomes green and putrid after days: but gold is never changed.
And let the thread be of a middle size, fine yet not too thin, according to its quantity that it can fit between the teeth.
And the form of the retension is, that you take a thread, and insert double its length between two healthy teeth: then weave it with both ends of the thread between the moving teeth, whether one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side. Then iterate the weaving until you reach the part where you started: and tie your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it does not come loose at all: and let your constriction be such that you bind the thread around the roots of the teeth, so that it does not slip out.
Then cut off the superfluous ends of the thread with scissors: and gather both together, and convert them with a knot: and hide them between the healthy tooth and the moving tooth, so that they do not injure the tongue: then let it be left tightly bound until it remains.
But if it comes undone or is cut, bind them with another thread and they will remain thus for the whole time.
And this is the form of teeth, and the figure of the retention of two healthy teeth, and two moving teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one tooth or two returns to its place after a fall of each in their own locations, and remain as we described, and are retained; and this only happens through the skillful, prudent, and experienced artisan.
And sometimes a piece of bone from the shin fits together; and it forms into the shape of a tooth, and is placed in its original location, secured by the tooth and bound tightly, as we said: and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter 44.
Sometimes this membrane that occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which a person is born, or accidental, resulting from a wound that has already healed.
And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient in your lap, and lift up his tongue; then cut that membrane-like ligament through its width, until the tongue is released from its constraint.
But if there is something hard and knotty in it, and that is due to the healing of a wound: then put a hook into it and find it through its width, until you cut the ligament and loosen the knot.
And beware that there is no tear in the depth of the flesh, and you do not cut an artery there, and a flow of blood occurs.
Then wash the incision with rose-water, or vinegar, or cold water.
Then put a linen cloth under the tongue, which the patient should wear every night: so that it does not consolidate again.
If however a flow of blood occurs, then put powdered vermilion over the place. If however the blood overflows, then cauterize the place with a lentil-like cautery that is suitable for it; then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter 35.
Sometimes an abscess occurs under the tongue, similar to a small frog, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function; and it may become so swollen that it fills the mouth.
And the operation in this case is to open the patient's mouth before the sun and examine the abscess.
If you see it to be dark-colored or black and hard, and the patient does not sense it; then do not touch it, because it is a tumor.
And if it is turned towards whiteness, and there is moisture in it; then throw a needle into it, and cut it with a thin scapel, and free it from all parts. What if blood flows from you during your operation hour; then place a powdered ligature on top of it, until the bleeding ceases: afterwards return to your operation and remove it with its contents.
Then bind it with vinegar and salt: and care for it with the remaining suitable treatment until it heals.
On the cure of abscesses of both tonsils.
Chapter 36.
Sometimes abscesses occur between the throat's glands, which are similar to those that occur outside and are called two tonsils; which when you cure with what we said earlier and they do not heal, then investigate.
If it is a hard abscess, dark-colored, with little sensation; then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red-colored and the root of it is thick: then do not touch it even with iron, fearing a flow of blood; rather let it be, until it matures. And then either pierce it or let it burst by itself.
And if it is white-colored, rounded, and the root of it is thin: then you should cut it.
And the operation is as follows: before performing your own operation, consider whether the apostema of that person has cooled down completely or decreased to some extent. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and have his head resting on your shoulder; open his mouth, and let a servant receive it between their hands, and press his tongue downwards with an instrument, which is shaped as follows.
Let it be made of silver or bronze, so that it is as fine as a knife.
When you press the tongue with it and the apostema is shown to you, and falls upon it according to your sight: then take a hook and fix it in the amygdule, and pull it out as far as you can, except that you draw something from the tunics along with it.
Then cut it with an instrument, which has the following shape: It is similar to pincers: however, its extremities should be curved, so that the opening of each one is in a straight line with the other's tip: therefore take care that it is made of tempered iron or horn.
But if this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatula, which has the following shape: Be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other.
And after you have cut one amygdule, cut the other one according to this same form of cutting.
Then after the cutting, the patient should gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
But if a bleeding occurs, he should gargle with water in which pomegranate rinds have been boiled: or with myrtle leaves and similar things from styptics, until the flow of blood ceases: then take care of him until he is healed.
And sometimes other apostemas are born in the throat, besides the two tonsils. Cut them therefore according to what I said about cutting the two tonsils equally.
And I myself was already treated for a woman suffering from an abscess that had developed between her throat and the chin, which pulled towards disfigurement, with few sensations, because it had almost closed off her throat: and the woman was breathing through a narrow passage, and had now forbidden her food and drink of water: and she had reached death's door if left for one or two days.
And the abscess had risen so far that it had discharged two branches until they emerged above two nostril openings.
I therefore hastened and fixed one of them with a hook. Then I pulled it out and removed a large portion from it.
Then I cut it off where it was grasped through the nostril opening.
Then I did that to her which had protruded from the other nostril opening.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; and afterwards I fixed the hook into the abscess; then I cut off a part from it, and only a small amount of blood flowed out: thus the woman's throat was cleared, and she began to drink water immediately, then received food.
So I did not cease to cut into that abscess many times over a long period of time; and the abscess succeeded in the place where I was cutting, until it was prolonged too far with it.
I therefore applied and cauterized the abscess between her throat.
It then ceased to increase: afterwards I walked away from it, and did not know what God had done with her after me.
Chapter on the cutting of a uvular abscess.
Chapter 37.
When the catarrh descends to the uvula and abscesses, and is long: then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part thick, round: then it is called uvula.
When it is cured with what we have said in the division, and the cure does not agree: and you see that the abscess has cooled down from it and becomes fine: then it is necessary to cut into it.
And what is attached to it being round, and it has no length, and is blood-red or dark-colored or black, and has no sensation: then one should make an incision on it. For there is fear in her over the weak.
Therefore, when you see her according to the manner I said from whiteness and length, make the weak person sit before the sun: and press his tongue with the instrument whose narration preceded: then place a hook in it, and pull her down below: and cut her with one of the two instruments which I mentioned for cutting both amigdalar.
And it is necessary that you do not cut from there unless what is added is above the natural limit without addition.
For if you cut too much from there, you will harm the voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use what we narrated for cutting both amigdalas: and take care of her until she is healed.
But if the patient is terrified by the incision, then you should use your skill in cauterizing him without fear and dread.
And the method of cauterization there is not, unless with sharp water: and it is, as you put the patient's head in your arm. Then press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned. Then take the water which I mentioned to you in the chapter on cauterizing, and fill with it a burnt hoof not extinguished, and put it not dense, nor thin, and fill from it the concavity of this instrument, whose shape is this.
Let its extremity be at the end where the medicine is placed, like the concavity of the ear canal of the radius.
And put the instrument with medicine on the same uvula: and let the patient lie down on his side, so that the saliva may flow from his mouth internally through the medicine, so that nothing from it descends to his throat and harms him.
Then take your hand with medicine. And you place it on the wound as much as a quarter of an hour, until you see it is already healed and the pungency of medicine is quieted.
And if you wish to take a ligature, and wrap it around the end of the radius, and pour medicine onto the ligature, and insert the radius with the ligature into the canal above, until the ligature adheres to the wound.
Do that many times, until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound. Then let it go: for it indeed dries up and falls off after three days, or four.
What if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it: and after cauterization, wash around the wound with a soaked ligature dipped in butter, and cleanse with what is on its circumference from the medicine: and anoint with cold water.
And treat it externally with ointments, and internally with gargles, until it heals.
Therefore this mode of treatment is more wholesome by an incision and longer in removing fear.
And sometimes the wound is also cured by something that is finer than caustic and incision: it is cured with fumigation, in this way. Take calament, and hyssop, and origanum, and rue, and sseah, and chamomile, and abrotanum, and similar herbs to these: and gather all of them together, or some of them in a pot, and submerge them with vinegar, and let them boil: and the pot should be coated with clay well: and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, above which an instrument will be placed according to this method.
Make it from silver or bronze: and insert the end, where there is a berry, into the mouth of the patient, until the vapor ascends to the wound above the canal, until the wound becomes very dark.
Then iterate over her many times until she is relieved.
And beware, lest you perform this treatment at the beginning of an apostematic arrival. For it often adds to an apostema: and it is not necessary for you to do that unless upon the decline of his apostema's heat.
But if this instrument is not present to you, then take a reed and compose its bark at the extremity of it, so that the sick person's mouth is not burned; because the reed's bark prevents vapor from burning the mouth: and this is good treatment with salvation.
On the Extraction of Thorns and Bones from the Throat.
Chapter 38.
A bone or a fish spine often adheres to the throat many times.
Therefore, you must remove what appears to be on top of it and falls into view, after pressing the tongue with an instrument under the sun, and it will be revealed to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, you must make the sick person vomit before food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps indeed something attached will come out through vomiting.
Or the sick person swallows a piece of cress, or a root of lettuce, or swallows a dry biscuit: or takes a piece of dried sea sponge, and binds it with thread, then swallows it. When therefore he arrives at the place where the spines or bone are, and is extracted, then it will come out.
If therefore it does not come out with what we said: then use a lead instrument in this shape.
Let it be a roughness greater than a radius for a little bit, and at the end of it let there be a curvature which he inserts into his own throat with ease: and he should have his head lifted upwards.
And let him beware of touching his epiglottis, lest he be seized by a cough, and let the doctor push with him, or the bone, or introduce himself with his own hand.
But if the patient introduces himself, this is better: on account of his knowledge of the location of the attached thing; and let him push downwards or draw his hand upwards with an instrument, all according to the quantity which is prepared for him, until he emerges.
Of the Extraction of the Leech.
Chapter 39.
When the leech is treated with what I said about cures with medicines and does not concur, then look at the patient's throat before the sun or behind it after you have pressed his tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
If then your sight falls on the leech, remove it with a small hook or with gentle and subtle gestures.
What if it is not possible with these: then take a hollow reed and insert it into the patient's throat up to the throat; then insert the heated iron rod from the fire into the hollow of the reed. Do that many times: and let the patient abstain from water all day.
Then let him take a full bladder of cold water and open his mouth into it; and let him moisten his mouth with it, and not swallow anything from it: and let him move the water one hour after another with his own hand. For the leech immediately falls when it feels the water.
If however it does not emerge with what we narrated, then fumigate the patient with fleas or with a feather using the instrument that I told you about for fumigating the uvula.
Do that many times, because it will fall.
And the method of operation in fumigating is that you take a pot, in which are alive prunes with fire; and the pot is covered with a lid, in whose middle is an opening; and it should be composed in that opening at the end of the instrument.
Then place a suffumigation and let the patient put his mouth at the end of the cannula and close his mouth so that the suffumigation does not go out until you know that the suffumigation has reached the blood-sucking place. For the blood-sucking place will immediately fall.
But if it does not fall, then repeat the suffumigation many times.
And let the patient endure thirst, and eat salted foods, and others, but not drink water.
Therefore it is necessary for him to go out with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood-sucking place is extracted from the throat when it falls on its surface.
It resembles forceps, as you see: except that it has this curvature which is inserted into the throat. And its end is similar to the beak of a bird called a stork, in which there is a roughness like a file: when it grasps something, it does not let go entirely.
Of the opening of aposthemes, and their division, and care in general.
Chapter 40.
The species of aposthemes are many, of many kinds, according to the recollection of them, namely one and one in this book: and they are diverse in their perforation and division into two modes.
One of which is a type of apostheme that is in itself, and because it contains moisture from humidity.
And the second mode is due to locations where they occur in the body.
For an apostheme occurring on the head is one thing, and different from an apostheme occurring in the anus; and an apostheme occurring on a fleshy part is another thing, and different from an apostheme occurring at a joint: and each of them has its own judgment according to operation.
And there are aposthemes that should not be perforated unless after maturation of the pus in them and its completion; and among these are those that must be perforated while they are raw, and do not mature according to their completion.
As abscesses which are near joints.
Because when an abscess occurs near a joint and it prolongs itself until what is inside it putrefies, perhaps the surrounding ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted: therefore, it is a more immediate cause of that member's contraction.
Or it is an abscess in the main member: because if you delay its perforation until it matures, it will harm either that one or through the main member.
Or it is near the anus, therefore perforate it unripe: and it is not proper to open up a raw abscess that is not yet fully digested, except when it is near the anus, so that it does not putrefy deep and extend to the internal parts of the anus, and become a fistula or remain in its end without healing.
You should know the time for perforating an abscess when it has matured according to its completion; and this is at a time of sedation of pain, recession of fever, diminution of swelling, pulse, and sharpness of the head of the abscess: and other signs.
And you should make the same perforation in the lower part of the abscess and more prominent elevation: and let the perforation go along the length of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of hands and feet, and elbow joints, and tendons, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflexion.
But in those that are reflected, proceed with the perforation according to that member.
When however the abscess is in fleshy places: then it is better to delay its perforation until its digestion is confirmed, as we said according to its completion.
Because if you perforate it before that, the course of the pus is prolonged from it, and there are many impurities and foulness, and perhaps the edges of it become hardened, and its depth.
And certain abscesses are pierced according to the breadth of the body in necessity or according to what a member requires.
And it is necessary to administer a small incision to small abscesses and a large incision to large ones; or multiple sections according to the similarity of the size of the abscess.
And there are abscesses from which the skin must be poulticed; and when it has been made like a cloth, and has become dead at the edge, as happens to many things that are dubious, and boils.
And from them are those which are cut with an incision having three angles. And from them is one that is cut like the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
Like an abscess in the groin.
And from them are those in which a circular incision and a lunar incision are administered: and similar ones from the incisions.
However, that which has no head, such as mild and superficial abscesses, should be pierced with a superficial or flat incision only.
And it is necessary, when the abscess is large and has already collected a great deal of pus, to pierce it so that you do not hurry and extract all the pus at once; rather, extract some from it. Then bind the abscess with an opilum until another day. Then extract something else from the pus again.
Do this many times according to degree until it drains out: especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an old decrepit person: for the spirit of the animal often dissolves from one animal to another with the discharge of pus: and perhaps the patient will die, and you will not notice.
Therefore beware this chapter with great caution.
And after your incision, by which you pierce abscesses, it is necessary to clean the wound and observe. If then there is a wound of apostema small, or it is a flat incision, then administer linen oil from flax, or old cotton. And if there is a great apostema and many perforations are present, it is necessary then to insert linen into every perforation until they reach the inside.
And if you have excised a part of the skin from an apostema, or in its surrounding area you have made it concave: then it is necessary to fill it with old cotton, or as when cloth is sewn, or it is removed with flax fibers without moisture: and tie it so that it remains for three days.
Then throw it away, and care for it as needed with an ointment until it heals.
But if bleeding occurs during your operation hour, then administer cold water and vinegar, after the cloth has been soaked in them: and place it repeatedly over the site of the bleeding.
But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary to apply a treatment, and cure, and powders that I have described in many places of this our book, and from division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the site of the apostema is over many nerves: then it is necessary to soak wool with wine and hot oil: and place them on the sites.
And if it is in the summer, and the sites are fleshy: then it is necessary to place wool soaked in water and oil, or in wine and oil, and all that is cold. Until the third day, as we said, then it is necessary to open the apostema, and clean it, and apply to its cure what is fitting for it, until it heals.
This therefore is what is necessary from universal knowledge of the treatment of apostemata.
According to the path of true distinction, I have already spoken about every apostema, how is the way to its cure chapter by chapter individually.
Head 41.
On the removal of boils that occur on the scalp of the head.
Boils occur on the scalp of the head which are small and are of the type of nodules, contained in sacks, that is as if they were the eggs of a hen.
And there are many kinds of them.
Some of them are fatty; and some which contain moisture similar to mud: and some which contain moisture similar to that of fresh cheese and curds: and there are others like these, and some are hard and stony.
And in the cutting of all and the removal of them, there is no fear, as long as the artery does not interfere with their cutting.
And the operation in cutting them is that you should examine them with an instrument of which the shape comes after these, which is called an Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then cut it with a shallow incision according to the length of the superficial cut: in this shape.
And begin with a cut from the line b to the line g. When the moisture has evacuated, then remove the crust that contains that moisture, and do not leave anything entirely.
For it often returns if something remains of it.
Then immerse the cut in Egyptian ointment if it is present: and if not, in water and salt: and fill the wound with it, and leave it until another day. For what remains of the crust will rot.
Then repeat the process over the cut with Egyptian ointment a second and third time, and if you need it, until you are confident that nothing remains of the crust; then indeed apply care to the wound with ointment until it heals.
What if the boil contains a fatty nodule? Then cut it according to this shape, with an incision having the form of a cross: and place lancets between the divisions of the incision, and remove everything from all parts: and try your best in extracting the sack that contains it.
If however an artery makes opposition to you, then do that which I shall tell you afterwards.
And similarly do this in an ulceration, if it is a bony one, by incision and the same treatment, according to what we have said.
And the incision above a bony ulceration is easier: because it has few blood and moisture. And sometimes there are some of these ulcerations which are on the head of certain people, in which there is not at all moisture.
Which is because I cut above an ulceration on the head of an old woman, and I found an ulcer like a hard, solid, rough, white stone that could not be broken; and if someone would strike it with a blow while falling, it would wound him.
However, in other ulcerations that occur on the head, apart from those which occur on the heads of children and at the roots of ears, the incision of all of them should be a superficial one.
Or make a perforation in them always from the lower part of them, so that the flow of pus may be eased downwards.
Then the cure is done with it as is fitting for each one according to its treatment.
Of the cutting of Strophulae on the neck.
Chapter 42.
These ulcerations often occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And above those that occur on the neck, there is one and many, and they are generated from each other; and every Strophula is within its own fold, just as it is with nodes and head ulcers, as we have narrated.
And the kinds of these Strophulae are many. And among them there are those that are bony, and those that contain moisture, and those that are malignant, which do not obey treatment.
Therefore, when you see a lump that appears to have good structure in touch, which is clearly close in color to the skin, and moves freely in every direction, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the gullet, nor to an artery, nor is it deep: it is necessary to cut it with a superficial incision from the upper part to the lower part of the body along the line, b. to the line, g. and remove it from all parts: and stretch two flaps of skin with forceps, or with many forceps if you need them, as we said in head abscesses, and pull it out gradually.
And it is advisable to take care that the vein or nerve is not cut.
And let the spatula be not too sharp: so that it does not cause you to cut unnecessarily with your hand at the incision, or trouble a weak person, and cut what is not necessary.
But if you cut a vein or artery, then stop the operation at once, and apply to the wound some powdered zinc or certain powders that coagulate blood, and tie up the wound, and leave it alone until the inflammation of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes soft: or else it may begin to putrefy.
For the blood is coagulated by a poultice. Therefore, return to your operation until you are finished.
Then examine with your finger if any small stumps remain; therefore cut them and clean them.
But if a large vein is in the root of the stump: then it is necessary not to cut that stump from its own root; rather, it is necessary to tie it with a double strong thread and let it go until it falls off without harm.
Then fill the wound with the old lint that you had previously soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then care for it.
If Strophula is entirely incised, then it is necessary to gather the two lips of the wound and immediately set him up, after you see that there is no longer any surplus.
But if you see that there remains surplus because of the size of Strophula, then it is necessary to turn your attention to incising its root and pulling it out: and apply the suture which we mentioned.
And that which contains moistures from Strophula, pierce it with a superficial perforation: so that the location of its maturity appears to you; and place the perforation below that part of the body that follows downwards, as we said.
Then apply licinia with ointment and similar substances after the perforation, so that what remains from the corruption is absorbed; until you see the wound to be clean again. Then care for it with generative ointment of flesh, until it heals.
Head 43.
On the section of the Epiglottis from an abscess occurring within the throat.
The ancients said that this section is of the Epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone on earth who has done it; and this is the writing of their discourse.
However, in those having synancheum, it is necessary to remove the section of the Epiglottis; since no benefit will come from that because all the veins and lung are weak.
In those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or throat, or both tonsils, when there is no sickness in the canal, it is necessary to use the section of the Epiglottis, to escape from the destruction which comes from obstruction.
Therefore, when we wish to do that, it is necessary to cut the Epiglottis under three or four circles of the Epiglottis, by a small section through its width, in what is between two circles, as much as possible, so that the section be in the mucous membrane, not in cartilage: and this place indeed is suitable for the section, because it is deprived of flesh, and the vessels of blood are distant from it.
If the surgeon is timid, then he should stretch the skin of the throat with a hook. Then he finds the skin until it reaches the canal; he empties the vessel of blood if he sees anything from them.
Then he cuts the siphon as we have described: and it signifies above the cutting of the canal from the phlegm that flows out from it, when it is torn apart and the voice is cut off.
And leave the open wound for some time.
When therefore the hour arrives that fears suffocation, gather together two lips of the wound and sew it up by itself without cartilage.
Then administer medicines which make flesh grow until it is healed.
Albucasis says. The sum of this discourse that we have narrated is not explained, except when they see that some of these abscesses have already obstructed the sick person's throat: and the sick person has been lifted up to death, and wants to be cut open for his breathing: they go to cutting off the Epiglottis, so that the sick person breathes over the place of the wound by some respiration, and is saved from death: and because of this they have ordered to leave the open wound, until the malice of the sickness is consumed, and it is a three-day evil: then therefore they have ordered to sew up the wound, and cure it, until he is healed.
And what I saw through myself is that one servant took a knife and sent it with into her own throat, and it happened to her with him as far as the part of the lung's canal.
And I was called to her healing, and when I found her moaning, like the mooing of one who is dying.
So I removed the wound, and found a small amount of blood that had flowed out from the wound. So I was confident that she had not cut the vein, nor stopped up the breathing: and breath was issuing forth from the wound.
Therefore I hastened, and took care of my wound, and cured it until it was sound: and nothing happened to the maidservant, except that she became hoarse in her voice: and she returned after a few days to better management of her own affairs.
Therefore I say: that there is no fear in cutting away the Epiglottis.
Of the Cutting Away of a Throat Hernia.
Chapter 44.
This hernia named Hernia gutturis is a great swelling, according to the color of the body: and it is found very much in women.
And it is according to two modes: either it is natural or accidental.
In the natural one, indeed there is no fault.
The accidental one however is according to two modes: of which one is similar to fatty nodes. And the other mode is similar to an abscess that occurs from arterial constriction. And in this case there is fear, and one should not presume to cut into it with iron, unless it is small; and you must test it and investigate it with an instrument. If therefore you find it to be similar to a fatty node, and it is not suspended from any vessels; then cut into it, just as one cuts into nodes: and extract it with what contains it from the chest, if it is in the chest; and if not, then thoroughly examine all of its contents. Then care for the place according to what is needed for healing, until it heals.
Chapter 45.
Of the Cutting Away above Fatty Nodes.
There are many kinds of nodes, and I have already spoken about all their kinds in division: and it is necessary for me to narrate here the difference between a node and an Exitura: since it causes doubt.
I say therefore that when an Exitura is present there is heat, fever, and severe pains, until the effusion of excess is stilled and putrefaction is completed: then indeed the fevers and heat subside.
When there is no knot [i.e. wound], nor heat, nor fever, nor pain, and they contain them with a kistis called sifachin, which is their own bag, and it is according to the color of the body: and it is the taking in of them like beans, and it becomes like batecha, and greater and lesser.
And they are according to two kinds: either fat or containing moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a knot [i.e. wound], you must examine it and inquire into it first with the instrument that is called Intromissum, according to what its form will be in the chapter that follows this one.
And the method of inquiry for all apostemes and knots is this: you should take this instrument and insert it into a more humid place which you find in the aposteme; and then revolve your fingers with it gradually, until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin. Then your last finger according to the measurement of the size of the aposteme.
Then withdraw the Intromissum and consider what comes out as a sign of it.
If then moisture running with any color comes out, then cut it off with a superficial section, according to what I said about other apostemes.
And if no moisture comes out in the sign of the Intromissum, then you will know that it is fatty: therefore cut off above it with a section having the shape of a cross, according to this form, as I taught you; and suspend it with hooks, and scrape off the skin from all parts with ease: and preserve the kistin if you can over it, so that you may draw out the healthy part with the Knot.
But if the kistin is torn apart during the operation and it is not possible to draw out the healthy part, for indeed that often happens, then draw it out in pieces, until nothing remains of it.
If anything remains from it a little, or much, returns to the Knot according to most.
If it overcomes you and something remains from it a little, then fill the wound at your completion with certain corrosive sharp powders: and close the wound, and place above it what sits as warm pus, and care for it along with the rest of the cure until it is healed.
If therefore there is a Knot great, then split its two lips and care for it with what enfleshes.
But if there is a vein to you that pulsates or does not pulsate: then hasten and fill the place with trodden sesame, and leave it tight for two days or three, until the wound putrefies and the ebullition of blood ceases: then return to cutting into what remains from the Knot.
Chapter 46.
Chapter on external instruments for cutting and piercing.
There are shapes of Instruments of Introduction, and they are of three kinds.
From them there is a great one, and from them there is a middle-sized one, and from them there is a small one.
Let them be made of iron with rounded edges on the outer extremities, so that they hasten entrance into the abscess.
And these are forms of Probes, and no, that is, piercing ones: and one of them is called Beris, that is, piercing; and they are of three kinds.
From them there is a great one, and a middle-sized one, and a small one.
They congregate to be investigated through these abscesses, and outlets, and fistulas, and boils from what is between them, that is, from the bones.
And others are made rounded, smooth, and gentle, like large needles which serve as seats, of course, from citron wood, or air, or iron, or silver.
And better among them are those that are made from citron.
And experiments are also made from black lead, which are suitable for testing fistulas whose concavities are adapted to be reflected with their own softness along with those reflections.
And they are again of three kinds. Because from them there are long ones, from them middle-sized ones, and from them short ones, according to the size of the fistula's amplitude and its constriction.
The form of bandages, and they are many kinds.
Because from them there are simple ones, namely those with a single curvature: and they are three kinds as you see, Great, Middle, and Small.
And from them there are bandages that are blind: and they are three kinds.
And from them there are bandages that have two curves, and they are three kinds: and from them there are bandages that have three curves, and they are three kinds: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels, with which knots and abscesses are cut and lanced: and they are three kinds: because from them there is a great one, a middle one, and a small one.
Their ends where the section is made are sharp, while their other ends are not sharp: and they are not put to use unless for the purpose of providing benefit in the lancing of knots near the fear of incision of a vein or nerve: and so that the infirm may be healed through them, and find tranquility shortly after the burning which is found in the lancing of an abscess.
They are made of bronze, and they are similar to Radiorum, with which one makes alcohol: and at the broad end there is a hidden puncture of Spathium: and within it flows towards the inside and outside when you wish, as you see.
The form of skin excrescences which are hidden between the fingers at the site of an abscess: and those who are weak do not perceive them: and they are of three kinds, great, middle-sized, and small.
The forms of windsores with which bleeding is stopped: and they are of three kinds, great, middle-sized, and small.
Let them be made round from air or citron, about as long as you see, and fine to subtlety.
And it is necessary for these forms of windsores to be at hand with you, great and small: so that you may stop blood flow through them with speed in necessity, and then when medicine is not present.
However, you should not use them for stopping blood flow in every part of the body, and you should only use them on fleshy parts: such as arms, thighs, and shoulders, and breasts, and belly, and groin, and similar areas.
And sometimes they are made into small instruments similar to the rinds of pomegranates, according to their shape: with which blood is stopped when it flows from the site of phlebotomy, or at the incision of a vein, or artery; and sometimes they are made round in this shape.
Chapter 47.
On the care of men's breasts which resemble those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become inflamed at the completion of sleep (that is, when they begin to emit seminal fluid during sleep) until they resemble those of women: and they remain foul and swollen.
Whoever abhors this, should apply the lunar caesarean technique to the breasts, according to this shape from line "b" to line "g". Then remove the entire fatty accumulation. Then fill the wound with medicinal ointment. Then gather two lips of the wound with a suture, and care for it until it heals.
But if the nipple inclines towards the lower parts and softens due to its size, as happens in women: then it is necessary to cut into two upper sides of his own two similar sections resembling a crescent shape, each containing one with another at the ends of both, until there is a line larger containing the smaller one, according to this form from b to g. Then remove the skin that is between the two lips and take away fatness, and administer what we said about suturing and powders, which is necessary for healing, until it heals.
But if you do not complete the incision as it is necessary for you to make, because of the patient's restlessness or due to bleeding: then it is necessary that you fill the wound with a poultice immersed in corrosive ointment, and let it go, until what remains of fatness has been consumed. Then care for it until it heals.
About the piercing of an abscess that occurs under the titillate.
Chapter 48.
These abscesses that occur under the titillate are of the kind of hardened Strophulae which contain pus, and from these some contain moisture.
As for those that contain moisture, it is necessary to open them with a lunar incision, according to this form, from line b. to line g. When therefore everything that is in the abscess is emptied of pus, then fill it with old poultice and let it go until another day.
Then remove the poultice and treat it with a suitable ointment for it, until it heals.
What if the abscess is of the kind of nodules of Strophulae? Then cut above it, as we said in equal sections over the Strophulae.
If however a wound is extended so that it discharges pus, then apply a cauter to it, according to what we said previously.
Chapter 49.
On the cutting off of an apostema which occurs due to the artery and vein.
When an artery is torn and the skin above it becomes hardened, it often happens that an apostema occurs there; similarly with a vein, so that an apostema and inflammation occur.
And the signs by which it is known that an apostema and inflammation are due to an artery and vein are these: because when an apostema is caused by an artery, it is long and aggregated in the depths of the body; and when you push on the apostema with your fingers, you feel as if there is a hissing sound.
And that which is caused by a vein is rounded in the visible part of the body.
And the cutting into this apostema is an error, and especially when it occurs under the armpits, groin, throat, and in many parts of the body; and it is very great. Therefore it is necessary to avoid its cure with an iron instrument, and that which extends from them also to the extremities or head, one must avoid.
Therefore on that which arises from the inflammation of the artery's opening, make an incision in the skin in a longitudinal direction. Then open up the incision with a hook, afterwards the artery; and free it from its coverings until it is fully exposed.
Then insert a needle under it and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie off the artery with a double thread in two places, just as I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temporal regions.
Then puncture the spot that is between two ligaments with a spatula-like instrument, until the blood that is in it all comes out and the apostema is resolved.
Then administer treatment that produces pus until the ligaments fall apart: afterward, care for it with suitable ointments until it heals.
What if an abscess arises from a vein section, then you should keep your hand as clean as possible from the abscess with skin. Then insert the needle under the spot where you held your hand, and make it penetrate; and let a thread be twice as long, until you draw it out from another side. Then tie with the abscess itself a good knot: according to what I said to you about tying an olive knot, from two sides with two ends of thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert another needle with a different thread under the entire abscess near the cut of the needle; press and tie your threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in half, until what is inside it comes out; then cut away the excess skin and let go what has been tied off from it.
Then place over it a poultice which you moistened with wine and oil. Then administer treatment that is done with lichen and ointments, until it heals.
Book 5, Chapter L (Latin).
Of the abscess that occurs from twisting of Nerves.
Just as an abscess occurs in Arteries and Veins, similarly an abscess occurs in Nerves: which occurs from a blow or from excessive labor, and similar causes; and it happens most often in the places of aiders, or heels, and in every place where joints are moved: and is a grave abscess.
It resembles its color to the rest of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain: and when it is tied with weakness, the weak person feels like numbness in it.
And it is not an abscess accumulated deep within the body, but rather is beneath the skin, and it moves to every part, and does not go towards the front or before, nor back to the rear.
What is therefore present in joints should not be touched with iron. Perhaps indeed contraction will occur.
However, as for what is present in the head or forehead, find a skin crease with a spatula. So if there is a small abscess, then hold it with forceps and cut it off from its root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and scrape off the top; next, remove it, and gather the wound together with a suture; and care for it until it heals.
Chapter 51.
Of the excision of an abscess that occurs in the belly.
Some people are afflicted many times in their bellies and in other parts of their bodies with certain things which are called Fungalia, similar to mushrooms.
Whose root is fine, and whose head is thick, and their lips have turned inward. And it is small among them; and there is one that is greatly enlarged.
And I myself have already seen a man, and in his belly were two thelils, which were more similar to things other than fungi: there was no difference between them, white and small roots, and their lips turned inward, and they were filled, and moisture always flowed from them.
I therefore cut them open and found that one weighed almost 10 3/4 ounces and the other almost 6 ounces. And the operation of cutting them open is this: first consider whether the patient is humid, and if the color of the thelil is white, moist, and fine root; then cut it with a broad spatula, and have cauteries ready in your fire.
For indeed much blood is often expelled during the cutting of it; therefore, be prepared if blood overflows you, then cauterize it.
If you see an infirm person frightened and timid about incision with a iron tool, then take a thread made from lead, well-made and tie it with athel to him. The method is as we have said, and leave him for two days.
Then add the leaden strip. Therefore you should not stop tying on the lead until it is removed and falls off by itself without any effort.
But if the root is thick and large, then there is something to be feared and dreaded in its incision, especially since it is in the belly.
However, it is possible to cut it in half. Then cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then take care of it until the wound is healed.
And beware not to presume to cut away a root that is of dull color, lacking sensation, and foul appearance: for it is an apostematic cancerous thing: and I come with the reminder of Cancer after this.
Chapter 52.
Paragraph on the care of a Umberlical Hernia.
A hernia occurs at the navel from many causes. Or from fissures of the si-face, which is above the belly: and it comes out through the umbilical cord, or intestine, according as it happens in other ruptures. Or from blood which flows from a vein, or an artery, according to what has been mentioned before. Or from the constriction of the intestines in that place.
If however it is due to a fissure of the si-face and the umbilical cord, then it has a color similar to that of the body's apostema: and it is smooth, without pain: and appears in different positions. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its position is as we have described, with a greater diversity. When therefore you press with your fingers, it becomes hidden; then it returns, and perhaps it comes with a sound; and it is greatly magnified at the entrance of the bath, and a violent effort.
If it is because of moisture, it is soft; then it does not become hidden when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrict, nor is anything added.
What if it is because of blood; then when these signs appear, a abscess turns black from the swelling.
But if it is because of natural flesh: then it is a grave abscess, large, hard, and stays according to one size.
If it is because of flatness, then the touch of it is soft.
And the operation in that case is, that you should then consider whether the protrusion of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or flatness; then it is necessary for you to refrain from treating it. For in that case there is fear and dread, just as I taught you in the chapter where I said that abscesses are due to an artery and a vein.
What if the protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or a tumor; then you should hasten to warn the patient that he should hold his breath and stand upright with his body extended. Then signs are made on the circumference of the navel with a cauterizing iron. Afterwards, instruct him to lie flat between your hands on his back. Then encircle with a broad spatula around the navel in the area you marked with the cauterizing iron. Afterwards, extend the middle of the abscess upwards with a large hook. Then bind him tightly around the circumference with a strong thread or with a cord of linen tied firmly; and let the knot be adjusted.
Then open up the extended middle of the abscess above the ligature. If then you find the thing already captured by a ligament: then draw out the other parts, and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the interior of the belly: and if you find a knot, then take it with a hook, and cut off its superfluity.
But if there is against you an artery or vein: then surround it much. Then return to your operation. And take two needles, and insert into them two strong threads: and insert two needles into the surrounding part which you made around the abscess in the shape of a cross, making them penetrate.
Then tie the abscess in four places over the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave the place until the stretched flesh putsrefies and falls away on its own: or cut it when it has become thin and putrid.
Then care for it with what is needed from the ointments, until it is healed.
What if a swelling of the navel is from fatty flesh in it, or from moisture: then you should have the abscess drained, as we said. And draw out the blood or moisture that you find in it.
Then care for it with what is needed to solidify the place.
Chapter 53.
De cure of Cancer.
We have already spoken about the kinds of Cancer and how to cure it with medicines: and warned against curing it with iron, lest it ulcerate: and we have said that Cancer is generated in the womb, and caution regarding its cure.
And the ancients have said that sometimes Cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible: such as Cancer which is on the breasts, or on the thigh, and similar ones, located in members to be removed entirely: especially when it begins small.
When however it becomes old and is great, you should not approach it.
I couldn't heal anyone from that: nor did I see another before me who reached it.
And the operation on him, when he is located as we said, is to precede and dissolve the sick person from black cholera some times. Then let bloodletting be done if you find him with a clear filling.
Then prepare the sick person with preparation, where he will be located with the operation.
Then place on the cancerous ulcers those which are suitable for him. Afterwards, concave him from all parts with the skin, according to investigation, until nothing remains of its roots: and let the blood flow, and do not cut it quickly, but express the places, and wash away the thick blood entirely with your hand or with whatever is possible there with instruments.
But if a thick flow of blood makes opposition to you from the incision of an artery or vein: then cauterize the vein until the blood is cut off. Then care for him with the remaining treatment, until he is healed.
Of the cure of Hydrophobia.
Chapter 54. Now we have narrated the types of Hydrophobia in division, and how water aggregation is done: and signs of every type, and its cure with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is not except the solitary species of ascites alone: nor does it approach the species of tympanitis at all: nor the species of hyposarca entirely: for that one is mortal.
When you are already cured of this species of Hydrophobia called tympanitis with medicines, and your treatment has not availed: then consider. For if the sick person has already been weakened by debility, or there is another infirmity with him besides Hydrophobia, such as if he also has a cough, or bowel loosening, and similar things: then beware of treating him with iron: for it is feared.
If you see an invalid person of abundant vigor, and there is no illness with him except for simple hydrocephalus: and he is not a youth nor an old man: then the method of operation on him is, to lift the invalid standing between your hands, and have someone express his belly behind him by pushing water down into the lower part of his chest.
Then take a thorn-like spoon, in this shape. The two sharp, long parts are like the thorn-like spoon, having an acute extremity. However, there should be something of shortness gradually in it, so that you do not pass through with it during the operation up to the intestine and injure it.
Then consider. For if it is a case of hydrocephalus generation from the part of the intestines, then you should lengthen with the incision from the navel to a distance of three fingers' breadth, directly downwards above the chest.
If the generation of hydrocephalus is due to liver disease: then your incision should be on the left from the navel, three fingers' breadth.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then the incision should be on the right side: and it is not necessary that the incision should be also on the side where the patient wants to lie down, lest superfluities flow to that weak place.
Then pierce through with an instrument all around. Then insert into that incision and lift your hand with the thorn-like spoon between the skin, and scrape, as if you were stripping it away: and let the amount that is stripped away be the size of a fingernail or about that.
Then pierce and scrape until the thorn-like spoon reaches the empty place: and it is the location of the water. Then remove it and insert into the opening an instrument with this shape. And it is similar to a cannula: made of silver, or copper, or bronze, smooth and bright: with a small hole at its lower part, and three holes on either side, two on one side and one on the other side: and the end of it is cut off, according to the shape of a calamus, as you see: in its upper extremity there is a band.
When the instrument reaches water, then it immediately descends upon the instrument; therefore, it evacuates from water a medium quantity in an hour.
Since if you evacuate more from it than is proper, the patient may perhaps die in an hour by the resolution of his animal spirits; or syncopes occurs which approaches death.
But evacuate from it according to the strength of its virtue, and according to what the patient's dispositions indicate to you through the strength of his pulse and his condition.
Then remove the instrument, and retain the water.
Which is because it is retained immediately by the skin which retains the orifice that is above the siphon: about which I spoke, in order to pierce it according to that method.
Then insert the instrument again on the next day, if you see the patient is able to tolerate it; and also evacuate a small quantity from the water.
Do that for several days without fear, and guard yourself against error: until there remains little or no water left.
But if you fear for the patient and dismiss much of the water: then take care of him with burial in hot sand, and profuse sweating in a bath and under the sun, and wait until his thirst is quenched: and take care of him with medicaments that dry out, until he is healed; and cauterize over the stomach, liver, and spleen, after the removal of water: according to what I spoke previously.
On the care of infants born with their lower extremities not perforated.
Chapter 55.
When someone of the infants exits from his mother's womb, and his head is not perforated, or the orifice is narrow, or it is not in its proper place.
Therefore one must hasten to help with the perforation immediately at birth with a very fine spatula, according to this form.
Then place a thin iron wire in the hole and tie it; and keep it there for three days or four.
When therefore he wishes to emit urine, let it be removed, and let him urinate. Then put it back.
And if you do not place the lead, it is now possible for the urine that flows over the place not to allow it to close.
But he whose opening is constricted, is healed with lead, as we said, over many days, until it becomes larger.
Those however in whom the opening is in an incorrect place, are hurt. Which is because the opening is at the end of the head of the penis: wherefore he cannot urinate forward until he raises his penis with his own hand to the upper parts. Nor is there generation in him, therefore, because the sperm cannot reach the womb by right; and it is very foul suffering.
And the method of treatment for him is to have him lie supine on his back. Then stretch his penis with your left hand with a strong extension, and cut off the head of the penis from its original place with a sharp point or a small, thin knife: just as one cuts reeds, or as you trim something to make it like the head of the penis; and let the opening fall in the middle, as it should.
And beware of bleeding during your operation. For it often happens that way. So place with him what stops blood from flowing, and care for the wound until it heals.
A treatise on ulcers that occur in the foreskin and head of the penis, and on putrefaction, blackening, and sticking.
Chapter 56.
These ulcers often occur on the penis, and it is a prominent manifestation of foul flesh.
And from it another is malignant, and another not malignant.
Therefore you should suspend the non-malignant one with a thin hook, and cut it off until it is entirely cleansed. Then place over it a poultice soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then care for the patient with the ointment of Diaphnikon until he is healed.
If, however, the ulcer is malignant of bad color, then it is necessary to apply a caustic after making an incision in it and the surrounding area.
But if the ulcer is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised captive, and it is a part of the ulcer inside and another part outside: then it is necessary to remove the ulcer which is inside first, until it consolidates, then care for the one outside; because when you treat it simultaneously, the foreskin will not secure itself but will rather protrude.
And now also in the testicles and foreskin a darkening and corruption occurs. Therefore, you should open up all that is already discolored, and what wants to be corrupted or has already been corrupted.
Then apply over it a poultice made with honey and the flour of ground almonds, and the herb of threshed plants.
Then care for that with the remaining treatment until he is healed.
If however a flow of blood occurs, then apply a caustic with lunar caustic, in this form.
For the caustic is useful for two dispositions at once, namely for a flow of blood and an ulcer when it corrupts.
Which if the head of the penis is corrupted and destroyed within an hour: then it is necessary that you insert a lead tube into the urethra of the penis, so that the patient may urinate onto it.
In the case of an adhesion between the foreskin and the head of the penis, and this kind of adhesion does not occur except in one whose foreskin is healthy and no circumcision is required: and sometimes adhesion occurs because of a wound or apostema: therefore you should scrape it off with a blunt spatula until the ligament loosens and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
If it is difficult to distinguish these things finely, then it is necessary to remove something from the head of the rod and from the foreskin. What exists is because the foreskin when it is thin perhaps pierces quickly due to its own thinness.
Then separate the foreskin and the head of the rod with a piece of fine linen cloth that has already been soaked in cold water, so that they do not stick together again.
Then treat it with a medicinal wine, until it is consolidated.
Chapter 57.
On the cleansing of infants and the cure for any mistake that may have befallen them.
Circumcision is not the breaking of continuity, like other wounds: yet since it is our operation, our will, and its use is peculiarly in children, it is necessary that we mark with it a better operation and a path leading to salvation.
I say therefore that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is nothing but what we have acquired through experience.
For it is because I have found the majority of surgeons and bloodletters to use cleansing by circumcision with a scalpel and forceps, and they treat those affected, bandaging with a thread, and cutting with a nail.
And I indeed have tried out all these methods, and I did not find a better cleansing with forceps and bandaging with a thread.
Because in the cleansing with a scalpel, the skin often escapes many times. Because the skin of the foreskin has two layers: therefore perhaps the upper layer is cut and the lower layer remains: so it is forced to be cut again, and future pain will result. And with the cleansing that is done by laying on of hands, that is, manual manipulation used by surgeons, the cut at the end of the male member is not secured: because perhaps it may enter into its orifice.
In the process of cleaning with a spatula, perhaps iron will escape and ruin your operation: and indeed the skin of a child is naturally short-lived, and many times they are born in such a way that they do not require cleaning; and I have already seen this.
But in the process of cleaning with forceps and tying with a thread, I have obtained a good result: because forceps are proportional to the incision: therefore, since the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below. Therefore, when you place your hand, two sharpnesses are proportioned and they fall according to the operation at one time; and it makes a compression similar in shape, containing the skin of the wound from every part, with which there is no error whatsoever.
And the proper method of operation is to make the child think that you are not doing it, especially if it is one who understands a little, that which you do not do except for tying the thread on its wound just so much: and then let it go until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be happy in every way that is possible to you, because he receives his own understanding. Then make him stand between your prepared hands, and let him not be sitting; and hide the forceps in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the child may see nothing of them, nor anything from the instruments.
Then insert your hand into his wound and blow on it, and draw it up until the end of the head of the wound emerges. Then clean it because impurities are accumulating in it.
Then bind the marked place with a double thread. Then bind below, for a little way, another band. Then take hold with your index finger and thumb, and use good retention to cut between the two bands. Then lift up the skin quickly and extract the head of the wound. Then let the blood flow slowly (for it is better) and place powder above: and on top of the powder, a cloth that has been spread with yolk of egg decocted in rose water, pounded with rose oil. Recent good: and let him be above it until another day: and care for it with the rest of the treatment, until he is healed.
However, the shape of a forceps for purification is this.
Let there be two blunt ends and let them meet together: so that no branch of a key may come out; and let the length of both sharp parts be equal to the length of two equally matched arm-lengths.
The error falls in purification is this: because perhaps the inner skin may altogether escape, or a part of it at the incision.
Therefore, you should stretch it forth from your hour with your own finger before the place becomes inflamed: and cut it according to equality.
But if you cannot hold it with your own finger, then pull it out with a pincers and cut it.
But if however three days have passed and there remains what is under the inflamed part, that is apostema; then let it go until the apostema becomes warm, and remove that with ease, and cut that according to how it is prepared for you: and beware of the head of the rod. For it will not harm him.
Therefore cure that with what consolidates the wound from the powders which we narrated in the treatise on powders; and if it happens to cut through the skin above measure and goes up to the upper parts, that will not harm him either.
Therefore cure that with what we said, until he is healed.
Chapter 58.
Of the Extraction of the Vrin retained in the Womb.
The retention of urine in the womb occurs when a stone or frozen blood or pus or flesh is formed and similar things to those which we mentioned in the division of cures.
And if the hernia is not resolved and you see that its retention is due to a stone which is already in the throat of the windpipe: then it is necessary for him to be weak, bent over his own knees. Then have his feet placed on his back, and let him stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back, and let the patient strain his breathing as much as possible for him. Therefore he is forced to have the throat of the windpipe bent towards the expulsion of the stone to the rear, whereupon the hernia is absolved.
But if it does not resolve with him as we said, and the matter becomes a pressing one for the patient; then it is necessary to administer extraction to him with an instrument called siringa, whose shape is this: It shall be made of silver, and be subtle, thin, hollow, like a bird's feather in subtlety of radius, long in likeness of the palm of one hand and half: having a fine tube at its head.
And the method of exiting the hernia through it is, that you take a doubled thread, and tie a good knot at its end with wool or cotton: and insert the extremity of the thread into the lower part of the Siringa: and cut off any excess with scissors if there is anything superfluous from the wool; truly insert it into the tube with gentleness, like an allazier.
Then grease the Siringa with oil or butter, and a yolk of egg: and make the patient sit on a seat, and anoint the windpipe, and take hold of his rod with wet oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the Siringa into the rod with ease, until it reaches the root of the windpipe.
Then double it above from the part of the navel.
Then push the Siringa into it until it reaches the Vesica, and the patient feels that he has already reached the empty place: and this is not done according to this order unless the passage through which it goes is one where there is a twist.
Then stretch the thread with wool gradually. The skin will follow the wool.
Then pull it out and make the skin run along the path of the urine; and repeat the catheterization, and do not stop doing that until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
About the quality of cathartic washing of the bladder with Clepsydra.
Chapter 59.
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder, or blood freezes in it, or pus congeals in it, and you wish to make water and medicines flow into it: then use the instrument called Clepsydra, and this is its shape.
For it is mute, that is, closed. And on it are three openings, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
And the hollow place, where that which propels is located, should be of a size that it can operate without addition, until when something is drawn with it from moisture, it is attracted: and when propelled, it is pushed away to a distance: according to how the Clepsydra works, by which Greek fire is poured out in battles of war.
Therefore, when you wish to pour out moisture into the bladder, insert the extremity of the Clepsydra into the moisture, and draw with it what propels towards the upper part, for moisture is drawn into the hollow of the Clepsydra.
Then insert its extremity into the catheter, according to what we have narrated about the catheter. Then propel the moisture with what propels it, and that moisture immediately reaches the bladder, so that the patient feels it.
The shape of a subtle cathartic by which the bladder is washed.
It should be made of silver or auriculum: whose head should be higher like a small alcanna, and under it a cavity in which a ligament falls.
Then receive goat's bile and put in it moisture as much as you wish to catheterize the urethra. Then tie it between two sinuses with a strong double thread: and warm that moisture a little over the fire.
Then insert the end of the catheter into the penis, afterwards bind your hand over the urethra with a stricture-decent moisture, until the patient feels that the moisture has already reached the urethra.
But if there is no present urethra, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it, and pierce it all around its roundness. Then insert a strong thread into those holes, as they are turned back. Then gather the circle together, just like an assemblage gathers: after you put into it what you wish from moistures, and oils, and waters.
Then tie it into an instrument: and do with it as you did with the urethra from expression with your hand, until the moisture reaches the urethra.
Chapter 60.
¶ Of the Extraction of a Stone.
We have already spoken of the division of stones and their treatment with medicines: and I have said the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys, and one in the bladder, and signs of the whole: and I have said about the stone where the operation is done by hand and cutting: and it is the stone generated in the bladder properly: and that which settles in the penis: and I am recounting this with clear explanation and abbreviation.
I say therefore, that a stone generated in the bladder occurs most frequently in boys.
And one of its signs is that the urine flows out of the bladder like water in its subtlety: and appears in it white sand, and the patient frictions his penis, and labors with it, and many times hangs. Then it is raised and comes out with him, anus in many of them.
And the healing of children is easy up to the point that they reach fourteen years. And it is difficult in old men. However, it is intermediate in young men, in the sense that if the stone is larger, the healing is easier; and if small, it is on the contrary.
Therefore, when we come to the healing, it is first necessary that we cleanse the sick person with a purgative, which will remove all the dung that is in their intestines; for it indeed sometimes prevents the discovery of the Stone during the examination.
Then take the sick person with his feet and shake him, and move him towards the lower parts: so that the Stone descends to the depth of the bladder or ejects itself from a high place occasionally.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared and his hands be under his buttocks, so that the bladder is entirely sloping towards the lower parts.
Then search for him and touch him externally.
If then you feel the Stone in place, then hasten immediately with an incision above it.
And if it does not fall entirely under your touch, then you must wipe the index finger of your left hand with oil if the patient is a child; or the middle finger if he is a fully grown young man: and insert it into his anus and feel for the Stone until it stops under your finger; and turn it gradually towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press above it with your finger and push it towards the exterior against the place where you want to make an incision; and command your assistant to press on the bladder with his hand, and command another assistant to extend the testicles with his right hand upwards: and with the other hand, to remove the skin which is under the testicles in that part where the section is.
Then insert a spatula that is cut in, whose form this is. And find it in that which is between the anus and testicles, not in the middle, on the left side of the navel: and let the incision be above this stone, and your finger be in the anus: and make the incision transverse, so that the section be outwardly wide and inwardly narrow, according to the possibility of the stone's egress from it not being greater.
Perhaps indeed the finger that is in the anus compresses the Stone at the incision, and it emerges without difficulty.
And know that from the Stone are angles and edges, why its exit is difficult because of this.
And from this it is smooth, like a gland, and rounded: and its exit is easy.
So to that which has angles and edges, add to the cleft.
But if it does not emerge thus, then you must use force on top of it: or bind it with a bandage decently tied, whose end is like the Moon, which binds around the Stone and does not come loose from it: or insert a subtle instrument underneath it, curved at the tip.
But if you cannot do this, then enlarge the opening slightly. But if something from blood constrains you, cut it off with a saw.
But if the Stone is more than one, then push the first large one towards the mouth of the bladder. Then cut above it. Afterwards push the small one behind that, and do the same if there are more than two.
But if it is very large, then you must cut above it with a great incision. For it often happens to a sick person one of two things, either that they will die, or that a constant dripping of urine occurs to them: because the location is not fully consolidated.
True is to administer the expulsion of it until it goes out: or skills with forceps in its fracture, until you extract it bit by bit.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with tar, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it tight, and place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water upon it, so that the hot aposteme may be assuaged.
Then prop up the sick person on their neck, and do not loosen the bandage, until the third day. When you have loosened it, bathe the place with water and much oil.
Then care for it with the balm of diaphanum and the balm of basilicum, until it is healed.
But if it happens that a hot aposteme is added to the wound, and corroding sores, and similar things, as if blood were congealed in the bladder, and prevented from flowing out of it, and urine fails to come forth with the blood. And this is known by the egress of blood along with urine. Therefore insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood. For if it remains, it provokes to the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt: and apply to it all sorts of remedies that are suitable for its cure, until it is healed.
And it is necessary during the entire course of treatment that you bind two bandages together and tie them up, because of the remedies that are placed on the place.
But if a stone is small and situated in the urethra, and it becomes stuck there, and prevents the flow of urine: then care for it with what I have told you before, until you reach the point of incision. For indeed many times I have been excused from performing an incision through this treatment, for I have already tested it out.
And it is, that you take a perforator from iron alferic, whose form is, having a triangular extremity, sharp, fixed on wood.
Then receive a thread and tie it to him with a stick under a stone so that it does not return to the vesica.
Then insert the piercing iron into the stick with ease, until it reaches the Perforator at the stone: and turn the Perforator by your hand on the stone slowly: and you will make its perforation, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
Urination is immediately released.
Then press your hand on what remains from the stone at the outer part of the stick. For it breaks apart and exits with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure does not prepare itself for you because something prevents it from that side: then tie the thread under the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then cut above the stone on the stick between the two bindings. Then pull it out. After that, untie the binding, and clean up the frozen blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to bind the thread under the stone, unless so that it does not return to the vesica: and another binding above, unless so that when you untie the thread after the stone's exit, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound: and for this reason it is necessary for you to do it when you bind the thread above, so that you lift up the skin towards the top, so that it returns to your complement, and covers the wound, as we said.
Chapter 61.
¶ Of the Extraction of Stone from Women.
A small stone is formed in women.
But if a stone occurs to any of them, then the cure is difficult and prevented by many methods.
One of them is: that perhaps a woman is a virgin.
And the second one is, because you do not find a woman who would reveal herself to a doctor when she is chaste, or with husbands.
The third one is, because you do not find a woman well-versed in this art, especially the operation with her hand.
And the fourth one is, because of the distance from the place of stone: wherefore it requires deep cutting, and there is fear.
For if necessity compels you to do that, then it is necessary to take a female doctor, well-versed: and little is found.
But if you prefer not to do that, then seek out a chaste doctor, subtle and present a well-educated midwife knowledgeable about women's affairs, or a woman who knows part of the art: make her present and especially instruct her to perform everything that you instruct her to do according to investigation on the stone.
First of all, what is most important is to see if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary for her to introduce your finger into her anus and search for the stone.
If then she finds it, construe it under her finger, and then instruct the midwife to introduce her finger into the weak woman's vulva, and inquire about the stone after placing her left hand on the bladder and compressing it with good compression.
If then she finds the stone, it is necessary for her to move it gradually from the orifice of the bladder downwards with all her might, until it reaches the root of the hip joint.
Then cut above it at the opposite side of the mid-point of the vulva at the root of the hip joint, from whichever part is prepared for her, and feel the stone on that part: and let her finger not be removed from the stone, constraining under it: and let the incision be small at first. Then he inserts the rod above that incision.
Then he inserts the rod above that incision. So if he feels a stone, then he adds it to the incision according to the proportion of its size as it emerges from there.
And know that there are many kinds of stones. From these [kinds of stones] is small and great, smooth and rough, long and round with branches.
Know therefore its kind, so that it may signify to you through this above what you desire.
So if blood overpowers you, then add to the place some powdered egg and hold it for one hour until the bleeding ceases.
Then return to your operation until the stone emerges: and prepare with you from the instruments I said for extracting stones in men, so that you may assist through them in your operation.
But if the flow of blood overpowers you and you know that the bleeding is from the artery that has been cut: then place a poultice on the spot, and bind it with bandages suitable for binding: and do not move that, and leave the stone, and do not extract it. Perhaps indeed the weak woman will die. Then take care of the wound.
When therefore the sharpness of blood has subsided after days and the place has putrefied, then return to your operation until the stone emerges.
Chapter 62.
About cutting on a water-filled hernia.
A water-filled scrotum is not, unless it is a collection of moisture in the white scrotal sac which is under the skin containing the testicle: and it is called a scrotum.
And sometimes it is contained in a pouch of its own, which nature has prepared for it in the part of the testicle, until it ripens: which is another kind of ovum, and it is the skin of the testicle between the white scrotal sac, which we said; and this does not happen except rarely.
And indeed, the generation of this branch is from the weakness that occurs in the testicles; wherefore it flows to them this material. And sometimes it happens through a blow upon the testicles.
And this moisture is having many colors. For either it is declining towards a yellowish color, or it is reddish blood-like, or it is dung-like, black, or it is watery white, and that which is more.
And the signs by which one knows where the gathering of water is, are these. For if it is in the white phlegm that we mentioned, then an abscess is rounded to a length somewhat like the shape of an egg: and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture contains it from every part.
And if there is moisture in its own sac, then an abscess is rounded with the shape of an egg, and because of this a man thinks it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white phlegm, then it falls under sensation.
When therefore you wish to know the color of the moisture, then examine the color of the moisture in the abscess with a square glass, whose shape has preceded. Accordingly, then, judge about that which is between it and what emerges in the track of the Intromisso.
When therefore we come to the cure with iron, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to be bled if possible for him and you see his body full.
Then let it be placed above his back on a high surface, and put many cloths underneath him.
Then sit you on the left side of him, and instruct your servant to sit on his right side, who should stretch his rod to one or two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part of the navel of the belly.
Here is the translation:
Then pierce a siphon full of water with a wide piercing, and draw out all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with a hook, and stretch the siphon upwards, and do not touch the skin covering the testicles: and cut the siphon as best you can, either entirely or in pieces, especially its delicate side. For if you do not carefully examine it, there is no security in the incision, and the water will flow back.
But if an egg proceeds from its own skin externally during your operation's hour: then when you have completed the siphon's section, bring it back. Then gather up the two lips of the skin covering the testicles with a stitch.
Then care for it like other wounds until it heals.
And if you find a corrupted egg due to another kind of blackness, then it is necessary for you to tie up the vessels that are the suspender, fearing blood flow.
Then cut off the testicle with its suspender, and draw out the egg: afterwards care for it as we have said.
If however water is gathered in two parts, then you will know that there are two branches: cut off therefore the other part equally as you did with the first.
And if it is equal to you, so that there is one operation, then do so: afterwards wipe away the blood. And introduce a piece of cloth soaked in oil or rose oil into the incisions: and put another cloth that you had submerged in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles, and also on the belly: and place above double cloths, which are called poultices: and bind them above with a bandage, which has six sections according to this form.
Then two cloths are taken and moistened, and filled with the linen cloth that has been bloodied, according to this similarity: and make the ends which are pressed out from the belly, or damp wool: and gather them together with a binding in the loin of the arms: and one end takes hold above the anus up to the back, and the second takes hold at the part of the chest: and two ends above the two lower hips, and two other ends above the two groin areas, and gather the binding whole in the loin of the arms.
And when this type of surgery is performed artificially, the ramus (branch) is treated with a cauterizer in place of sectioning with iron. It should be done thus: take a cauterizer that is a fine knife, and cut with it the skin of the testicles; and it will be ignited, as we have narrated. Until the white membrane containing water is revealed, then take the cauterizer according to this form.
Are assimilated Greek letters.
Then pierce with it that membrane, and it is ignited, until the moisture goes out entirely.
Then stretch that membrane with a hook, and scrape it off with a burning fine cauterizer, and cut it as far as you can, until you have eradicated the entire thing.
And beware of oil, lest the fire touch it.
And know that this operation is more salubrious, and longer-lasting in preventing bleeding, and better than an operation with cutting.
If however, contrary symptoms appear to you during the time of cutting or cauterizing, such as a warm abscess or bleeding, or something else: then it is necessary for you to treat what is causing the contrariety from that with the cure that suits it, according to what has been mentioned.
But if the patient is fearful and does not await this operation on account of its horror: then perform a perforation according to what I narrate, and it is.
When you are certain of this in your presence, as we have mentioned the signs, that the ramus is watery: then it is necessary for you to make the patient sit on a raised seat.
Then pierce the abscess on the lower part of it with a broad spatula: and place the perforation according to the length of the body, and let the opening be wide, until all the water flows out.
Then place a compress on the place, and bind it, and let it be until the remaining water flows out: then care for it, until the wound is healed.
If however the contrariety is of water flowing out at the hour when you are perforating it; and this does not happen except because a white cloth makes a contrariety in the orifice of the wound, and prevents the exit of the water: then it is necessary to insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument with which water is drawn off, whose shape has preceded: or add something to the operation on the wound for a little while.
And know that the water returns and gathers after six months, or about those. When it has gathered, then it is purged in the same manner and passes through on a sick day.
Chapter 63.
Of the care of Fleshy Wounds.
Know that in the incision above this Fleshy Wound, there is a fear leading to harm in many dispositions. Therefore it seems to me that its removal will heal from it.
And I am recalling the operation on it and the appearance of suppuration.
I say therefore that many suppurations occur in bodies, from which testicles are composed: and this happens for many reasons, namely.
Or from excessive or sharp fluid that flows to the testicles. Or from striking.
And the appearance of the suppuration is according to the color of the body, and no pain is found in it: and it is a grave suppuration.
And perhaps it is a stone-like suppuration, whose color is dark, and there is no sensation to it.
And sometimes it happens from the constriction of arteries and their inflation, just as I have already recalled; or from the inflation of veins.
What therefore is from them by way of inflation of arteries, is known by the appearance of the suppuration, when you compress it with your fingers. And it is not necessary for you to touch it directly.
What occurs through venous inflation is not scattered when compressed with fingers.
And now it is possible to make an incision above this type and above other flesh; and that is, as you would cut the skin of testicles. Then stretch the womb upwards and pull it out with a white cloth: and free the suspensory ligament from the vessels, and bind the vessels; and cut the suspensory ligament after you have freed it from all parts of the womb.
If therefore the womb is consolidated with those born flesh, then it is necessary to grasp the womb and cut it.
And if there is adhesion between something from the peritoneum or in what is between the vessels: then it is necessary to free all that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
But if there is birth of flesh in the place of adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary to cut all of that and pull out the womb, as we said.
When therefore your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine: afterwards care for it with other treatment, until it heals.
Chapter 64.
A treatise on the care of Gouty people who are afflicted with Vine.
Vine is a swelling wrapped up with some wrapping, similar to a boil, with softening of the testicles. And it occurs difficult for an infirm person to move and exercise, and to walk.
And in the treatment of this illness is from fear, due to what was previously mentioned.
But it is necessary for us to say how one operates in it according to what the first ones did.
I say therefore that it is necessary for you to make the infirm person sit on an elevated seat. Then push down the suspensory ligament of the testicles. Then grasp the skin of the testicles with your fingers, along with the veins that are nearby the penis; and let another assistant hold them, and stretch them out with a strong extension.
Then cut with a sharp-bladed spatula across the width of the veins in a straight section, until the veins are exposed.
Then scrape off all parts, just as we told you to do with the arteries that are in temporal regions.
Then insert into them a thread which is double, and tie it at the first point where they occur; and tie it again at the last of these. Then cut them in a straight middle section according to the length of the body, and remove what is gathered from corrupted, fetid moisture.
Then care for the wound with the treatment of other wounds, in which pus is generated, so that the veins that nourish one testicle may fall. For it is not bad by that.
But if it happens that the veins are all injured, then it is necessary to remove the testicles with the veins: so that the sperm may not be deprived of nourishment due to the incision, and wither away or dry up, and not be beneficial along with them.
Chapter 65.
Of the Treatment for Intestinal Ramrods.
The exit of this Ramrod is from a section that occurs in the siphac extended above the belly in the part of the groin from the ventral abdomen.
Therefore, the intestines descend through that rupture to one testicle. And this rupture is either from the siphac or its extension.
And these two kinds occur due to many causes. Or from impact. Or from a fall. Or from a blow. Or from the elevation of a heavy object and similar things.
And a sign is when it comes from an extension of the siphac. It is what happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly; and it is an equal apostema towards the depth: therefore, because the siphac compresses the intestine.
And its sign is when it comes from the section of the siphac, because it makes happen a sharp pain suddenly from the beginning; and it is a different apostema, appearing under the skin nearby: and that is due to the exit of the intestine and its course towards the exterior of the siphac.
And sometimes it issues forth with an intestine wrapped around; and this is called the Intestinal Ramus and Zirbia: and sometimes it happens with inflammation.
And sometimes it runs into the intestine with feces and is retained there; and it is accompanied by the destruction of a sick person: because it makes happen a bad pain, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this disease's species with iron there is fear; therefore it is necessary to beware of accidents in that.
And the method of the operation is, to force the sick person to reduce their intestine by hand to the inner concavities of their own, if they obey. Then it should be raised above his neck between your hands: and lift up his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin to the upper parts, and cut the scrotal skin entirely along its length. Then place in the two lips of the incision, hooked instruments, according to your need to open the incision with them; and the incision should be such a size as it is possible for an egg to come out from it.
Then strip away the siphac and what is under the skin of the testicles, until when the white siphac is uncovered, hard from every part: then introduce your index finger into it, following the testicle, in that which is between the white siphac, which is under the skin, and between the second siphac and without sticking to it which is in the posterior part of the testicle.
Then move your right hand to the inner side of the testicular skin: and with this extend a white cloth upward, with your left hand. And lift the egg up with the cloth to the part of the sectioning: and instruct the assistant to extend it upward: and you loosen the adhesion which is behind the complete solution.
And search with your fingers to see that nothing from the intestine is wrapped around the hard white cloth. If however you find something [there], then push it into the lower belly.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made from ten threads, and insert it into the back of the cloth, that is, the tunic that is under the skin of the testicles which follows the section; then cut off the ends that protrude from the thread until there are four threads. Then place some of them on top of the others in the shape of a cross, and tie with them the white cloth, about which we spoke, because it is under the skin of the testicles tied tightly, until nothing from the vessels that nourish them can reach there: so that no hot abscess may occur. And place another ligature outside the first ligature, two fingers less long from it. And after these two ligatures, let go from the white cloth, which is under the skin of the testicles, as much as a finger's length; and cut off the remainder entirely in a rounded shape, and remove the egg.
Then cut off the lower part of the skin of the testicles by sectioning, from which blood and pus flow out: just as we described above.
Then apply a bandage soaked in oil to the wound: and apply the ligature which we described. And sometimes the white cloth that we mentioned is cauterized after its incision, fearing a flow of blood. That often happens indeed. And let go of the ligament until it falls by itself.
But if its case is delayed, then let it be anointed with hot water; and place over it what we said, until it falls.
Then take care of the wound along with the rest of the wound treatment, until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
About Wounds from Thorns.
In this type of thorn wound, I have not seen anyone who has dared to treat it with iron.
And the first indeed said that this happens just as we narrated about thorn wounds that are accompanied by vines. Which is to tie the vessels below after incision over them with ease; then cut in the middle, and cure finally with what opens it up, until the vessels fall; and cure the wound according to what we said, until it heals.
Chapter 67.
About Disruptions that Occur in Groins.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we said, and the swelling appears and does not go down to the testicles; and if it goes down, it is slight and returns to its place in all hours: but if it persists with this condition, a fissure forms in the scrotum until the intestines descend into the scrotum.
And that happens from the stretching of the scrotum, which is in the groin, as we said. Which is because the scrotum stretches: then it becomes soft and a boil forms, and swells.
And its cure is with a cautery, as was previously mentioned about it.
And sometimes it is cured with iron, according to this method: and it is, that the patient lies on his back between your hands. Then cut the area of the rupture's boil and swelling, with an incision through its width, according to the size of three fingers.
Then tie the alsifak and those that are under the skin until the white alsifak is uncovered, which is under the skin following it.
Then take a radium and place it on top of the prominent part from the alsifak, and press it deep into the belly.
Then take two prominent parts from the alsifak and place them on either side of the extremity of the radium, and connect one to the other with a suture; then withdraw the extremity of the radium.
And do not cut off the alsifak entirely, nor stretch the skin, nor anything else, as I have taught you in the cure of intestinal hernias.
Then care for that wound with a wound treatment. When therefore you cut the threads, clean that and restore the wound until it is consolidated.
For the sisch is contracted and no prominence of rupture is added.
And cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to health.
Chapter 68.
A treatise on the softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in some people, because of which the flesh that is between them becomes soft and their appearance is marred.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is asked to cure this to make the patient lie on his back and cut off all the softened skin that is over the natural skin.
Then gather two flaps with a suture: and if you wish, add a surplus of the softened skin in three or four sutures, and make the suture firm.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then care for the remaining wounds with a treatment until it heals, and the threads fall away.
Chapter 69.
A treatise on Castration.
You should know that Castration is excommunicated by our law: and because of this, I would have been allowed not to recall it in my book, and it is not necessary to recall it unless for two reasons.
One of which is that a physician should know when he is questioned about it, and how to treat one who suffers from it.
And another method is that we often need to perform castration on certain animals for our benefit through them, such as sheep, wild goats, and cats, and similar animals.
Therefore I say that castration is done in two ways. Or through emasculation. Or through incision and cutting.
In the one that is done through emasculation, the method of operation is this: we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles become soft and relaxed, and then we cut them off with your hand, until they dissolve and do not appear under the touch.
In the castration done through incision and cutting, it is necessary to hold the animal firmly and press with your left hand on the skin of its testicles.
Then bind the suspensory ligament and cut above one end of the section, until two testicles come forth: then cut them after you have removed both, and do not leave anything except for a thin skin that is over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than the one done through emasculation, because emasculation perhaps leaves something of the testicles, which is why the animal desires to copulate.
Then take care of the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
On the Treatment of a Hermaphrodite in Two Ways.
A hermaphrodite is formed from males in two ways. One of them is, because it appears as if there is a space, or in the skin of the testicles, between two testicles, with a figure resembling a woman's vulva, with hair: and sometimes urine flows from what is in the skin of the testicles.
In women, however, there is a kind, and it is the vulva of a woman over the pubis bone just like that of a small boy's penis entirely, protruding to the exterior: one of which is like a man's priapus, and two like two testicles.
And the treatment of three kinds, two from men and one from women, is: because it is necessary to cut away excess flesh until the impression of those parts disappears. Then the care for these wounds is by the same cure as for other wounds.
However, in the second kind of men's genitals from which urine emerges, which is on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor its cure at all.
Chapter 71.
On the cutting of the clitoris and the flesh protruding in women's vulvae.
The clitoris is perhaps added to the natural organ until it becomes foul and its appearance is repugnant; and sometimes it grows large in certain women to such an extent that it expands like a man's penis, and reaches as far as copulation.
Therefore you must grasp the excess of the clitoris with your hand or a hook and cut it away; and do not linger too long in cutting, especially at the root of it: lest bleeding occur.
Then care for it by the same cure as for wounds, until it heals.
However, the flesh that arises is the flesh that grows in the maternal orifice until it fills it; and perhaps it emerges to the exterior according to the likeness of a tail: and on account of this some call it a caudate affliction. Therefore you must cut it away just as we cut away the clitoris, and care for it until it heals.
On the cure of the Alraticia, which is an unbroken vulva of a woman.
Chapter 72.
The Alraticia is an unbroken vulva of a woman or one with a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is from the preceding illness: and it itself comes about either from innate flesh added on, or sifach subtle, or spisso: and it occurs either in the depth of the matrix, or in its sides, or above it, or below it: and it prevents copulation and conception, and childbirth, and perhaps menstruation.
And knowledge of this is obtained through the observation of a midwife if the obstruction appears to be nearby.
But if it is not apparent, then search for it with your fingers or with a probe.
But if the obstruction is from subtle sifach and is near two lips: then hasten and tear it apart.
And you should place poultices on both lips.
Then place your fingers of both hands together, and the woman should be placed on her back with her legs spread apart. Then stretch open the two lips with force until the subtle sifach is torn apart and the obstruction is opened.
Then take a piece of wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the spot; and let the woman sit every day so that the place does not harden again.
But if the sifach is thick and dense: then it is necessary to cut it with a spatula similar to a leaf of myrtle.
But if the obstruction is from innate flesh, then suspend it with a hook and cut it open: and be accompanied by medicines that calm the flow of blood without biting, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and lily-aggregate with owl's white.
Then administer a leaden cannula, wide, so that the wound does not quickly become inflamed, and keep it for several days: and then apply linseed from dry flax, and take care of the remaining treatment until it is healed.
And when the birth of other flesh occurs in the womb: it is necessary therefore that they be cut according to this method: while not an apostematic cancer exists apostemata cancerosa are not made contrary with iron entirely.
Chapter 73.
On the care of hemorrhoids, Athelila's and Bothor's red boils on women's faces.
Hemorrhoids indeed are the opening of venous openings, until much blood flows out of them constantly.
When therefore hemorrhoids are aged, they become thickened; and I said previously in the division of their kinds and signs; and I will say here which of them receive treatment and which do not.
I say therefore that hemorrhoids which are in the vaginal opening and do not appear to the sense: then there is no cure for them with iron.
Those however that are in the vaginal opening above which sense falls are those that are cured.
Therefore one should put the woman into a cold house. Then extend Athelila with forceps or with a rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then powderize over them at the flow of blood from one cut powder without cauterization: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thistle, and similar things.
Then push her feet against the wall for an hour. Afterwards put her into cold water.
What if the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, and walnut bark, and galls, and similar things.
Then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice with it on her back.
If therefore the blood is cut off with this, it is good; and if not, make poultices stick to her back, and breasts, without cauterization.
Then take wool and immerse it in the juice of tarar, or the juice of the tongue-licked reed, that is, aglantine, Pontic wine, and make it stick to the wound.
When therefore the swelling subsides, then care for the place with ointments until it is healed.
The albarmuth, however, is red and resembles the heads of hedgehogs, and has a rough appearance.
Therefore it is necessary to cut off what appears from it, according to what I said in equal proportions; and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
A passage about perforation of the uterus which occurs in the womb.
Many kinds of swelling occur in the womb, such as cancer, stone-like swelling, ulcers, and adubelati, and alekilati, that is, herpes, abscesses, fistulas, hemorrhoids, ragadiae, and thelils, and hot swelling.
And I indeed have already spoken about all these afflictions and their kinds, and the signs of each, and their cures in a division; it is necessary for me to say in this treatise about hot swelling which occurs in the womb, when it arises from swellings that collect pus, and it is necessary to know how its opening with iron is done.
Therefore it is necessary that you consider. Then if the pain of the swelling in its beginning is sharp with percussion and heat and fever, and you see it red; if sensation falls upon it, then do not hasten with perforation of it; and care for it along with it as long as it is beneficial for maturation, until the acuteness of the accident subsides.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit on a chair which has two armrests, and recline or lean back against her back, and gather her feet to the lower part of her belly; and her hips should be spread apart, and she should put her arms under her knees, and bind each one with suitable binding to it.
Then the midwife will sit on the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the womb is opened.
And it is necessary when you wish to administer this instrument, that you insert it with the radius deep into the woman's womb: so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the womb, and does not harm the patient.
But if the instrument is longer than the depth, then it is necessary to place pillows under the covering of the depth of the womb: so that the entrance of the entire instrument into the depth of the womb may be prevented. And it is necessary to place a cushion which runs along the instrument on the upper side; and to hold the instrument and to have the servant turn the cushion, until the depth of the womb is opened.
When therefore the Exitura appears and is touched by hand and is soft and smooth: then it is necessary to cut it at its head with a broad spatula.
When therefore the lochia is evacuated, then it is necessary to place a lint soaked in rose oil or green oil, in which there is some stimulating quality, into the wound; and put the lint, and draw out the section in the depth of the womb.
And place it externally on the womb, and on the back a clean woolen cloth soaked in water in which mulberries have been boiled.
Then care for it after two days with an ointment that is suitable for it, until it heals.
And when the womb and wound are washed, so that they are anointed with water and honey: then with water in which lily root or long aristolochia has been boiled; then return to the ointment.
But if the wound is hidden internally in the womb, then it is necessary to refrain from treating it with iron, rather cure it with that which we said in the division.
Head 70th.
Teachings of Obstetrics, how midwives should treat living embryos, according to their unnatural form that has emerged.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know first of all the natural form of birth.
Therefore the sign of it is, that when you see a woman compressed downwards and desires to breathe air, and is relieved above what is above her in childbirth, and hastens the exit of the embryo: then you will know that this birth is natural and its issue is over its head, and the umbilical cord with it, either suspended or hanging from the navel.
When therefore you see these signs, then it is necessary to compress her belly so that the embryo may come down quickly.
For when it descends over its head, the umbilical cord also descends with it, and is purged from those excessences by a good purgation.
But whoever is outside of this birth is unnatural, unpraiseworthy.
For sometimes the fetus emerges under its own feet, and its body emerges before its head, and its feet and hands together, or one foot: or it emerges with its head and hands; or it emerges ventrally; and perhaps it turns over onto its neck, and similar things from unnatural forms.
It is necessary therefore for the obstetrician to be prudent and subtle in all these things, and to beware of error and deception: and I am showing every form among them, and how it is a sign in it, and what it signifies by that, and stands over it.
When the fetus emerges over its own head in its natural birth, and that thing becomes strong above the woman, and childbirth becomes difficult for her, and you see its strength already weakened: then make her sit on a seat, or women hold her; and warm her abdomen with a decoction of fenugreek and with moist oils.
Then the midwife inserts a small wooden spatula between her fingers and finds with it a second one, and scrapes it with her own nail, until what is inside from moisture flows out; and presses the woman's womb, until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be cleansed with fenugreek mucilage mixed with sesame oil.
Then instruct her to be compressed after the enema; and make her cough with a condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour. For the fetus will exit immediately.
And if the fetus's hands emerge first, it is necessary to reduce them with ease and gradually. But if it does not obey during the introduction, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up; afterwards, strike the chair against the ground: and the woman must be held so that she does not fall with the shock.
So if the hands do not emerge and the fetus dies: then cut them, and extract the remaining fetus: and bind its hand with a cloth, and extract it evenly: for it will come out.
Exit of the embryo on its feet. When the fetus emerges over its own feet, then it is necessary to push them upwards; afterwards, turn the fetus slightly; afterwards, straighten it.
Then take one of his feet and stretch it out slightly.
When they emerge up to the hips, then instruct her to be compressed, and make her cough with a condiment: it will come out, if God wills.
And if it does not emerge as we have narrated, then reduce the fetus gradually, until you place it in its natural shape. For it will come out then with easy exit.
But if it is obstructed in all that we have narrated: then take a mixture of alum, and sesame oil, and gum solution: and strike the whole thing well with a mortar; afterwards, bind it to the woman's womb, and below her lower abdomen. Then make her sit in warm water, until hypothermia is reached.
When therefore you see that already the lower parts of hers are warmed, then make her sit in myrrh: and place it on. When however she holds the poultice for one hour, then make her sit down. Then make her cough: and bind her mouth and nose: and press the lower part of the belly with easy compression. For fire will come out immediately.
The exit of the fetus above the knees and hands. When it exits in this shape, then she will recover by gradually inserting her hands. Then the woman should be laid back on her neck, and her feet should hang down below: and she herself should lie on the bed, and wrap her hands around. Then press above her belly gradually. Then remove what is under her feet from the bedclothes, until she is prepared in the lower part. What if the fetus does not exit, then take her feet and move them with a strong motion. Then press what is above hypothermia gradually, until the fetus ascends to the higher parts. Then she should insert her hands and equalize the fetus gradually: and instruct the woman to compress until the fetus exits.
The exit of the fetus hanging breadthwise from the hands. She will recover by reducing her hands. But if she cannot reduce it, then lift up the woman and make her walk.
But if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed: and strike her legs with a strong shaking.
Then administer the ointment that you prepared from mucus.
What if she accepts the birth, then make her sit on a seat. Then strive to reduce the swelling of the hand, and shape it according to its natural form. And make a woman sneeze, and tell her to press down on herself until she expels it.
The exit of the fetus over its mother's shoulder, with outstretched hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back. It is necessary for the obstetrician to hold the fetus' hand, then gradually turn it over and adjust it with ease.
When it is adjusted, then place over its mouth what we have previously narrated, made from oil and mucus.
Then tell her to move slightly. When you have done that, then make her sit down on a seat and tell her to lean to the right side. Then tell her to press down, and make her sneeze with condiment.
The exit of the prepared fetus over the side. When it descends into the mother's opening according to this method with a cord, then cut the cord with your finger, until it is evacuated from moisture.
If it is suspended over the face and neck of the fetus, then cut it off from the navel so that it does not remain attached and dies.
Then push the fetus inside until you place it as needed, and tell the woman to press down a few times: for indeed it will emerge easily.
The exit of twins, or many fetuses. You should know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born. However, this is a rare occurrence and does not often happen.
But five is something outside of nature and they do not live at all; and it contains them, although they may be multiplied, with one cord: and separates them through a siphac, distinguishing between each one bound by its own umbilical cord.
And sometimes they go out like a single fetus goes out naturally and easily; and they come out with an unhappy outcome, just as we narrated.
But if some of them are difficult during birth and arrive at what we mentioned in unnatural forms, then cure them as we narrated: and let the obstetrician be subtle, and do what is done with ease and slowness, and shape according to every form with what is prepared for it from a guiding ingenuity towards salvation.
A reminder of what is formed in the womb from embryos, and those that are aborted.
Sometimes one is formed in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten: and it has been verified with me, that a woman having an abortion has expelled seven, and others fifteen, all of them formed.
What has been done through the measurement of a glorious wise person.
Therefore, this should be entirely in the knowledge of an obstetrician. Perhaps indeed it will come to her similar to that one: let her oppose it with what is necessary.
Chapter 76.
A treatise on the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you care for a dead fetus as I said in the division of medication, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use an operation with your hand, then you should consider.
If therefore the woman is of sound virtue and is not afflicted by any of the accidents from which one fears loss over her: then it is necessary that the woman be placed on a bed behind her back, with her head inclined downward and her legs raised; and let someone support her on both sides, or be bound to the bed, so that her body may not be pulled away during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the womb with oily liquids mixed with aloes and fenugreek seeds, and linseed.
Then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucus-like substances; then she inserts it into the womb with ease. Then he seeks with her the place where he will grasp the umbilical cords of the fetus, and the suitable places for that.
Therefore consider then, if the fetus is prepared to come out over its own head: then grasp the umbilical cords at his eyes, or on his neck, or on his mouth, or on his palate, or under his beard, or in the crease of his skin, or in nearby places along the ribs, and under the armpits.
But if the descent is over his feet, then in the flank and middle of his ribcage.
And it is necessary to hold the cord with the right hand; and place its curvature between the fingers of the left hand; and insert it with ease, and fix the cord in one of those places which we said, until it reaches the empty space.
Then fix another or third cord opposite to it, if necessary; so that the contraction is equal and does not lean towards one side.
Then it should be extended with equal extension, and not just straight ahead, but rather move in all directions to facilitate its exit, as happens when a tooth is being extracted.
And it is necessary between that, that the extension be softened. And if a part is retained from that, then the midwife should anoint some fingers with oil and insert them from one side to turn back what is being retained.
And if a part of the fetus emerges, then the cords should be moved to another higher location: do this until the entire fetus has emerged.
And if the arm emerges first and it is not possible to bring it back due to its contraction: then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped over it. Then take it out until the entire thing emerges, cut it at either the joint of the foot or at the elbow; and so you should do with the other hand and two feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or if there is a constriction at birth, or if water has gathered on its head; then it is necessary to insert between the fingers a spathula with thorns, and cut with it the head, and draw out the water: or break it off with an instrument called Almisdac, whose shape comes along with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that follows.
He should do similarly if the fetus has a natural large head; then it is necessary to remove the afterbirth: or take it out with a misdac, as we said. Then grasp the bones with forceps.
But if the head emerges and is constricted at the neck; then it should be cut, until the moisture that is in the chest flows out.
But if it does not unfold or comply with birth; then cut the head in pieces, as much as you can.
But if the lower part of the abdomen is apostematic, or there is dropsy within; then it is necessary to puncture it, until the moisture flows out from it.
But if the fetus is above its feet, then its extraction is easy, and its direction towards the mother's mouth is light.
But if it is constricted in the belly or chest; then it is necessary to take it out with a cloth that you wrapped around your hand: and cut the belly or chest, until what is within them flows out.
But if the remaining limbs are removed, and the head returns; then the obstetrician should insert their left hand. So if the mother's mouth is open, then insert your hand into the depth of the uterus and seek out the head with it, and grasp it with your fingers up to the mother's mouth: then insert one or two hooks into it, and pull it out with it.
If the womb's opening is obstructed due to a hot abscess that has occurred to it: then one should not work on it, but rather administer a flowing of moist things, fatty substances. And apply poultices. And have them sit in waters that soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, then it is possible to adjust it; then what we said for a living fetus should be administered.
If that is not possible, then cut quickly and extract it.
And one should not leave anything of the afterbirth entirely inside.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what we said for hot abscesses that occur in wombs.
If there occurs bleeding, then let it flow into cooling waters, and administer the remaining treatment.
And I myself have already seen a woman whose womb contained a dead fetus; then she became pregnant with another one in its place, and again the other fetus died. Then an abscess occurred to her after a long time in her navel, and it swelled until it was opened, and began to discharge pus.
So I was called upon for its treatment, and I treated her for a long time; and the wound did not heal.
So I placed on it some poultices of strong attraction, and the bone came out of its place. Then a few days passed for her, and another bone came out. I was amazed therefore, since there is no bone in the womb.
I thought therefore, because they were from the bones of a dead fetus.
I therefore examined the wound and extracted many bones from her, while she was in better condition than before; and now after a long time has passed, she is sending forth pus from the site.
And I did not confirm this foreign thing here unless there is knowledge and assistance for what the medical craftsman administers with his hand in healing.
Chapter Seventy-Seven.
About the shapes of necessary instruments in extracting a fetus.
The shape of the Handle by which the womb is opened.
Here is the shape of the Straightener, with which books are adjusted, having two handles at the two ends of two woods. However, this handle ought to be subtler than the Straightener; and it should be made either of ebony or of busse wood.
And the width of all wood should be almost two fingers; and the edge of each of them is almost one finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and half; and in the middle of the two woods are two additions made of the same kind of wood, which are already fixed on both sides, whose length is half a palm and a little more; and the width of each is almost two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are introduced into the maternal opening, so that it may be opened with them when you revolve the two Handles.
Another form similar to that one, subtler and lighter.
Let it be made of ebony wood or busse wood, according to the likeness of forceps. However, at the end of it there should be two additions, just as you see here above: and the length of all these additions is almost a palm; and the width of each one is two fingers.
When therefore you wish to open the womb with this, then make her sit on a bed, with her feet hanging down, and the opening between her thighs. Then introduce these two additions joined together into the womb; and you are holding the end of the instrument below between her hips. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with forceps, equally according to the quantity which you wish from opening the mouth of the matrix, until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of the other type of whirlpool which the ancients called the driving form, by which the fetus is driven forward.
The form of Almisdac, where the great head is crushed and resembles a forceps with teeth at the end, as you see.
And sometimes it is made obtuse, like a forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like those of a saw, by which it is inserted and crushed.
The form of a hook having one spine.
The form of a hook having two spines.
The form of Spatumilis having two extremities for cutting off the head.
The form of two wide Spatumilii.
All these instruments are exercised and the more their kinds multiply and are prepared by the craftsman, the swifter they are for their operation and higher among people, because of their quantity.
Therefore do not despise any of these instruments, but let it be prepared with you. For the necessity of them is inexcusable.
Chapter 78.
Of the Extraction of the Secondina.
When the Secondina is retained at birth, then it is necessary to hasten the weak [or feeble] so that it may retain its breathing. Then make her sneeze with what you have condensed: and bind your hand over her mouth, and nose itself. If it therefore goes out through this, it is well.
If not: then take a pot, and pierce in the cover a hole; and put into it herbs opening the womb, such as calament, rue, and anise, and chamomile, and sassafras, and cedar wood, and centaury. Take all these herbs, or some of them, and immerse them in water, and put them over fire.
Then put the reed's gum on top of the hole in the pot's cover, and another end into the womb; and hold it until the steam reaches the drying of the womb.
Then make her sneeze, as we said. For indeed the Secundina will come out with ease.
But if it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then instruct the midwife to dip her hand in sesame oil or aloe juice. Then insert her hand into the womb, and search for the Secundina with it. When she has found it, then take it and stretch it out gradually.
But if it is attached deeply within the womb, then insert your hand, as we have described, until you find the Secundina and pull it out gradually straight ahead, so that the womb does not fall under strong attraction. Rather, it should be pulled with ease to the right and left sides: then add it in proportion to the attraction. For then it will obey, and be saved, and depart from its adhesion.
And if the womb is constricted, as we have already described: cure it with sneezing and by means of the pot's medicine with herbs.
But if it does not come out with all that we have described, then beware lest you tire yourself over her in repeated extractions.
True, it is necessary to bind what comes out from the womb to the woman's hip. Then anoint it with the tetrapharmaco ointment. For this will corrupt it after a few days and dissolve it, and it will be eliminated.
But when it putsrefies, a bad smell arises from it to the stomach and head, and injures that sick person. Therefore suitable fumigations should be administered to it.
However some of the ancients have already experienced the fumigation of tansy and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated during the retention of the menses and secondines.
Make it from a piece of vitriol similar to alcama, or from cinnabar; and place the broad end on the fire: and let the fumigation be placed above the coals; hold it until that fumigation is consumed, and then repeat another.
Chapter 79.
On the healing of an unperforated hernia.
Many boys are born with unperforated hernias, which have been bound by the thin membrane of sifac. Therefore it is necessary that the midwife perforates that membrane with her finger: and if not, she should perforate it with a sharp spatula; and beware of getting a burn, lest she touch him.
Then place over it a cloth soaked in wine and oil. Then care for it with ointments until it is healed.
But if you fear that it will strangle, then place a lead tube into the hole and leave it for many days, and remove it when the child wants to urinate.
And also hernia occurs from the consolidation of a wound or an abscess. Therefore it is necessary to cut open that consolidation, and then it should be healed with what we said earlier about healing and lead.
Here is the translation:
On the healing of fistulas which occur in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are Nodation and Grossitude which occur near the anus outside or in a space of one part. And it is a fistula, one or more.
When therefore that Nodation becomes old, it opens and a white watery moisture or thin pus flows out from it.
And sometimes these fistulas are penetrating. Therefore the penetrating ones are recognized by what comes out through stool and vomiting when an infirm person uses a toilet: and perhaps a worm comes out from them.
And there are fistulas among these when they are penetrating into the space up to the bladder and up to the urethra. And there are fistulas among these that penetrate as far as the joint of the hip and as far as the node of the tail.
But from this by which you can know whether the fistula penetrates to the anus or not, is when you insert your index finger into the anus and also insert a thin probe made of air or iron into the fistula, when there is no twisting.
And if there is twisting in it, then insert into it a thin probe made of lead or a brush made of horsehair, until you feel the probe or brush with your finger.
And if you do not feel it thoroughly, nor does anything come out from the orifice through stool, vomiting, or worm as I said: then you will know that it is not penetrating: therefore hasten to treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating to the bladder or to the urethra: then its significance is the flow of urine from it and prevention of this so that the place is consolidated with medicines.
If however it is penetrating to the joint of the hip or to the socket of the hip: then its sign is that the probe reaches there if there is no twisting up to the socket: and finding pain around the part, and pus always coming out from it: and that medicine does not work in it, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
And for these fistulas that penetrate everywhere, there is no cure at all. And the cure of them is toil and futility for foolish physicians, who are formed against him.
But for those that are not penetrating and not old, there is hope of a cure with a probe: according to what I tell you, and I have already tried it; and thus the sick man lies between your hands on his back: and lift up his legs as far above his hip-bones, and let his hip-bones be inclined towards his belly. Then insert a lead or air probe into the fistula, if there is curvature in it, until you know where it reaches.
But if the sick man feels it around his anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your index finger into the anus.
Therefore, if you feel with your finger that the probe has already penetrated by itself and detected, besides what you feel between your finger and the skin or flesh: then you are certain to know that it is penetrating. Therefore, do not trouble yourself about it, since there is no cure for it, as we said.
However, it is said that the flesh is healed in some people through medication and the benefit that is hoped for from it. The method is to apply a fine cautery iron according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert the burning iron into the fistula until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat that twice or three times until you know that all those charred and filtered flesh pieces, which are similar to a bird's feather canal, have been completely consumed.
Then treat that with linen bandages wrapped in butter until those charred flesh pieces emerge: then treat it with ointments that produce flesh and consolidate.
If it is healed, it is good.
And if not, then it will never be cured with any other treatment.
And if it protrudes out and does not reach up to your finger that is in the anus, and there is a thick skin or membrane of flesh between it and the protrusion or fistula: and you see a fistula on the surface of the skin, then cut the skin at the beginning of the fistula, and you go cutting with the tenta that is in the fistula, until the incision reaches where the end of the tenta ends, and the tenta is released and falls.
Then cleanse those filtered flesh parts, which are similar to a bird's feather, so that nothing remains of them.
But if blood overcomes you and prevents you from operating between yourself and the operation, so that you must cut those flesh parts: then it is better to do so and provide more rapid relief by cauterizing it with fire or with sharp medicine.
For the cauterizing with fire brings together good habits, adds dryness to those added flesh parts, and absorbs blood and dries up moisture.
Then care for that with linen cloths wrapped in butter or crushed cauls, until the place discharges pus, and those dry flesh parts emerge into pus.
Then care for the wound with consolidating ointments that produce hard flesh, and there are medicines that have astringency and drying properties.
For when it is restored, then it is already healed; and you should not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula has already reached to the depth of the anus and is distant from the surplus of the body: then insert your finger into the anus and investigate with it.
So if you feel the tenta and between you and it is a membrane of flesh or skin, and it is near to penetration: then there is no operation in that case, unless according to the way of faith and hope.
Which is because it is administered in one of three ways: either you cauterize it as we said: or cut it until you reach its concavity, so that it becomes possible for you to insert a linen and effect a cure from nearby. And do not proceed too much with cutting, so that you do not cut the arm containing a vein, and a bad outcome of evacuation occurs without will. Then take care of it as we have said.
Perhaps it will be healed; or stretch the skin over it and cleanse it after you have cut it up to the vein, as we said, or with a tent, or with another sharp instrument. Then cleanse those filtered flesh parts that are in the cutting, as far as you can with probing.
Then attempt to restore the wound of the entire section and the upper opening where it is consolidated: and a fistula will remain open on the inside part of the anus, and it will be easier for the weak one.
And sometimes the fistula is suitable according to this method: and it is when you insert a tent into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus, around the surface of the body with skin and the margin of the anus: then take the perforated extremity of the tent, which is like an awl, that is, preparing skins, according to this form. And insert a thread wrapped with five threads into it, and around it. Then insert the tent with the thread into the fistula, until it reaches its concavity.
If then it is piercing the margin of the anus on the inside near, then pull out the thread from that opening: so that you insert your finger into the anus, and pull out the end of the thread, and gather both ends together: and tie each one, and leave it for one or two days: and as much as the thread goes into the flesh, tie it well, until those skins which are between the two ends of the thread come to be cut and fall: then take care of the wound, until it is consolidated and healed.
If however the opening of the fistula is not piercing: then make it pierce somehow as you have prepared for yourself, except if it is very deep. You don't have it so that you would do that on account of the elbow, so as not to cut it.
Then do with her as we said, until she heals.
The shape of the Spatholimus spine is as follows: it has a very acute curvature and one side is not acute, so that you do not cut what is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter 81.
On the suture of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows after an incision has been made in them, and on the cure of fissures.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways. Either they are within the anus, resembling charcoal vesicles, or rather they are like clusters of grapes. And there are small ones and large ones; and blood flows from them always, and it is one, and there are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are for the most part few in moisture, from which yellowish water or a little blood flows with constant flow, and they are according to the color of the body.
And the cure for that which is within the anus is, to cause a patient to sit and strain, until it comes out through the anus, and appear to you as an atonement. Therefore and suspend them with a hook; or hold them with your finger. Then cut them at their roots.
But if they are not retained by hooks, because of the moisture in them and their softness: then take them with a rough cloth or with a strip of coarse linen, and extract them with your fingers. Then cut them and powderize some hot powders over them after the incision, so that they may fill their place as a cauterizing agent. Or cauterize them according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterization. Then treat them with the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
If the patient does not obey the stool's exit, then use an enema on the sick person with a small amount of medication, so that they may be cleaned out with what is in their anus, and quickly obey the stool when the patient expresses themselves.
But if they are external from the anus, then their condition is light, easy; and it is as if you would take them with your finger, or take them with a pincer, and cut them off. Then treat them in the manner we have said until they are healed.
And whoever shuns cutting with iron, then it is necessary that you apply a stitch to them according to this method. Take the wrapped thread and insert it into the needle. Then pull the thread out to the top and make it penetrate with the needle into the root of it on one side: and wrap two ends of the thread around the lower part of the needle, and be lateral; and tie the athelil tightly strong. Then knot the thread and pull out the needle.
Do that with all the athelil, and leave one; do not bind it so that excess blood does not flow from it.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or safflower oil over the anus, and place it on top of the anus; and instruct the patient to rest. Then let it be, until it falls off.
When therefore the athelil fall off, treat them with ointments and the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
Of the Treatment of Fissures. For many times fissures occur due to constipation and natural constriction.
When therefore they become old and medicine is not effective in them: then it is necessary that you scrape with a spoon or your finger until they become moist, and remove the upper crust that prevents them from consolidating. Then take care of these until they are consoled according to what is necessary.
But if they do not consolidate: then repeat them with a more vigorous reason than the first, until they bleed much, and then take care of them, until they heal.
Of the cure of Almirmas of turned men, and not turned men: and Aethelils sores, and Formicas.
Chapter 82.
Know that Almirmar is nothing but a rounded knot according to the color of the body, like the head of a key: and it occurs throughout the whole body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and toes: and it happens from them pain at walking.
Therefore, what is around the head of the key should be cut, and held with forceps or a hook, and pulled out from its root.
Then take care of that thing; and if you wish, cauterize it as was done previously in its own chapter.
From Aethelils sores, one is a small, rough, filtered, rounded prominence above the surface of the body. And it often occurs in the hands of boys.
And its cure is to stretch out the Aethelil, and cut it: or tie it with a silk thread: or with a hair, until it falls. And if you wish, cauterize it as was previously mentioned with fire or with sharp medicine: and now the Aethelils, both those that are turned and not turned, will be eradicated with the instrument that I shall say.
Formica is also a small, filtered, rough prominence above the surface of the body, going down very deeply into the skin. And when it finds cold, there is felt in it like the sting of a flea, and it occurs throughout the whole body: and most of it occurs in the hands.
And its cure is to take a tube made from the feather of a goose or a strong vulture's wing: and place that tube over the Formica, until it contains a circle of the parts of it. Then revolve your hand with a catheter, until you cut out what is in the circumference of the ant: and put it in deep flesh, and uproot the ant from its root.
And if you wish, do that with a hollow tube of air or iron, according to this shape.
Sit the upper end of the catheter above, drawing it upwards to unwind the numbness wrapped around, so that its relaxation and rotation may be felt on the grasping finger.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant according to what is mentioned before in the cauterization of Atthelia in the chapter on cauterizing.
Chapter 83.
A chapter on the forms of instruments that are used for enemas in ailments of the bladder, and for the purgation of the bowels, and for colic.
Sometimes an enema is made from silver, or from golden bronze, or from melted air, or malleted.
And sometimes it is made from these instruments, small and great, according to those in which they are administered.
Therefore that which is administered in the treatment of small children, let it be small: and whose bladders are weak or painful, so also their enemas.
Great Enema.
Its tube, that is, the upper head where the womb is tied up, be broad according to this shape: and let there be a distinction so that the womb may be tied as you see, and its lower extremity which enters the anus, be mute, that is, not open, gentle, very soft, drawing down to subtlety: and on one side of it be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And let the width of the hole be according to the thickness of the threads, and slightly thick, and let the womb in which medicines are placed from animal bladder: or from a sheep's parchment, which is according to the form of an asparagus stalk: whose root is one palm.
And it will be pierced through many holes as it is revolved, and there will be space which is between every hole the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes a strong thread made from raw flax, which is composed of ten threads or thereabouts, and join it to him like an armadillo. When then this is put into him, let it be tightened at the head of the catheter between two distinguishing constrictions with a strong constriction. Then cleanse with it.
And this is the form of the circle of intestines depicted here, and of the holes.
The quality of cleansing with it is: that you fill the catheter or bladder from medicine, which has been warmed according to the tolerance of the sick person; and beware lest it be very hot or very cold.
Then the sick person will be lifted up on his back and raise his legs to the higher parts; and place under him an inthan, that is, a hide or linen cloth, over which people lie.
Then grease the extremity of the catheter with oil or with egg white or with fenugreek mucus or similar. Then insert it into the anus with ease. Then let the attendant take the catheter with both his hands simultaneously and express it with vehemence until everything that is in the catheter is emptied into the intestine.
Then draw out the catheter and let the sick person raise his legs to the wall.
What if medicine compels him to evacuation, then let it be done as much as possible. And if he sleeps all night with this, it is more likely to be the last one beneficially.
But if you cleanse him with cathartics in the pains of intestinal dissolution and his exit is hastened: then iterate the catheter until he is healed.
What if there are hemorrhoids or painful ulcers in the anus: then let the catheter be very fine, soft, made from those catheters with which children are cleansed.
And this is the form of a fine poultice on which the skin should be tightly stretched.
Chapter 44 of the Head.
Now I have spoken in the division of wound treatment about what was fitting for the book, and I will say here the treatment of those wounds with hand and with medicines according to need.
I say therefore that wounds are differentiated according to what causes the wound and according to the place on which the wound falls.
Therefore, the causes of wounds are often like a thrown stone: either from a knife's cutting or a razor's cut; or from a blow with a lance, wood, or arrow, and similar things from many other objects.
But wounds that are caused by locations on the body are, such as a wound that falls on the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or hip: and similar ones from those other members.
And I am telling the treatments for some wounds, in order to set forth a reason and rule over the remaining wounds.
And I begin with simple head wounds, since the recollection of compound ones will come at the beginning of chapter three.
I say therefore. When a simple wound occurs on the head and is not accompanied by bone fracture: consider then whether it was caused by a thrown stone or something similar, and only has broken the skin; and if it's a large wound and you fear a bad outcome from suppuration, then hasten to perform a cephalic bloodletting immediately, and don't delay; and take out of his blood according to the quantity of its virtue: unless some obstacle prevents bloodletting, especially if the blood flowing out of the wound is scant. And let the bloodletting be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the bloodletting be from the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the patient beware of fullness, and wine, and heavy foods.
But if something prevents cutting off, then let less be taken from food, and let him not approach flesh nor wine.
And place on the wound if a warm abscess occurs to him, a poultice infused in rose oil alone, or with wine having purging properties.
But if you are free from a warm abscess, then place on the wound, if it is recent and still with its own blood, and has not been disturbed by air: and that powder which I will tell you afterwards; and if it has already been disturbed by air, then place some ointments upon it until it heals.
But if the wound is large, or is from an incision with a sword, and similar: and its edges are not brought together by poutlices, then bring them together with suture, according to what I will tell you about the sutures of their wounds in the belly.
But if the wound is already detected by bone and hangs, and there is no retention of it except with a small sling: then cut it. Then care for the wound with medicines and restore hard flesh to its place under the skin. And especially instruct the patient to eat foods that are heavy, such as heads and cooked wheat, until he is like a pulse: and similar things.
What if you find putrefaction on the skin and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut out the putrefaction entirely and throw it away. Then care for that one.
But if there is an artery or vein from which blood flows in these wounds, and it is not cut off by medicines, then inquire about the artery. So if you find it not severed, then sever it with a Spatulum or tie it. What if necessity demands when what we said does not help, then cauterize it until the blood is cut off.
If however these wounds are small, simple, then the remedy for them is easy, light: so that you may sprinkle powder over them this powder because it consolidates them before they change with air.
Mode of the Powdered Incarnate. Recipe: Take one part of olibanum, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished lime. Grind it well and sift it through a sieve. Fill the wound with this mixture and bind it tightly until it adheres well to the skin and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind the wound above with lint, and let it be, nor loose it until it remains sound, so that it does not suppurate. For this medicine is not to be removed from the wound until it has healed.
And sometimes the lime alone does this work when you do not have olibanum and dragon's blood in front of you. And it also performs the same operation on many large wounds when it is suitable to be placed on them and bound up, and they are recent wounds with their own blood which has not been altered by air.
But if the air has already altered them in some way, especially during the time of summer, then there is no intention to use this powder: therefore, care for it with what we have said, so that you place over it certain digested ointments or put on it poultices made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until they discharge pus. Then care for the rest of the cure, until they are healed.
If, however, a fracture occurs with the wound in a bone and it is small, then extract that with Gesta: and I will now speak of the cure for fractures of the head, as future.
The Wounds of the Neck.
If a wound occurs on the neck then there is no difference between it and a wound of the head when it is simple.
If however the nerve of the neck has already been cut, or the artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no art in it except to remove the cure of it with what causes it to make a strong stiptication, such as ziniar, and zegi, and similar things. Because they harm nerves, and contract them.
And do not put anything cold whatsoever on the wound: because the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is a higher part of the members: and that which cures it should be from gentle medicines, such as lime washed with sweet water several times infused with oil, or with rose oil, and tuthia, when it is also washed with sweet water: and other mineral stones, according to this method, and moist ointments.
If however the wound is large, then administer a suture: or bind its edges with lint. Then take care of it until it heals.
If the wound has a depth or occurs on the lower part of it where pus has already accumulated, then puncture it in a more depressed area.
And if an artery has already been cut in the wound and its flow of blood has followed: then separate it, or cut it off, and tie it off: or cauterize it, if necessity demands that.
If however the vertebrae of the neck have already been cut, or the whole thing, and the ligaments are saved: then bring together the edges of the skin with a suture over a canna of the neck, and do not touch the neck itself, but rather equalize it, and return it to its natural shape. Then bind it with a bandage that is fitting, and let it go for several days. Then take care of it with ointments in which there is stiptication and drying, until it heals.
If however the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then search for it; then if there are fragments of bone within it, remove all of them or as many as you can and leave what is not prepared to rot until the wound becomes putrid, separates, and its discharge subsides.
If the wound has been recent, then powder the surface of it with the powder I have described. But if a bone appears in the wound and a fistula forms, then treat it with that remedy which is mentioned in its own chapter.
On Wounds of the Knives.
If there is a puncture from a lance or dagger, and you see its depth, then consider it. If therefore pus is discharged from the wound and a sick person breathes heavily because of it, then you will know that the wound is mortal.
What if there is no great depth and it is recent with its own blood? Then do not put powder on it from the first hour, nor bind it up, so that the blood may not be retained in its depth and turn back to the heart and kill the sick person: but put a attracting ointment on it and open it twice a day.
But if you do not have an ointment present, then put old lint into the opening of the wound, so that it may suck up what discharges from it through moisture: and make the sick person sleep over the wound, so that what forms in it may flow out.
But if already three days or more have passed since the wound occurred, and it does not happen to the sick person that he has a spasm, nor a bad trembling of the heart, nor constriction in his breathing, and you see its other conditions are good: then you will know that the wound is sound. Therefore heal it with liniments and all other healing remedies until it is healed.
If indeed his healing is delayed and it always opens up, then you should know that already a fistula has formed. So cure him according to his chapter.
And if the wound is from a cut made with a sword or dagger and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then cure him by sewing it up as before if it is large; or with powder if it is small.
But if he has already made an impression on the bone and fragments have fallen out: then examine the wound and hurry to remove those fragments if they are separate. If they are not separate, then leave them alone until the wound becomes putrid, for their removal would only be an annoyance.
As for other accidents of wounds in other limbs, the judgment in treatment is that which we have mentioned.
On Wounds of the Belly and Exit of Intestines and their Issues.
The disruption that occurs in the belly is great, moderate, and small.
Therefore from a great disruption sometimes the intestine or the number of intestines goes forth.
Wherefore their introduction and suture is more violent and difficult.
And a small disruption also becomes difficult in another way. Therefore, it follows that their reduction becomes more difficult if you do not hurry to introduce them into their place immediately, since they are inflated, opened, and swollen; therefore the entrance of them becomes difficult.
Therefore, it follows that a medium-sized disruption is better: since with it the reduction of the intestine does not become difficult, as it does in these two cases.
Know that the suture of the belly is according to four modes.
Two common sutures meet in the suture of the belly and in the suture of other wounds of the body; and two other sutures properly communicate with other wounds. However, these are more proper with stitches for the belly; and I will tell you each one with explanation and declaration.
I say therefore, because when a wound is small and something from the intestine protrudes from it, and it becomes difficult to reduce it then, that is due to one of two methods. Either because of the narrowness of the disruption, as we said: or because there is inflation within the intestine due to cold air.
When therefore that is so, then it is necessary to warm it up, so that you would immerse a sponge or a wet cloth in warm water alone. Or boil wild madder, and cypress, and asafoetida, and mix with them the intestine, until the inflation is resolved.
Sometimes it makes that wine which has astringency, and it is better than water alone for the resolution of inflation.
When therefore you see the inflation already resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which alum or mulberry has been cooked. For by that it is alleviated its entrance with a small quantity.
If however it resists return after this cure, then find a little bit in the disruption with an instrument used to cut off hemorrhoids.
And the first cure is better when prepared than when cutting: and there is no forcing to cut after necessity and deficiency of the instrument.
Let that part of it be one which is twisted, acute, and the other part not acute, and let the extremity be subtle, but not with the subtlety of a Scythian, rather be somewhat obtuse: and that is what resembles a caiada, as you see.
When therefore the wound is enlarged and enters the intestine, then it is necessary that its reduction should be according to its natural shape in its own proper place, if possible above it: because it is better.
When the disruption is wide in the lower part of the abdomen: then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head. And if it is in the upper part of the abdomen: then place his head and chest higher than his lower parts.
And similarly if there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the abdomen: then place your intention and your attention always on this, that the part where the wound is should be higher than the other part.
And thus it is necessary to do so in great wounds and in medium-sized wounds.
But in small wounds, do it as you are prepared for.
Then have a pious servant present between your hands, who holds the entire disruption with his hand and gathers its edges. Then remove something from it to the one who follows in suturing, something after something: and this is the common method of suture for one.
And it is, that you take a needle or a number of needles according to the size and depth of the wound. Then let go from the edge of the disruption the length of a ring finger, that is, of a doctor: and fix one needle so that you insert it into the skin on both sides at the edges of the cutaneous layer, with two edges of the sifac, as much as is under the skin from the inside out, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and you have already gathered together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the sifac: and there are four orders.
Then tie with a double thread around the circumference of the needle several times from both sides at once, until the two edges of the wound are gathered together in a decent manner.
Then let go of the thickness of the finger and fix another needle in them: afterwards tie it with a thread, just as you did with the first needle. Therefore you should not stop doing that with him whom you need from splints until you complete the constriction of the wound altogether.
And they should be of medium thickness between grossness and subtlety: because very fine needles quickly pierce flesh: and thick ones have difficulty entering the skin: therefore they ought to be of medium thickness in subtlety and grossness.
And it is not necessary for the needle to be stuck in two nearby parts of the skin: so that the flesh may not be pierced quickly and the wound may not be opened before its own consolidation, and also when sutured, in order that the wound may not prevent its own consolidation.
Then cut off the ends of the splints so that they do not harm the patient in his sleep: and place small pieces of cloth from all parts on them which hold the extremities of the splints: and let them be, until you know that the wound is now consolidated.
And this kind of suture with splints is indeed more suitable for small wounds. Because it is enough for the suture to have one or two needles, or roughly that many.
However, the second suture is common, that you gather with one suture four extremities: two of skin and two of silk wound in one place, with a needle in which there is an evenly wrapped thread of equal subtlety and thickness.
Then when you have pierced with the needle these four extremities, withdraw the needle from the part where you began, so that the thread is released from the upper part of the wound: in order that it be a suture, like a suture of cloth by which cloths are sewn together, and place between every suture the thickness of a small finger.
People know this kind of suture.
And with this suture I closed the wound that had occurred to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and there was a larger disruption than the width of one palm: and something like two palms had come out from the middle intestine, and there was a disruption in the middle of the belly.
Therefore I made it repair after his intestine stood outside the wound for 24 hours.
The wound was therefore consolidated in so much time as it was, being around 15 days; and I took care of it, and he recovered: and he lived many years after that, living according to his habits.
And the doctors had judged that he would not recover.
And it was a miracle, since I did not treat it with ointment. Because I was in a place where I could not find any ointment, nor anything from medicines. So I placed a piece of old linen cloth on the wound twice a day, and persisted with washing it with honey water until it was healed.
However, I will mention two kinds of stitches suitable for this narrative.
And it is, that you begin with a sharp stitch: and insert the needle from the outer to the inner part.
When therefore the needle enters the skin and follows the course of a tendon going according to the length and width of the entire body: let the end be left at the side where you inserted the needle, and make it pass through the other extremity from the inner part to the outer in the opposite direction.
When therefore you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate according to this in the same extremity of the mirror on the outside to the inside: and leave the end at that side, and make the needle enter the other extremity from the inner part to the outer: and make it penetrate with your penetration as you make it penetrate into the edge of the mirror which is on its part, until it penetrates into the whole.
Then begin also from this same side, and take it along with the end which is from the edge of the mirror on another side, and pull out the needle from the skin as far as it has penetrated.
Then bring it back into that skin and join the end of the mirror which is on the other side with this end: and pull out the needle from the skin as far as it has penetrated from its part, and do it in reverse once and again: and do it in reverse after reverse, until you have brought all the external parts together according to that example.
And the highest point of this suturing is that you should make your sutures like those of pelt-makers who sew pelts: so that on one side of the skin, you join it together with a single thread from end to end; and then leave it off on another side and tie it back again on another until you complete it.
The second kind of proper suture, which Galenus said.
This is the way he said it should be done, by likening it to how certain physicians sew together, so that they join all parts together with their corresponding natural counterparts: and they apply the end of one piece to the end of another, and the end of one thing to the end of another. And this is done according to what I am telling you.
You should insert the point of the needle into the end of the thread that is nearest to you on the outer part, and make it penetrate only as far as the inside; and then let go the two ends of the thread. Then turn back the needle and make it penetrate from the outer part to the inner part on both ends of the thread.
Then turn back both and make them penetrate from the inner part to the outer part on the other two ends of the thread, which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is a better and easier common suture, and it is the suture which was previously mentioned.
This then is the word of Galenus also.
And certain people said. The suture of the belly is rectified with two hooks. Which is to say that you should insert one thread into both of them: and begin with the insertion of the needle from where it is at your end, and make it penetrate until the other side, according to the suture of those who sew leather evenly.
And know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the belly: then the suture of it is more difficult than of other places of the belly.
The judgment of wound treatment is the judgment of other wounds.
For when you follow a recent wound with its blood, before it is altered by air: and bring out the intestine, and put it back in its place, and bind it tightly; then place it on humectated powder.
But if the air has already altered the wound: then place on it certain ointments that are present to you, until they cause pus; and let the strings fall off, and be consoled by sifac, and myrrh. Then take care of it as you would with other wounds, until it heals.
But if you do not have medicines present, then place on it immediately, as soon as it begins to emit pus, old cotton; and change it twice a day, as I taught you, until it heals.
For you do not need other medicines in many cases when wounds are simple.
But if you are afraid that the wound may spread to principal limbs with injury, then it is necessary to immerse a soft woolen cloth in temperate warm oil or rose oil: and place it around the areas between the groin and armpits.
For if it feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in its intestines (for this often occurs) then cleanse it with a stiptic wine, black and warm: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and is making an exit that penetrates to its hollow.
And know that what comes from the thick intestine is easier to heal from: and what comes from the thin one is more difficult to heal from.
However, the intestine which is called Jeyun does not accept healing from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is due to its multitude, which comes from veins, and the magnitude of those, and due to the subtlety of its body, and proximity to the nature of nerves.
If however that which proceeds from the wound is pus, and you subsequently find it fresh: reduce it according to your reduction, whereby you reduce intestines evenly.
But if a time has passed and it has become green or black: then it is necessary to bind it with thread above the place that has been discolored from it, so that bleeding does not occur. For in pus there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is outside of that ligament and place two ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that its attraction to you may be alleviated, and its extraction at the case of the pus and discharge of the wound.
Memorial of a wound which occurs in the intestine.
When a disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small: then it is possible to be restored in some people: therefore, since I have seen someone who was wounded in his belly with the blow of a lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the old wound had been closed: and a fistula formed, and a discharge and flatulence occurred.
So I applied the treatment until I was not confident in his healing: nor did I cease to fine-tune it until he was healed and the affected area had consolidated.
After I saw the place already consolidated, I was afraid for the patient, lest a subsequent evil occurrence should happen to him in his belly: and it did not occur to him from that subsequent evil. And he remained in better physical condition, eating and drinking, and engaging in sexual activity, and bathed himself, and exercised according to his own habits.
And some experimenters have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small: then it is necessary to bind it according to this method. And it is as if you were taking ants from large heads. Then gather two lips of the wound, and place a formication on one of them that has an open mouth above the two lips of the wound. When it therefore takes hold on those and tightens its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres and is not loosened.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not cease to do that with an ant after an ant according to the size of the wound as a whole.
Then reduce it [the formication] and close the wound. For those heads remain attached to the intestine until it is nourished by the intestine, and is healed, so that no harm comes to the patient completely.
And now it is possible to suture the intestine also with a fine thread: which has been taken from an animal's intestine, and attached to it after it has been inserted into the wound.
And it is, that you take the extremity of this thread from the intestine and scrape off a lot. Then tie the fine linen thread to its end. Then insert that thread into the wound and close with it the intestine. Then reduce it to its place.
And this method of suture with ants and intestine is not except by the way of confidence and hope.
You should know that a wound which is great, wide, especially if it is on one of the thin intestines: then there is no skill except to make it finer, nor is its healing at all.
¶ On the treatment of Ulcers, and Fissures.
You should know that every wound or apostema when it becomes old and worn out, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal, and always discharges pus, and is not cut away: then it is called universally whatever member it may be in a Fistula, and we call it Zuchemen.
And a fistula indeed is a true knot, filtered, hard, white: with which there is no pain, like the hollow of a bird's feather. And because of this, some call it Risati, that is, a feather.
And it is in certain hours watery, which discharges pus. And perhaps the moisture is broken up in certain hours. And sometimes this moisture is much, and sometimes little; and it is thick, and it is fine.
And I have already spoken of the division, when I mentioned wounds, that every ulcer which is not healed, nor does flesh grow over it, is not that except for one reason out of nine causes.
One of which is because there is a lack of blood in the body: or because it is evil itself: or because there is hard flesh between it and its edges, preventing the growth of flesh: or because it is filled with many foul things and filth: or because the wound within itself is putrid, and the matter sent to it is of bad quality: or because the medicine used in its cure is unsuitable: or because a corrupting influence falls upon the region, such as occurs in Caesaraugusta, where digestion of illnesses is difficult and healing of ulcers delayed by nature: or because there is one bone or a number of bones.
And I have already shown all these causes and signs of them, and their cures with medicines in division: and it is necessary for me to make you know the cure of a fistula and zuke, which occurs through the way of operation by hand.
You should know that a fistula occurs in all members of the body. For some of these are fistulas that reach the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or sinews: or the intestines, or bladder, or to some part of the ribs: or to some part of the vertebrae, or to some joint composed of joints: such as hands and feet: and among them are those that go to the proximity of the main member, and similar.
What therefore is among these abscesses, difficult to heal, is from illnesses that do not receive healing, and the occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
But if it is from an abscess which depth does not reach the places I mentioned: and you hope, and trust in its cure, and wish to come to knowledge of it, then take a tent made of air or iron, if the abscess extends straight forward, and explore it with itself.
But if there is twisting in the abscess, then investigate it with a fine leaden tent. Because lead is eased by the softness of its body and curves around the twisting shape.
For if the abscess has many openings, it is not possible for you to investigate above it with a tent. Therefore, inject a medicament through one of its own openings.
For the moisture with which you inject it goes towards other openings and flows out from them.
Then, by diligent inquiry, find out how it is possible for you to know that there is an opening or a nerve, and that the abscess is far or near, or whether it is one abscess with many openings, and standing above all that, with the utmost fortitude of yours: with your questioning of the patient, and discovery of pain at compression by your hand on the spot, and similar signs and causes of apostema.
When therefore you have stood above all those things with a true understanding, then go to the cure according to your confidence: and it is, as you consider then, if the abscess appears near or in a safe distant place from the joint, or from a nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places I told you about: then cut the abscess according to what was previously said in my narrative, and remove what is in it through filtration, and corrupted flesh, which arises in its opening from the flesh, or fat, and similar things: and care for it until it heals.
If however a fistula is of great depth and straightness: then it is necessary to cut into its depth as much as you can. Then cleanse it from all the corrupted flesh of it.
Then apply a linseed wrapped in sharp medicine: and insert it as far as the concavity of the fistula that you have grasped with forceps: do this several times, until the sharp medicine has eaten away all that remains in the concavity of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that produce healthy flesh, until it is healed.
If however it does not heal through this, then cauterize it as we have described.
If therefore the cause of the fistula is a bone, and you have identified it in yourself: then investigate it, and cut into it as I have told you: if nothing prevents you from doing so on account of a vein, or nerve, or principal member, as we said.
If therefore a bone is revealed to you and it has something of corruption and blackening: then scrape it away until the entire corruption is removed. Then care for it with what helps to cover it, until it is healed.
What if it does not heal and discharges pus as before: then you will know that you have not reached the total eradication of the corruption.
Therefore remove again above it, and make a thorough examination of its condition, and purification of itself with your utmost strength.
Then restore it. If therefore it is healed, that is good; and if not, then you will know that the corruption is in a deep recess of the body, which you have not reached. It is therefore not within your power to cure it, unless you leave it to nature.
What if the small bone is corrupted and it is possible for you, then draw it out with fine forceps that fit it.
If however there are many bones, then make a careful attempt to attract them all, and do not leave anything from them with your strength.
If indeed something from the moistures is opposed to you, and there is no fear or mistake in their cutting: then cut those moistures and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If indeed you do not have preparation for removing the bones from your hour, then place over the wound that will make it rot, and leave it until it rots what is around those bones of flesh and moistures.
And guard the wound so that it may not consolidate. And tighten the incision which you made in your operation. Then place on top of it, if you fear, a poultice submerged in powdered sulfur mixed with oil: or a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment, or some green ointments.
For when those moistures decay, and the bones separate from them, the removal of these is eased, and their attraction.
If however there is one large bone, such as the shinbone or hipbone, and similar to those, and what has decayed from it is a major part: then scrape it off with the last rasp until that blackness and corruption is removed. Then restore the wound.
If however what has decayed from it is a major part, and corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw through it, and cut all the way to the point where corruption has reached: then care for it until it consolidates.
And I tell you of Zukan, what befell a man on his shin: that you may place it as an example and aid to your operation.
There was a young man of around thirty years old who suffered from pain in his shin, caused by something that had moved inside his body, namely the internal parts, until they reached his leg and became inflamed with great inflammation. And it was not caused by an external factor.
Therefore it was extended with him until a certain time, together with an error of physicians, until an abscess is opened, and many materials concurred with him. And after that, his treatment was suspended until his leg was tunneled and many openings were made in him; which all discharged pus and bodily fluids.
Therefore a multitude of physicians treated him for almost two years, and there was no wisdom in their hands until I was summoned, and I saw his leg and the materials flowing from those openings with great flow; also every part of his body had already become gangrenous, and his color was yellow.
So I introduced a probe into one of the openings, and it reached to the mouth.
Then I examined all the openings: and I found that they were communicating with one another from all parts of the leg.
Therefore I hastened and cut above one of those openings until I uncovered a part of the bone; and I found it corrupted: which was already decayed, and denigrated, and had putrefied, and perforated, until it had penetrated to the marrow.
Therefore I cut away what was revealed to me, and prepared from the corrupted bone.
And I removed what was not in the bone except for that corruption which I cut away, and scraped. And I had already removed it.
Then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidation medicines over a long period of time. And it was not consolidated.
Then I probed again, and uncovered above the bone a second time after the first discovery; and I found a continuous corruption with the bone: and I cut away what appeared to me from that very corruption.
Then I attempted to restore it. And it was not restored.
So I uncovered it again above him, and did not cease to cut away the bone piece by piece, and attempt to restore it: and it was not restored until I cut off from the bone about a hand's breadth, and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored him with medicines, and it was consolidated quickly, and healed. And this iteration of the operation on him, and the cutting open of his wound, was not necessary unless due to the debilitation of the sick person, and the scarcity of their tolerance, and my fear for him regarding death, since harm befell him at all hours from excessive purging.
Therefore he was healed by a complete cure. And flesh hard and good grew in place of the bone, and a good arrangement took place in his body, and his strength returned. He turned back to his natural state: and there was no harm or discomfort at all in his walking.
But if the prominent bone is already broken in the body: then it is necessary that you splint it, according to this method: and thus: take a ligament, and tie it at the tip of the prominent bone; and order someone to stretch it upwards; and place another ligament made from coarse wool on top of the first ligament. Then tie it above the flesh that is on the bone; and stretch the end of it so as to pull the flesh down to the lower part; and you will uncover the flesh above the place which you wish to cut, in order not to injure the flesh with the cutting.
Place a piece of wood or a board under the bone below, in the middle: because when you do that, it does not prevent the corrupt flesh from being cut.
And it is necessary that the cutting should be above the corrupted place for a short time, so that the corruption of the bone does not occur; and its appearance does not appear to the sense, and makes another place cut in its turn.
What if the bone is corrupted and is not prominent, but rather continues with another part; and corruption is in its middle or in a part of it: then remove all the flesh from every part. Then place a piece of wood below.
Then cut that from the first part where there is corruption, until the cutting continues to the other part; and let the cutting be according to length for a short time, as we said.
If there is corruption in the joint, cut off the corrupted joint and saw away at the bone where it continues on the other side.
If indeed corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then there is no art except removal.
If corruption is in the hip of the hand or in the hip of the foot: then the matter in that case is very difficult. However, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you. And remove it, and clean the area according to what is possible for you, and with whatever skill corrects itself to you: when it does not cause opposition from the Vein or Nerve.
And know that scalpels and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and subtlety, and size, and smallness, and hardness, and rarity. Therefore, it is necessary that you prepare the suitable instrument for every kind of operation.
And know that these operations mean something to you according to the type of instrument you need when you have a long study with yourself. And knowledge of the methods of this art is a testimony to the modes of illnesses: then indeed you will find through yourself what fits each illness from instruments.
And I am strengthening you with the last number of instruments that you put examples on which you will cut, and proof by which you will test others.
Form of another saw.
Form of Sutures and Ligatures. Here is the translation:
And it does not agree, unless the heads of the joints are rubbed with him when they are corrupted, or a large and great mouth.
The greater form of the Razor.
The broad form of the Razor.
The Razor form with a concavity.
The other subtle form of the Razor.
The other curved end form of the Razor.
The small, subtle form of the Razor tip.
This resembles a Rasp and its end is like a Saw: it is shown in many places for scraping bones.
The form of the Razor which agrees with the perforation of what is scraped from bones.
Its end is triangular and has a sharp point.
It comes from India. And similarly, it is necessary for all things that we have said to be made of Razors, Cutters, and Saws.
About the cutting off of extremities and the sawing of bones.
The extremities putrefy, either due to an external or internal cause.
When you have been treated for that corruption with medicines and the treatment does not help: and you see the corruption occurring in a member which does not respond to anything: then it is necessary to cut off that member up to where the corruption ends, so that the invalid may escape through it from death or from the greater defect of the member.
And the sign by which this happens is that the member becomes discolored and blackens until it rots: which fire has consumed or decays after turning black: until the putridity reaches to what follows the member and spreads throughout the entire body.
Therefore, with the incision of this sort, and similarly if the cause of corruption is from the blows of certain venomous things: as of a sea scorpion, and viper, and adder, and similar ones.
Therefore, if the corruption or blow is at the end of the finger, then cut off the finger and do not give space to the corruption to spread until it reaches the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens on the hand, then cut off the hand from the wrist and do not give space to the corruption until it reaches the armpit of the arm.
And if it spreads into that, then cut off the arm at the elbow joint.
But if the corruption passes through and you see him around the elbow: then that person is on the point of death. And to administer beyond that in a cure is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly do the same with the foot, when corruption invades a toe, then cut off that one at the first joint; and if it reaches the calf of the foot, then cut off the entire foot. But if it ascends to the knee, then cut off the leg at the knee joint.
If corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no skill left except for abandonment and leaving the sick person to death.
And the method of cutting off a limb or sawing it is to bind the ligament at the lower part which you wish to cut off and bind another ligament above that place. And have the assistant stretch one ligament down below: and have the assistant stretch another ligament up above upwards. And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments with a spatha or broad knife, until the entire piece of flesh is uncovered. Then it should be cut off, or sawed.
And it is necessary that you put a linen cloth around all parts and the saw does not touch healthy flesh: so that the patient suffers additional injury and develops a warm abscess.
If however a flow of blood occurs inwardly while you are operating, then cauterize the place quickly: or put some absorbent powders on top that cut off the blood. Then return to your treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded member with a suitable bandage and care for it until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to a man on his foot, which is the same thing I am telling you.
What is this? For it happened on his foot that a blackening occurred, resembling the burning of fire, and that corruption first affected his finger before spreading to his entire foot.
Therefore the man healed himself after he saw the corruption affecting his member with its madness, which he found from the pain and burning; and it happened to him at the joint, and he was cured.
And after a long time had passed, the same corruption occurred on his index finger of his hand.
So he came to me and I tried to remove the excess with him, using medicines on his hand after purifying his body; and the excess was not removed, and it began to progress to another finger: until corruption spread throughout his hand.
So he called me to cut into his hand: and I did not consent to do so, hoping that the excess would be removed through my treatment; and I also feared for him death at the time of the incision on his hand. For the man's strength was greater than the calamity.
Afterward, since he had lost hope in me, he returned to his land: and came back to me about it, because he was impatient, and cut off his entire hand; and he was healed.
And I did not tell this story except as an aid to what falls under the category of this illness: and that it may be a sign by which it is shown, and according to which it should be acted upon.
On the cure of sinuses and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members and the time for its abscess to form pus lengthens until it bursts or perforates and what is inside it comes out along with the pus, and a hollow space remains as if it were a vessel; and the skin that covers it is like a piece of cloth that has been worn thin: and it does not reach its final stage of corruption nor impress itself on bone, nerve, or ligament. It deserves to be called Sinus; and it is not called Fistula. However, if its space prolongs until corruption sets in something of these members, then it is called Fistula, or abscess.
And its cure is to cut off the entire skin as it peels away; and especially when it has been worn thin and has become like a piece of cloth: and you trust that it will not adhere with the location due to its own corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and does not follow from this its final corruption; and if there is thickness on the skin from flesh, then cure it with an enema: and it is, to consider it at the sinus.
Then if it is large and the pus that comes out of it has a foul odor: then anoint it with an Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, and zinar, parts taken in equal quantities, gathered together in a vessel: and let them be decocted over fire until the medicine becomes red-hot and arrives at a thick consistency like honey.
Then take from it what you need and dissolve it with water and honey, and anoint the sinus with it: and tie off its opening and let the medicine remain in it for a period of two hours.
Then extract it with expression; make him do this daily until the sinus is cleansed and the odor removed.
And sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present to you: and it is, that you take the ash of wood vines or the ash from ilex woods: and pour water over it. Then anoint it with it, and cleanse with it until you are confident that the sinus is now clean.
But if the patient is not able to tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then cleanse him with water and honey, in which something has been mixed from crushed Indian fig. Or cleanse him with honey and wine mixed together, because of the property of honey that it cleanses and washes away: and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
When you do this a few times and are confident that the corruption of the sinus is now removed: then cleanse him with what causes flesh to grow in it.
And it is, that you take defuminated plaster: and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine: or cleanse him with certain medicines and other ointments, whose properties I have written in the treatise on ointments.
But if the opening of the sinus is narrow and does not admit the canula of the cleanser: then enlarge it with iron for a short time: or insert into it a linen cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment, or Basilic ointment, until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the opening is also large: then close its lips with a suture: and let it be as much as the cleanser can enter without addition.
And similarly if the opening from which pus flows is elevated upwards: then cut it in a lower place that is inside, so that the pus will flow downwards from there: because pus when constricted in the depth of the sinus prevents flesh from growing in it.
If it is not possible for you to cut the abscess as low as you like, then try to prepare the member by preparation that will cause the pus to flow out easily, according to how it has been prepared for you. Try to avoid leaving anything of the pus at all in it; and take medicines that consolidate, which are placed on the sign, fitting for what you want. And spread them over a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such a size that there may be communication with the entire abscess. Then cut with scissors directly into the opening of the abscess, making the hole in the abscess a little larger. Then spread another cloth with soft ointments over it, according to the size of the hole; and place it over it at a distance from the opening of the abscess, so that the exit of pus from it may be eased: and do not remove the cloth completely until several days have passed by.
But the one who is over the opening of the abscess is the one you remove at every hour, so that what gathers in it from the pus may flow out; and to know whether what flows out from it is much, or little, or digested, or undigested.
And with this, repeatedly examine the place of the abscess itself, whether its lord feels pain in it or not, and whether there is an apostema in it or not.
When therefore your treatment proceeds thus, and you see the material that emerges over the opening of the abscess, then you will know that the abscess is now adhering or approaching adherence: then therefore dissolve it in the morning or on the third day: and when you dissolve the wound, then change another cloth and renew the ointment.
But if after a long period a fine pus emerges from the abscess, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, since there are people among whom the generation of flesh in their wounds is delayed, and among whom it works contrary to this.
If however it issues forth from the sinus after many days as a foul discharge, then you will know that the sinus does not adhere.
If therefore the sinus is delayed and prolonged: then add to the drying of medicines that true physicians should make them humid in substance and dry in virtue, just as diaphrenic ointment when excess of addition from myrrh is added to it.
And from the greatest last thing that is treated, it is to take diaphrenic ointment and dissolve it with rose oil, and sprinkle over it an equal amount of old wine in its substance.
Then mix it with that, and use it.
And now it does the same thing in this action, when you do not have diaphrenic ointment available, use honey when you cook it until it thickens, and use it. Or take myrrh, and aloes, and frankincense: grind the whole into powder and sprinkle it over honey while it is hot. Then stretch a cloth over it and bind it over the sinus: and stretch with the honey that you cooked until it thickens: and sprinkle powder on top of it, and put it on the cloth, and bind it.
And sometimes it is administered with Aristolochia longa and the roots of Liliaceous Lily, and this is called Lily; and wheat flour and Centaury. Use them in simple or compound form, grind them into powder, and sift it; and sprinkle it over the honey that I told you, and use it.
What if the sinus prolongs and does not heal with this treatment: then you will know that there is corruption deep within it; or already it makes an impression on the bones, or in other hard parts, or ligaments: then treat it with Fistula cure, according to what has been said before.
Of the Cure of Fungus and Worn-out Nail, and Additions through the Incision of the Finger, and Section.
Panaritium is a boil that grows under the thumb of the hand or foot: and perhaps it grows on other fingers.
When then the matter of it is prolonged, and its cure is neglected, and a boil forms a hot boil: or it becomes corrupted, and discharges pus, until it corrupts the root of the nail; and perhaps it corrupts the whole thing, and perhaps the corruption reaches to the mouth, until it has a foul odor: and the tip of the finger becomes broad, and its color becomes dark.
When then you treat it, as we said in the division, and your treatment does not take effect: then you must cut off with a knife all the superfluity that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. For a cautery is very beneficial.
If however the bone is sound, and the nail is also sound, and the growth of the nail is already pressing on the flesh to the inside, and begins to pierce it, and hurt it: then you should put a thin piece of cauterized radium under the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut away the flesh with ease, and place over what remains of the flesh from medicines that burn and corrode, until the whole thing is removed. Then care for it with ointments, until it heals.
If however corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then it is necessary to cut away that bone and remove it: for it never heals as long as the corrupted bone remains.
What if you see corrosion and corruption spreading into the finger, then cut it off at one of the joints, according to what was previously mentioned about its remembrance. Then care for it, until it heals.
If however there is nail attrition or percussion, and a severe pain accompanies it, then it is necessary to bleed the patient first. Then cut the nail with a sharp Spatumilus section transverse from above downward.
And take care lest the incision reaches the flesh beneath the nail, for if you do so, you will cause severe pain to the inferior part and it will be the reason for the added flesh growing in its place.
Then care for the wound with something that soothes pains.
However, the added finger that grows on some people's hands is perhaps entirely fleshy: and perhaps there are bones in some of them; and perhaps it has a nail: and some of them grow at the root of the joint or their birth is in certain knots of the finger. Therefore, that which grows in certain knots of the finger does not move: and that which grows at the joint of the finger, perhaps moves.
Therefore, since the one that is fleshy among them is so, its cutting is easy. What is, to cut it at its root with a broad Spatumilus.
But the treatment of that which grows at the joint of the root is difficult. Therefore, refrain from cutting it.
However, the one that grows on the finger at the end of the knots, then it is necessary to cut into its first flesh with a rounded incision up to the bone. Then file off the bone with one of those files that are suitable for it. Then care for it until it is healed.
However, the formation that occurs on fingers individually, often occurs either from the birth of a person, that is, it grows with him, or from the consolidation of a wound, or burning by fire, and similar things.
It is necessary therefore that you cut off that formation until the fingers return to their natural shape. Then place licinia or cloth soaked in rose oil between them: so that they do not consolidate quickly, and separate between them: or place a thin sheet of lead between them, until the location consolidates as needed.
And similarly if consolidation occurs on some fingers with the palm, then cut off that consolidation, according to what is prepared and conforms to the shape of the limb.
On cutting out defects.
Varicose veins are those which are twisted, thickened, and full of superfluous melancholic humors that occur in many parts of the body: and most often they happen in legs, particularly in the legs of travelers and workers, and carriers.
Therefore it is necessary to administer a purgation of the body with black choleric medication several times with strong purging.
Then let a bloodletting be performed on the patient's basilica vein.
However, their treatment with iron is according to two methods. One of them is that they are cauterized and the black blood is drawn out. And the other method is that the vein is raised and the entire thing is drawn out.
The cutting of it is according to this method. Bind the leg first with warm water a great deal until the thick, dirty blood has dissolved. Then bind the weak leg from the upper part of the hip down to the lower part of the knee with a bandage. Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, in a wide section.
Then lift, that is, draw out the blood with your hand from the lower part of the leg up to the top, and it is necessary for the phlebotomist to bleed the patient first. Then cut off the nail as far as the lower part: until a quantity of blood comes out which you see is sufficient and which the strength of the patient can tolerate.
Then bind it and tell him to abstain from foods that generate black bile, and iterate the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are filled and that hurts the patient.
The elevation of it is according to this manner. Shave the crippled leg, if there are many hairs on it. Then insert him into the bath; or pour hot water over his leg with a sponge, until it turns red and the veins are opened up: or exercise him in strong physical activity, if there is no bath available, until the limb is warmed up.
Then cut the skin along the direction of the vein's section by length: or at its end near the knee, or in the lower part near the heel.
Then open the cut with a scalpel, and strip the vein of all its covering, until it becomes visible to the sense; and it is at that moment when you see it turn from red to dark brown. When it then comes out of the cut, you see it white as if it were a cord.
Then insert Radium underneath it, until when it is elevated and comes out of the cut; tie it with a blind ligature, gentle.
Then cut another section nearby, three finger's length away. Then strip the cut from the upper part of the vein until it appears. Then elevate it with Radium as you did, and tie it with another ligature, just as you did at first.
Then cut another section, or multiple sections, if needed. Then elevate and incise the very last section at the heel.
Then remove it to the section that is above it.
And do that until you remove it from the section above, or higher sections altogether, until when it emerges entirely; then cut it.
If however it does not obey you to remove and elevate: then insert a hook with a strong string doubled, and tie it, and pull it out; or insert underneath it Radium: and turn your hand around every direction until it emerges. And beware, lest it be cut. For if it is cut, it becomes difficult for you to lift it strongly, and an evil consequence will ensue upon the sick person from that.
Therefore, when you have entirely extracted it: then place a cloth soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil, over the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vitriol is contracted, having a twisted shape and being wrapped around parts, and it is not as we said, straight: then you must cut through it on all sides of its twistiness, and the places where it wraps itself.
Then suspend it with a hook until you lift it all out: and beware at your cutting through it not to cut the vein or wound it: for it will be difficult for you to lift it up or draw it out. Therefore, preserve your prudence.
The Form of Cutting Whereby the Vitriol is Healed.
The Form of a Blind Knot.
It is not curved like other knots, nor is it sharp at its end, so as not to wound the vein; and it has a thickness of flexuousness, gentle: for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety: nay, let its superfluous thickness be as we said.
On the Extraction of the Vein of the Thigh.
This Vein is generated in the thighs of people on hot earth, like that of Alizeg, and of the Arabs, and on dry, hot lands with little fertility, that is, where no grass grows nor tree.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
And its generation indeed is from the putrefaction that occurs under the skin, just as it happens within bodies to snakes and ascaris worms, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein's outcome is that which happens in the leg a violent inflammation. Then the place is cleaned. Then the vein begins to emerge from that place of cleaning, as if it were a root of a plant or an animal.
Therefore, when the end of it appears from there, then it is necessary to wrap a piece of lead over it, weighing one and two-thirds drachma keil, and bind the lead suspended from the leg.
Whenever then something emerges from it to the outside, wrap that in lead, and bind it. What if it is prolonged greatly, then cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder. And do not cut off its root before it has emerged entirely. Because if you cut it, it contracts and enters the flesh, and causes an abscess, corruption in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary to handle it gently and draw it out gradually, until it emerges from its entirety, and nothing remains of it in the body: and from this vein some people emerge in a length of five palms and ten. And now it has reached me, because it emerged from a man twenty palms long.
But if it happens to you during your medication hour: then insert the tip into its opening, and pierce it with a long opening, together with the body, until everything that is in it is evacuated from the material: and administer putrefaction of the place with medicines for several days. Then care for the cure by treating abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or on the foot itself: and it has many openings, and a branch emerges from every opening.
Therefore treat it as we said in division, and with what has been previously mentioned.
About the cutting of worms born under the skin, and it is called a Boar's sickness.
This sickness is called "Boar's sickness" in a certain land among us because it frequently occurs in oxen and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it moves throughout the body, ascending and descending, and is shown to the sense at every step of its movement from member to member, until it breaks wherever it breaks in the skin, and emerges.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors. Just as worms and serpents, namely, lice and ascarids, occur in the belly.
And fear is to be had from its evil. Because when it goes into the body and rises to the head and reaches a place, then perhaps it opens up there and emerges, and destroys an eye: and that happens many times.
When therefore you wish to cure it and draw it out, then that does not happen except at every step of its movement and appearance to the sense.
Therefore you must tie what is above it and what is below it with a strong binding constraint. Then cut above it and draw it out.
What if it burrows into the flesh and you don't find it: then place a caustic on top of the spot with fire, until it dies.
And greater than that which is to be feared is its corruption, by which it corrupts an eye, as we said.
If you see it has already reached the head near the eye, then tie below it the eyebrow with a good tightening. Then cut above it and draw it out.
And it is necessary that the patient uses the cleansing of his body with medicines dissolving bad, putrid humors.
And let him beware of foods that produce putrefaction.
On the Lancing above Disease Nakir.
This disease is called Nakir in our land; and it is a pain that occurs in certain members, then it is changed from member to member.
And I indeed have seen him myself, according to what I am telling you. I was called to a sick woman in certain villages. And she showed me her arm and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
And after I had stayed for one hour, I saw a swelling move with the pulse, just like a worm moves, ascending to her shoulder more quickly than it can be, so that it is like living silver when it runs from place to place.
The pain then departed from that place and was fixed in the shoulder.
Then I sat for one hour and it ran to another part of the body until it reached the other arm.
Then she told me that it was revolving throughout her entire body, according to what I saw.
I was amazed therefore at the rapidity of its changes from member to member. And I indeed had not seen this disease with my own eyes in such a way before that time. However I have seen many who found pain changing from member to member; and I did not see it with my own eyes as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think it is anything except that the woman was one of those who are from dry and discovered veins of the body; therefore it becomes apparent to my senses that this swelling is being moved.
And it is necessary that they not appear according to this reason in those who are delicieux and have moist bodies and hidden veins.
So when you want to treat it and the patient feels that pain, then if it appears to your eye as we said, then tie above it quickly, and beneath it swiftly: and cut above it until the constricted swelling goes out: and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes: then cure it by excision of the body, and with that which drives out swellings, and bind them up with fetid pills, and pills of serapeum, and similar ones.
Of the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows are differentiated according to their own kinds and according to the places where they fall from the body.
And their variety is this: because there are some that have large points and small ones: and hollow-tipped and pointed. And among them are those that have three angles. And among them there are those with tongues. And among them there are those with stars.
Those however that fall according to the members, is in two modes. Or else the members are from the main concave members, such as the brain, and the heart, and liver, and lung, and kidney, and intestines, and bladder, and similar ones. When therefore it falls on one of these members and apparent signs of death appear to you which I will tell you next, then it is necessary that you extract the arrow from there, for death follows him who has it in many dispositions. And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it and cure the wound.
When a dart falls into the brain and pierces the skull, and emerges above the brain, it causes: convulsions, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the eyes, inflation, redness of the tongue, spasm, and a mixture of intellect, and vomiting with bile. And perhaps blood will flow out from the nose or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off, and voice is destroyed. And a white discharge like pus flows out from the wound site. And a fluid similar to serum of meat exits from it.
So if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and remove the dart if it does not emerge.
The signs of the dart when it falls into the heart are that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it were fixed in hard substance, not in empty space. And perhaps the dart's movement is similar to the movement of a pulse: and dark blood flows from the wound. And then follows numbness in the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting. Know therefore that death is undoubtedly impending.
And the sign of the dart when it wounds the lung is the emission of frothy blood from the wound: and the vessels that follow the neck become inflamed, and their color changes to that of a sick person. And it exhales a great and deep breath: and seeks the attraction of cold air.
Which if the dart falls into the membrane that is in the chest: then it is near the small ribs; and a great gasping occurs with intense pain, with a sigh: and all the limbs of the shoulders are moved.
And if the dart falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested from food will emerge from the wound.
And if an arrow falls into the belly and is stuck there: something foul-smelling exits from the wound, or pus, or intestine that is already torn. Therefore, there is no hope for its cure, nor for extracting the arrow.
For if the arrow falls into the bladder and urine flows out: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is more intense on the afflicted person: then you will know that it is mortal.
However, other parts of the body, such as the face, and neck, and throat, and shoulder blade, and rib, and loin, and leg, and similar ones are treated with poultices from the limbs, according to many dispositions: when the arrow does not find an artery or nerve: and the arrow is not venomous.
And I will tell you what I have seen about these arrows, so that you may infer from it about your own cure.
For it is this: a man had an arrow fall into the root of his nose, at the base of his tearful eye. So I extracted it from him on the other side, under his ear fat: and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into the fat of his eye under the lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not succeed in extracting more than a small part of it, with which it was stuck in its wood: and the arrow was great among the arrows of Turkish bows, with a soft iron tip, without an ear.
Therefore, the Jew was healed, and no evil happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian's throat.
And the arrow was Arab, and it is one that has an ear. So I secured it above it between two guides: and already it was submerged in his throat. I have skillfully handled her until I extracted it from her: and a Christian has been healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly: and we thought that he would die because of it.
After thirty days had passed and nothing had changed in his condition, I observed the arrow; and I examined it, and extracted it; and he was healed, and no further harm came to him.
And I saw a man on whom an arrow had fallen on his back, and the wound was consolidated over it. After seven years had passed, the arrowhead emerged at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman on whom an arrow had fallen into her belly, and the wound was consolidated over it, and the arrowhead remained inside her: and nothing changed in her condition, and the woman did not find any harm from any of her natural bodily functions.
And I saw another man on whom an arrow had fallen on his face: and the wound was consolidated, and remained without finding much pain; and similar things were seen.
And I extracted an arrow from a man of the King's princes, which had fallen into his nose and was already leaning towards the right side; and the arrowhead was entirely hidden.
I was called therefore to treat him after the arrow shot, until three days. I found then a wound of the arrow very tight.
I then probed it with a fine probe and did not feel it; and he himself was finding a puncture and pain under his ear on the right side. I therefore supposed that that puncture was from the tip of the arrowhead.
I therefore applied a poultice to the place with a poultice that had attracting and digestive power, having confidence in myself that the area would suppurate and that I would see a sign of the arrowhead appearing, so that I could cut above it: and no accident occurred at the place indicating that the arrowhead was located there.
Therefore I applied the poultice to him for many days and it did not happen that anything untoward occurred, and the wound was consolidated in the meantime: and he remained lame from the extraction of his space of days until he felt a dart one day inside his nose. And he told me this.
And he told me this. So I applied a sharp, corroding medicine to that wound for many days until it opened up: and when I probed him, and felt the slender extremity of the arrow which was stuck in wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the extremity of the arrow appeared visibly to us: and it passed by me along with him for a period of about four months.
Then after the wound had been widened and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it and move it, but it did not obey my exit: then I did not cease to whittle away at it and invent methods on top of it with various contrivances, until one day I began to extract it with well-made forceps, according to the shape they would take at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And indeed doctors judge that the nasal cartilage is not restored. So I restored it and the wound was consolidated and the patient recovered with complete and entire health: nor did anything at all harm him.
And I will tell you the quality of extracting certain arrows: so that you may place it as a rule and signification over what I did not say.
Because the parts of this art and their distinctions cannot be comprehended by narrative: nor does that book comprehend it, and a wise craftsman compares little with much: and he also finds what is present over what is absent: and he discovers a new operation and a new instrument in the descent of external matters of this art when accidents occur.
I therefore say that arrows do not exit from the limbs on which they are fixed, unless according to two modes. Or through attraction from the place where it entered. Or through the opposite part of the other side.
And that which exits where it entered is either an arrow proceeding to a fleshy place and being drawn out.
For if it does not obey the exit at the time when it falls: then one must let it be for some days, until the flesh that is around it has putrefied: and its attraction and exit will be eased.
And similarly if it is fixed in bone and does not obey you to exit, then let it be for some days: and repeat the process of attraction and motion every day, until it exits.
For if it does not obey you to exit after days, then one must pierce the surrounding flesh of the arrow in the bone from every part with a fine file, until the arrowhead is enlarged. Then attract it and pull it out.
If however an arrow has already been lodged in the body and is hidden from sight, and is concealed from sense perception: then search for it with probes. If however you feel it, then draw it out with certain instruments that are suitable for drawing it out.
If however you cannot reach it above, due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow deep within, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein: then find a way to reach it until the wound is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if there are ears that it holds to, then free the fixed flesh from all sides, in every way you can, and with arts, if it cannot be freed by going over the edge of the ear, and by bending them until it goes out.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow, wherever it may be, then use a twisting motion with your hand, along with forceps, to all parts, until you make it come out: and with utmost subtlety, so that the arrow does not break and the extraction becomes difficult for you.
And if you cannot remove it from one hour to another, then leave it for a few days, until what is around it begins to decay. Then reiterate it: the swelling will indeed be alleviated. If however blood flux makes contrary to you, then administer what we said in its own chapter: and preserve your strength from cutting a vein, or nerve, or tendon.
And apply skill in every way that it is possible for you to extract the arrow: and let it be with ease, and calmness, or slowness, and firmness, just as I told you.
And it is necessary that when you pull out the arrow, the patient be made weak according to the shape, according to which he was at the time of the arrow's impact. Because it is more beneficial. But if it's not possible for you, then do what is possible for you from the shapes.
However, the arrow that emerges from the opposite part of the other [side], either already proceeds something to the exterior or causes a swelling at the end of the Arrow by feeling on the superior part of the nearby skin, and you see it protruding: therefore, cut above it, and let the incision be according to the quantity that the forceps can take in it.
Then draw it out: for it becomes easy to come out by itself.
If it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness, until the Arrow impresses itself on the bone and enlarges its own depth: then draw it out.
And if not: leave it for a few days: then reiterate the procedure until it comes out.
What if the wood of the Arrow is stuck in it, then push it with that [wood].
But if the wood has fallen and you wish to administer a push: then introduce a concave instrument into it, so that it enters its concavity into the tail of the Arrow: then push it with it.
But if the Arrow is concave, then push it with the instrument entering into it. The Arrow is eased by that.
What if the Arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to remove all the flesh where the venom is, if that is possible for you. Then take care of it with what is fitting for that.
What if the Arrow falls in the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side: and it is close to what you touch with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and beware of cutting into a vein, or nerve, and draw it out.
Then treat a wound, if you see one, and care for it until it heals.
And this is the shape of forceps by which arrows are pulled out.
Let their extremities be like the beak of a bird, made as if from iron; when they take hold above an arrow, they do not let it go.
And many kinds of them are made, great, small, and middle-sized, according to the size, magnitude, and narrowness of the arrow, and the size, width, and constriction of the wound.
The shape of a spoon is concave.
And the shape of an obtuse impeller.
This is like the blunt end of a radius, so that it may be inserted into an arrow and pushed along with it.
On bloodletting of Veins.
The veins which are accustomed to be bloodletted in the body are thirty.
Of which sixteen are in the head: two pulse-beating veins that are behind the ears and are called Herbae; and two arteries that appear in both temporal regions; and two veins that are in both tear ducts of both eyes, which are called Aspicientes; and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein that is at the end of the nose. And two Guidigie veins that are in the neck. And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins that are in the lower lip. And these are called Algecherich veins. And two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins that are tapped for bloodletting on arms are five in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalic vein, and it is located on the lateral side of the shoulder; and the people call it the "head" vein. And the Axillary. And it is the Median vein, and it is composed of a branch of the Basilic and a branch of the Cephalic: and the people call it the "body" vein. And the Basilic, and it is located on the lateral side of the arm: and it is also called the Tertian. And the people call it the "abdominal" vein. And the Armstring vein, and it is located above the elbow; and it is that which is tapped for bloodletting, and it is the one that is visible above the wrist, with a clear appearance.
And the Cedrella: and it is a vein that is located between the Annular and Median: and it has two branches.
And there are three veins in the leg and foot. One of them is that which is located under the curvature of the toe on the lateral side. And the second one is the Saphena: and its location is at the heel, from the lateral side of the foot. And the vein Nerve: and its location is at the heel, from the lateral side.
And in another leg there are three veins similar to those.
Of Bloodletting from Two Veins after the Ears.
The bloodletting from two veins that are after the ears is beneficial for old catarrhs, and hemicrania, and sahafa, and bad old head sores.
And the quality of bloodletting it is according to what I narrate. And it is, as I said, to shave the head of the sick person: and to rub his occiput with a rough cloth in the place of the two veins with good friction. Then the patient tightens his neck with a bandage until two veins appear. And those places are located after the ears, on two depressed parts of the head. Therefore search for them with your finger and where you feel a pulse beneath your finger, mark it with an encaustic.
Then take the bloodletting knife, which is called the "Incidens". Then introduce it under the vein into the flesh until the bloodletting reaches the mouth. Then lift your hand with the vein and the skin to the top, and cut the vein with a cutting wound that cuts into the skin. And let the length of the incision be the width of two joined fingers, or roughly that; and make as much blood flow out as you wish.
Then tie it with lint, and let it go until it heals.
And now precedes the incision of those veins and their cauterization, which was discussed at the beginning of the book.
The benefit of bloodletting from the two arteries located in both temporal regions is for an old headache; and a bad cough; and constant tearing of the eyes.
And the quality of bleeding them is as I tell you. The patient tightens his neck greatly until two veins appear in a manifestly visible way; and show their pulse under your finger. Then mark it with an encaustic.
Then lift the skin above the vein to the top with your finger as a guide, and introduce the bloodletting knife beneath, and lift the vein upwards. And cut it as you did in the other two veins; and make the blood flow out according to the quantity of your need.
Then loosen the constriction of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for one hour. After that, place a compress and poultice on it, and bind it tightly above with strong constriction; and let it be until it heals.
And already a reminder of those things, and the cutting and extraction of them is presented at the beginning of the book.
The remedy for bloodletting from the forehead vein is after cephalic bloodletting, for old facial ailments: and for headache, and redness: and foul ulcers.
And the quality of its bloodletting is, according to what I tell you. The patient should constrict his neck with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take the instrument which is called the Fossorium.
Place the prominent point that is on top of the Fossorium head on top of the vein, and strike it gently with a plectrum or some other instrument in its way; and let the blood flow as much as you want. Then loosen the perforation of the patient, and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a broad bloodletting. However, it is not necessary for the bloodletting to be sharp at its extremity, like the other bloodlettings, but rather it should be broad. And perform the bloodletting through perforation, because it is nearby; and perhaps the bloodletting may be broken when it is subtle.
The remedy for the two veins that are in both tear ducts of two eyes is for an eye with a scab and redness: and swelling in the eye, and facial ailments.
And the quality of bleeding for those is, that a sick person binds his neck with a thread. Then make incisions on them; and you be standing above his head.
And let the bleeding be done across in a little bit of length, with a small, broad instrument, for there is no flesh in that place. For if the bleeding is at the end of a thin extremity, it may break.
Then make flow from the blood as much as you need. And place a cloth on them, and bind them one night, and release them.
The veins of the nose are for bleeding that is suitable for acute fever and violent headache, and also for facial afflictions, such as hemicrania and redness that occurs on the face: especially when it is old.
And the quality of bleeding for that is, that a sick person binds his neck with a thread. Then hold his nose with your left hand and take a thin, long bleeding instrument; and place it in the middle of the hare's joint itself, between that which separates the nose according to straightness. Because the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary for you to keep your hand with the bleeding instrument a little bit; and make flow from the blood as much as you need. Then bind them one night. For it is restored quickly itself.
The benefit of the two bleedings of the Gullet is for constriction of panting, and onset of leprosy, and melancholic afflictions, and impetigo, and bad ulcers, and corroding sores, that is, herpes-like.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient lies under both [bandages] on his neck with a strap; and the artist stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a seat.
Then bloodletting is performed on the vein for the length of a broad bloodletting. Then take out a measured amount of blood, or as much as necessity requires in the case you are treating. Then do the same thing to another vein.
Then loosen the strap and bind both veins together with a moderate tightness, so that the patient is not overheated. And leave it until morning. For the wound is healing.
A Treatise on Bloodletting of Veins by Algeberich. The veins of Algeberich are the benefit of bloodletting because they contribute to a headache at the mouth and corruption of the gums; and bad wounds; and fissures of the lips, and bad ulcers, even those that are on the nose and around it.
And the quality of bloodletting is that you make the patient sit before you; and bind his neck with a strap. Then turn his lip back and look at the two veins: one is on the right side of his lip, and the second is on the left side of it; and the demonstration of each is by the blackness of both. And that is true: because around those are small, black veins. Cut both with a single incision.
But if you are in doubt about it and do not know which one is which: then direct your attention to the larger and more prominent of the two.
And do the same thing to the two veins that are on the upper lip: and indeed a great deal of habit is with him: and cut the two veins that are on the lower lip.
On bloodletting from the vein under the tongue after cephalic bloodletting. The benefits of bloodletting from the two veins that are under the tongue: it is because cephalic bloodletting is for choking fits that occur in the throat, and troubles of the uvula, and troubles of the mouth.
And the quality of bloodletting them is, that you cause the patient to sit between your hands before the sun: and elevate his tongue, and look under his tongue from one side a vein, and from the other side another vein: and the color of both will decline to blackness.
Therefore, bleed both of them; and take care not to put your last finger on bleeding them. For under these are arteries, and perhaps a flow of blood may occur from those arteries.
The three veins that are bled on the elbow are those in which it is a custom for everyone to have bloodletting.
And their bloodletting is done according to two methods. Either by piercing with a myrtle-leafed lancet; or by oiling to subtlety decline; or by cutting with a knife-cultellary, and that is Alnesil. And this is its shape.
And from these there are broad and subtle species according to the breadth and constriction of the veins. The form of bloodletting with a myrtle leaf is broad, as you see. And it is suitable for opening up concave, full, proceeding, apparent, thick veins, and those which contain thick, turbid blood.
And this bloodletting is of lesser breadth and more subtle at the extremities.
And it is suitable for bloodletting of thin veins which contain citrus-colored blood.
The basilica, which is one of the three veins, is a source of benefit for bloodletting. Because it draws blood from the illnesses that are under the throat and neck, following the chest and belly; and it suits the bloodletter to cut into this vein, so he may beware of it and be on guard against fear, for beneath it is an artery. If therefore he erred and added to the incision of bloodletting, he will cut into that artery, and a flow of blood will occur. Therefore it is necessary for the phlebotomist not to cut this vein with a puncturing instrument; rather, let him cut it with an Alnesil.
If this basilica does not appear with a clear manifestation, then it is necessary to abandon it and seek another one, or find a branch of it; or if there is no alternative, use the tendon of the arm as a substitute. For this one is clear and can be cut with a phlebotomy instrument called Alnesil, just as we said.
If you wish to perform bloodletting on this very one, then it is necessary before tightening the arm, that you touch the place until you know the location of the pulse. Then mark the place with encaustic, afterwards the arm, and cut the vein with a concave section using the phlebotomy instrument called Alnesil, just as we said. And beware that the blow does not fall through the space to the location of the artery.
And when you see that as you tie the bandage, there is swelling in the place you marked with encaustic, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery; therefore avoid it.
What if you see blood flowing during the phlebotomy, like a child's urine, and it is fine and red: then you will know that it is from the artery's blood. Then therefore hasten and place your finger on top of the space for a long time, then remove your finger. If blood is cut off (for it is often cut off), then bind the arm and let it go: and let the sick person beware of its motion: and be on guard against its fear.
And do not move it for several days, until it heals.
But if the blood is not cut off and prevails over you, and medicine is not present to you at that moment, then cut the artery if it appears to you. For its extremities contract and blood is cut off.
Or take a piece of flaxen cord and tie it; take one half of it and bind it over the place where the vein is to be constricted, with a ligature and small pills until another day.
Then if blood is cut off, it is good. And if not: then cure it with the one whose remembrance preceded from the place of powder-removing blood flow; and its blood cutting off is not difficult in many dispositions, due to the small wound location and the possibility of a ligature from the arm.
The Black Vein is helpful for phlebotomy, because it draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body: therefore, since it is composed of a branch of the Basilic vein and a branch of the Cephalic vein, as we said.
And it is suitable for the one performing phlebotomy to choose this vein, so that it will be over the fear of bleeding from it, for beneath it is a nerve. If therefore the phlebotomist adds to the puncture and finds a nerve, it happens that there is numbness, and healing becomes difficult, and perhaps does not heal at all.
And this nerve often appears to the sense. But if it is hidden in certain people, and is subtle, and does not show itself: then you must put your phlebotomy in such a way that you will phlebotomize the section with Alnesil, and avoid hitting the nerve with your strength.
If a vein is between two nerves, then find the vein along its length.
Here is the translation: The veins of phlebotomy in the cephalic region are helpful, because they attract blood from the head and bring relief to eye afflictions.
And it is necessary in this vein, if you wish, to make an incision with a sesame oil phlebotome or a myrtle oil phlebotome: because it is the most salubrious of all veins, since there is no artery underneath nor nerve.
However, it is suitable for you at the time of phlebotomy to remove the head of the phlebotome just up to the wrist and look for a softer spot; and it will not harm him if he does not find it with the first blow, but rather repeat the process several times.
However, perhaps it will suppurate in some people if it is not phlebotomized at the first blow, but that swelling will do no harm to him.
On the utility of Phlebotomy and precautions to be observed in it. The quality however of Phlebotomy and its accidents from which you should reflect on how to correct them.
First therefore of that which you should know is this: that Phlebotomy is not administered except for the conservation of health, and the perseverance of its continuity, and caution against the approach of afflictions.
And that Phlebotomy may be done in one of the three veins on the shoulder, namely, the Cephalic, and the Black, and the Royal. And that Phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring after fasting, in March and autumn after eating, when signs of replenishment appear.
And that Phlebotomy should be done on the first or third day, after three hours have passed since sunrise.
But Phlebotomy which is administered for illnesses does not have a fixed hour; but when the occasion and necessity require it, whether by night or day, at any hour, and at any time.
And it is not fitting that children be bled until they come of age at fourteen years. Nor should a pregnant woman be bled, except from the fourth to the seventh month. Nor should old men who have already passed sixty years be bled.
When therefore someone wants to be bled for whatever reason: it is necessary that he cleanse his bowels beforehand with a gentle enema, if much feces has been retained in them: so that the veins may not attract at the time of bleeding the superfluous putrid things from the bowels that are harmful to the principal members.
Nor should a patient be bled who is drunk with excessive eating or drinking, nor one who is vomiting from excess, nor one who has just recovered from drunkenness, until that state passes away from them. Nor should an invalid with dropsy be bled.
And bloodletting should be avoided again after a colic attack, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequent coitus, and labor, and exercise, and wakefulness, and fasting, and all that dissipates the vital force from bodily or animal substance.
Then consider the subtlety of humors beforehand, whether the blood is thickened with foods and drinks, and medicines: if it is possible to do so.
Then enter the bath, unless something prevents it; or engage in some exercise, in order that the blood may be refined.
And put his bloodletting in the chest, on the third day, as we said: and strive to purge out his chest that day from all bad animal affections, such as anxiety, anger, fear: and from all bodily afflictions, such as labor, pain, excesses, and those similar things.
And make the remedies of his own kind present with which custom has accustomed people to use through aromaticity, and scenting, and dancing, and similar things in proportion to the possibility.
Then the phlebotomator should sit on a cushion which is higher than the one used for phlebotomy. Afterwards, he should take out his own arm and rub it with his hand twice or three times. Then he should tie a ligament with a belt, and wrap it around twice.
And let the constriction be moderate, for when it is unequal, or there is too much constriction, then it hinders the flow of blood; or if it is loose, then also it hinders the flow of blood.
Then after the constriction, it is necessary for the one to be bled to rub his hands together evenly until the veins are inflated and become apparent to the sense.
Then the phlebotomator should wipe the wound with a little old oil, properly.
Then he should place his index finger of the left hand on top of the vein at the spot where he wants to make the incision, slightly so that the vein does not flee and a blow can be struck. For just as the string flees from the phlebotomist during surgery, so too do the veins flee when one places the phlebotomy instrument on them. And there are some that are full of wind: and when you place the phlebotomy instrument on it, it contracts beneath the phlebotomist, and the phlebotomist is deceived, and the phlebotomy does not open up the vein; and if it does open up, it is constricted. Therefore it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be firm and attentive in all these matters.
Then he should remove the phlebotomy instrument. If the vein opens up on one side, then it is good. And if not, then do the same thing on the other side a little bit away or above it with haste: unless the spot becomes inflamed.
That if it becomes inflamed or swells up with disease, then let him rest for a day or two: and do not bind the bandage. Perhaps it will attract a warm abscess. Nor should he enter the bath.
Then he will repeat venesection, if desired.
But if the aperture is small, or the blood flows thinly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out: then repeat venesection in the same opening, following its natural direction, and add a little to the procedure.
And do this quickly, before the area becomes inflamed, for an inflamed area is a common occurrence in many people during a minor procedure.
If therefore you see it already inflamed, then do not repeat the procedure at all on it, for nothing excuses itself with you. And place something from oil and dung over it, because it will ease the flow of blood. And it is better here than oil itself, and than other oils.
And similarly administer oil and dung in all your venesections, where you make incisions to stop the flow of blood; and it is called tyriaca by Alfarach, and sagzenea when one of them is placed over the area.
For blood becomes thinner and is dissolved when it is thick.
For if a great abscess occurs at the site of the venesection, which often happens, especially to those who are not accustomed to it except for this occasion, or if the opening of the vein is small; then hurry and place a sponge soaked in water and salt, warmed slightly, over the area, and bind it for one hour: because it will dissolve.
And it is necessary to do this after the blood has stopped flowing from that very vein, when its flow is complete, or from another vein.
And if something remains at the site after a few days, whether it is black or greenish in color, it does not harm; and if you wish, place something over it from aloes, or myrrh solvents, or something from the sap of calament, that is, like menthe.
And many times indeed accidents and swellings occur at bloodletting in the Basilica.
So put your hand on it, then if you find softness under your pressure on it, then that swelling is bad. So beware, so as to put something on it from what we said. For perhaps blood will flow from it of the artery.
But make a poultice for it with that which has astringency, so that the place may be hardened. Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
And it is necessary that you withdraw blood from every man according to the quantity of his virtue. And what appears by the color victorious over the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it go out until it turns red; and similarly if you see it thick, then let it go until it becomes fine; and similarly if it is sharp, then let its sharpness be taken away.
And it is necessary for him who is full, strong, and needs bloodletting once, that phlebotomy be increased on the vein, and let the phlebotomist be broad-shouldered; and in one who is weak, let it be the opposite of this.
And it is necessary that he draw it out in sections and that the opening be narrow; and better is what is administered in vein phlebotomy, that there be a transverse incision, not a puncture.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from the flow of blood and from cutting into the nerve; and it is more praiseworthy and healthier than bloodletting by width and length.
And for one who is accustomed to syncopes coming on during bloodletting, it is necessary that he eats a moderate amount of bread soaked in grape juice water before the bloodletting; or safflower if he is heated: and let him withdraw from him from the blood in three sections or four.
And if the complexion is chilled, then it should take a bread infused with honey syrup, or with a sweetened honey syrup flavored with spices, or with an aromatic and fragrant syrup before bloodletting.
If syncope occurs during bloodletting and is due to the excessive exit of blood: then it is necessary that he should drink a broth of meat, and a subtle fragrant syrup: and make use of aromatic substances with aloes, and anoint his chest with them: and make use of the other things we mentioned in the division of syncope from evacuation.
However, he who wants to release his arm and shed his blood a second time: it is necessary for him whose phlebotomy is due to abundant evacuation and whose strength is weak, to let out the blood gradually by the amount of their strength over several days.
Whoever wants to release his arm and shed his blood a second time, and his body is strong: then let him do it after seven hours or nine from his first bloodletting.
Whoever wants to attract blood from his body to the opposite side to which it is declining: it is necessary that he do so on the second day or third.
In whose body is a great deal of blood already warmed up, sharpened, and causing fever: it is necessary that the blood exit from him on one side, and a large quantity be drawn out: and the opening be widened until syncope occurs: after which you should have preserved all conditions of phlebotomy: and place your hand on his pulse at the course of the blood, so that death may not occur instead of syncope. For it often happens that this occurs when the phlebotomist is ignorant and falls into negligence.
And it is not necessary when you want to release the arm and shed blood a second time, when already the orifice of the vein is closed and the exit of blood becomes difficult, that you should press upon it with forcefulness and cause it to be quickly bent or stretched. For that is a very bad thing, I mean let it go until it is bled second.
Or remove with sharp bleeding whatever has been clotted from blood in the wound opening, and place something of dissolved salt on top of it in water. And put something from Tyrian pitch or saffron on top of it, and place a gentle compression on it until the blood goes out.
If the vein is already inflamed, then let it be, and do not bind it, until the inflammation subsides.
What if necessity requires to let out blood again, and there is no excuse, then either bleed above that place or in another arm in another vein.
However, the veins of the arm are bled at the places known as Fusca and Basilia, when those cannot be found, and they are hidden, because it is composed of them.
And the quality of this bleeding is that the patient should put his hand into hot water until it turns red and the vein appears clearly.
Then a ligature should be tied above it with a moderate degree of constriction. Then bleed secondarily by transverse punctures gradually, not widthwise nor lengthwise: and let the aperture be wide, and let your bleeding be such that it flows over the juncture of the hand a little bit.
What if the flow of blood is hindered? Then repeat the motion with your hand in hot water, and let the blood run out into the water until you achieve your need.
But if you are in summer days, then excuse yourself from repeating the hand motion in hot water. And indeed the flow of blood is put to a great extent in hot water during winter time.
And the bleeding of this vein is more beneficial to all veins, because it is not under a pulsating vein nor a nerve.
Venesection is the right hand of Saluta's salvation, it relieves diseases of the liver.
And the quality of venesection is that you bind with a ligament or your own hand the vein after you have inserted it into warm water until it swells and becomes very sensitive to the touch. Then cut the vein across. And if you cut it completely, that will not harm him in any way.
And take care, lest your hand be stained with the venesection. For under it are the naked nerves of the fingers exposed from the flesh.
Then put your hand into warm water and let the blood flow freely in it. For if you do not put it into warm water, the blood will congeal in the wound of the vein and be prevented from flowing.
When you have extracted the necessary amount of blood, then place oil and salt over the vein so that it does not congeal quickly.
And similarly, it is necessary to do this with every tightened branch.
The remedy for the venesection is from the left hand, because it relieves spleen diseases; and similarly do this with his venesection as you did with the second one equally.
The remedy for the phlebotomy of the saphena is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as womanly complaints, retention of menses, and weaknesses of the kidneys, and old ulcers of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that the patient puts his foot into warm water and makes a friction on it until the veins swell; and bind above the joint of the foot with a strap. And the location of the veins is at the heel, appearing towards the thumb, and they branch out from there into multiple branches on the surface of the foot.
Let blood from it on a larger branch of his, or at the heel in its gathering, for it is better and more wholesome.
If you let blood from it on the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are under it above the surface of the foot.
And place your incision so that you may let blood from it sideways, as if you were willing to cut it: and the incisor is Nesil.
But if the flow of blood is hindered, then go down to his foot in hot water: and let the blood run out into it, until it is purged.
That if the physician makes a mistake in the first attempt, then he should go back with the lancet to a higher place a little bit, for the spot is safe, and you are not afraid of evil consequences when you beware of the nerves, as we said.
And similarly with the vein on the other foot equally.
The location of the Sciatic veins, as we said, is at the heel from the left side.
And the benefit of his bleeding is to relieve the pain in the ankle when it occurs due to hot blood.
And the quality of his bleeding is that the patient should enter the bath and hasten; and bind his leg on the side of the ankle up to the heel by four fingers with a thin, long string: for it appears only because of this.
When it appears, then let blood from it according to whatever nature is possible for you, either by transversing or by making an incision or a section. For that place is more wholesome, and it is very hidden in many people.
For that place is more wholesome, and it is very hidden in many people. But if you do not find it and it does not appear at all to the sense: then let blood from some branch of it, and that is the one which appears on the back of the foot and towards the ear; and beware of the nerves, and make the blood flow out in a quantity as much as you wish.
Then loosen the constriction, and place the skin over the spot of bloodletting, and tighten the place. For it heals quickly indeed.
Of Pneumothorax, and its quality.
Pneumothoraces occur from horns, and from air, and from vinegar.
And Pneumothorax indeed occurs in two ways. With scarification and bloodletting: and the other is pneumothorax without scarification.
And this Pneumothorax which is without scarification, is in two ways. Or it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the ventoses that are administered with scarification and bloodletting are fourteen places of the body. One of which is Ventosatio Alnocrati, and it is at the back of the head; and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck; and ventoses Alhagdahim, and they are two plates of the neck from both sides simultaneously; and ventoses of the mind, and it is under the jawbone in the lower part of the mouth; and ventoses of the two spatula-like places; and ventoses of Alachosos above the end of the tail; and ventoses of the two forearms, and they are in the middle of the two arms; and ventoses of the two hind legs; and ventoses of the two scapular areas.
And indeed, Pneumothorax does not extract blood from you from small scattered veins in the flesh, and because of that, it does not fall into power, just as is the case with bloodletting. Nor should pneumothorax be administered, whether with fire or without fire, in any disease that arises from excess, until the entire body has been purged.
But if necessity demands pneumothorax due to illness or habit, we administer it at every hour at the beginning of the month, its end, and its middle, and whenever it may be.
What is this? Because there are people who, when blood multiplies within him until he needs its extraction by lancing, find a swelling in their head and then swoon.
And among them are those who find fullness and redness on their face, head, and neck. And among them are those who find itching on their face and forehead, and darkness and dimness in their eyes.
And among them are those who scratch the place of their lancing. And among them is one whose laughter increases. And among them are those who find the taste of blood in their mouth: or their tongue will break out and spit up blood. And among them is one whose sleep increases. And among them is one who sees blood and redness, and killed ones, and wounds, and things similar to those in their sleep.
When we see something of these things, and especially if it occurs on the 15th day: then we prescribe lancing to be done two hours or three after sunset.
The relief of lancing the head is: because it brings about heaviness on the head, and what is poured out to the eyes. But it should be done after the evacuation of the entire body.
And this indeed is the lancing in place of the cephalic bloodletting.
And it is not allowed to use it on someone who has a cold complexion or one who has a catarrh. For it brings him great harm.
And because of that, one should not use this on the elderly or someone whose head is troubled by cold afflictions.
But whoever becomes accustomed to it, forgetfulness is generated in him.
And because of that, one should instruct the lancer to put down his hand with the lancet a little while after to the lower parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Ventosatio or Alkehel is a place for dark bloodletting and basilic vein bloodletting. It is useful for relieving breathing difficulties and chest constriction, facilitating the use of instruments, and curing coughs and replenishing.
And it is necessary for the Ventosatio Alkehel to be pushed slightly forward, because if it is placed below, it produces weakness in the heart and stomach.
The Ventosatio alhagdahim relieves pains and accidents in the head, and also the eyes, and headaches, and perforations, and pain in the roots of teeth; and it is a place for basilic vein bloodletting.
And it is necessary to warn the Ventosator not to press his hand with scarification so that he does not hit an artery and a flow of blood occurs.
The Ventosatio under the jaw relieves apoplexy in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar troubles from diseases that are in the mouth; and it is a place for bloodletting alieherich which are in both lips.
The Ventosatio of spatulas relieves alchafacham, which is caused by relaxation and heat.
The Ventosatio of the inner parts of two furnaces relieves the benefit of bloodletting from three veins, namely the basilic, cephalic, and femoral: because it attracts blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh; and those small veins attract blood from other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three said veins.
And it is necessary to warn the Ventosator not to proceed too much in scarification, because the location is laid bare of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
The Ventosa which is applied above the alcausos relieves hemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.
And it is necessary to warn the Ventosator that the Ventosa should be large and made of air: because the location needs strong suction, and perhaps the fine Ventosae may break: and there should be great scarification.
Wind veins of the legs decrease by manifest diminution; for they draw blood from the whole body and transfer old pains to the kidneys, bladder, and matrix: they provoke menstruation and transfer inflammation and swelling. And they take the place of phlebotomy of the two saphenous veins, and the Alkhoroubian vein.
However, they weaken the body greatly, and cause syncope to occur in many people.
And the benefit of the Alkhoroubian vein is similar to the benefit of the two veins of the legs.
The quality of the position of the wind veins is that you place the wind vein in the first empty space, and draw out with a tempered suction: and do not prolong the position of the wind veins, but put them quickly and remove them quickly, so that the humors come to the spot with equal arrival: and do not stop repeating it and continuing, until you see the spot already reddened and inflamed, and appears as a redness of blood: then indeed scarify, and iterate suction slowly. Then consider the dispositions of bodies.
For those among humans who have thin flesh, rare pores, it is necessary that you scarify him once only, not more: lest the place becomes ulcerated.
And instruct the wind vein operator to amplify the scarification and deepen it slightly: and temper the suction in ease, swiftness, and sweetness.
What if there is coagulation in the blood, then it is necessary that you scarify him twice. In the first instance, indeed, the way is opened for subtletization of the blood and its moistening: and in the second instance, indeed, a thorough and meticulous extraction of thick blood.
If the blood is very foul, then a third scarification should be performed: so that the outcome may be final.
And finally, when we want to draw out the blood slowly or a little bit, one scarification is enough for us. If we wish to extract a great deal of blood, we will make many scars.
And if we measure, and find that the blood is thick: then it is necessary to incise deeply with a scarification, and the equal end of the scarification is the depth of the skin.
What should be administered from oils at the position of Wind-sores, and what should a wind-sores patient beware.
In that person whose skin is thick, hard, and dark, and whose pores are tight, it is necessary that the areas of Wind-sores be anointed with open, gentle, resolving oils; if in the time of summer, such as oil of alkeiri, or oil of violet, or oil made from sweet almonds, or oil from cucumber seed.
And if it is in the time of winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or sabine oil; and similar things.
If the excess is thick and cold: then oil should be of amaranth, or oil of balsam, or oil of white poppy, or oil of anethum; and similar things.
If the wind-sores patient is of large pores and tender flesh: then it is necessary to prohibit them from oil, and it is necessary that those with such wind-sores wash the areas Ventosarum after ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or sour water, or cucumber water, or purslane water; and similar things.
He whose blood is of much moisture, should wash the wind-sores with vinegar, or with water of myrtle, and sumac; and similar things.
Whoever has thick excesses should wash their wind-sores with old wine, or with water of sammosus, or a decoction of anise, or chamomile; and similar things.
And it is necessary to beware of inflammation in the bathhouse, or near the bathhouse, indeed it is necessary that it be administered after exiting the bathhouse for an hour, or two hours.
And one should not sleep after inflammation.
What is it that ought to be regulated with the Venosandus or Phlebotomatus before inflammation?
And after that it is necessary to consider first: then if the Venosandus or Phlebotomatus is choleric and prevails over his blood's sharpness and inflammation: then it is necessary that he take cooling remedies, such as pomegranate juice: and also endive with vinegar and lettuce, and sycamore leaf, and similar things.
And give him foods such as eggs, old meat of sheep, and cooked foods with wild herbs: and similar things.
And to one whose complexion is cold, it is necessary that he takes in his drink a syrup made from honey or almond or sycamore seed: and let him take a medium-sized fragrant wine, which is between old and new: and let him be advised to use moderation with food. And give him foods such as eggs, and small birds: and sparrows, that is, small birds; and he should also take dove's eggs.
And it is necessary that the drink on the day of inflammation and phlebotomy be more than food: and it is necessary to give in the drink certain things to some people one hour before breakfast, or medicine made from moss, that is, muscata, or alesselithe before inflammation; and before or after phlebotomy, so that the principal members may be strengthened and the blood may be thinned. And one should not take it with a hot drink.
A treatise on Inflammation without Scarification. Those wounds that are without scarification are the ventosas which are placed on the liver, spleen, podagra, and on the belly, navel, and places of kidneys, and pithed anchae: for these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And it is not sought through them, except by attraction of blood from member to member: just as we place a ventosa on the breasts in illness of nasal bleeding. And we use them to remove from the member cold and congested blood in the member: just as we place a ventosa on the belly and navel. For it itself rarifies the member, and warms it up, and removes the pain on account of that, because it dissolves that blood congestion.
And it is also placed on the kidneys when there occurs a blockage or stone. For indeed its power of attraction may perhaps open up the blockage or remove the stone from its place.
And it does the same thing when placed on the liver and spleen with a congestion to be removed from both of them.
And these ventosas are administered empty, with only an incision. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in pleurisy afflictions; and that is, so that the ventosa may be filled and be large with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs have been decocted that agree.
Form of the Ventosas administered with fire.
The shape of the Ventosas administered with fire is as follows: let the width of its opening be two open fingers, according to what we have formed: and let the quantity of it in depth be half a palm: and let there be on one side of it, about halfway down, a small hole, according to the size that an acus will enter it: make it from air simultaneously, or citron, rounded, smooth, equal, clean edges so as not to hurt the member at its position upon it: and let there be in the middle of it a crosswise rod of air or iron where a candle is placed with fire.
And now this poultice is made large, greater than what we have described, and a little smaller than that, according to the afflictions and age of the person who uses it.
For wind pouches of children and those emaciated are different from wind pouches of men and those with large bodies.
However, the quality of applying this poultice with fire on a limb is as follows: you should light a linen wick or a small candle from beeswax and place it in the middle of the transverse stick which is inside the poultice, so that the ignited part of the fire may be directed towards the lower part of the poultice, lest the sick body be burnt.
Then it should be placed on the limb, and your finger should be above the opening which I mentioned, until we need to remove the poultice; as long as we use it, take away your finger, and a vapor will come out through that opening, and the poultice will loosen immediately.
Then burn the wick according to its nature, and repeat this if you need it.
But in the poultice which is administered in the illness of pleurisy with water, there is no transverse stick nor opening; and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed only on the limb.
And this is its form.
And this poultice is better in proportion as it is larger and can hold much water.
¶ On the suspension of Bloodletting Pouches.
Bloodletting pouches are not administered on many parts of the body, except in those where it is impossible to apply poultices due to their smallness, such as the lips and gums, and similar things. Or on a bare member devoid of flesh, such as a finger, and nose, and similar things.
And the quality of using them is: to take the blood from the bloodletting pouches that are in sweet and clean waters, free from corruption.
Then they are let go day and night in sweet water until they are famished, and nothing remains in their bellies. Then the body should be evacuated first by bloodletting, and then with purgatives. Then wash the afflicted member until it turns red. Then they are placed on top of it.
When they are filled and fall away, and it is possible to suck out the place with a purgative, then it is more beneficial; and if not, then wash the area with vinegar. Then with much water, it is rubbed and expressed.
But if the flow of blood is prolonged after the fall of haemostats, and it is that which drips away; then dip a linen cloth in cold water, and place it on top, until the dripping subsides.
But if the blood multiplies, then sprinkle powder of bounded alum or gallnuts and similar things from astringents on top, until the bleeding stops.
Or put middle layers of peeled beans on top and let them be, until they stick to the place, for the blood stops.
And it is necessary if a repetition of haemostats is needed, when possible, to change them.
But if the haemostats are prevented from being suspended, then wipe the area with fresh blood. Or fix a needle in place until something comes out of the blood. Then put them on, for they immediately stick when they feel something coming from the blood.
When you want them to fall, sprinkle something from pounded aloes, or salt, or ashes on top of them: and they will fall immediately.
This chapter is also very necessary in the art of medicine, and it is about restoring fractures and dislocations of bones.
Know, ye sons, that foolish doctors and the common crowd boast of this chapter, and those who have never looked at an ancient book nor read a letter from it.
And because of this reason, our method is deprived of science on earth. And I have never found anything good in it at all, and I did not obtain what I obtained unless it was through the length of reading ancient books and my study on their understanding, until I extracted that science from them.
Then I adhered to experimentation and lengthy study throughout my life.
And now I have described to you everything that my science contains in this chapter: and beyond what has passed my experiment, after I shortened it for you, and freed it from the occupation of prolongation, and shortened it at the end of shortening, and showed it at the end of deviation: and I shaped many forms in it from the forms of instruments that are used in it, with the addition of deviation, just as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter 2.
It is necessary that we say in the prologue of this chapter, the summaries and headings, whose understanding requires the craftsman to stand at attention over their truth: namely, so that you and those who are ready may know or learn this noble art from you.
I say therefore, that when any fracture or dislocation or twisting or fall happens to someone: then it is necessary that you hasten first to let blood on him, and dissolve him, or both at once: if nothing prevents, such as weakness of vigor: or he who has something happen to him is a child, or an old decrepit person: or the time is extremely hot, or extremely cold.
Then he should be content with his food, cold herbs, and the flesh of birds and hares; and forbid wine, fatty meats, and foods that fill veins with blood. Until you are safe from the warm abscess and do not fear the discharge of material onto the member; then the sick person should return to his original regimen, with which he is accustomed.
When therefore a broken bone is being restored, then it is necessary for the sick person to be fed nourishing foods in abundance, thick, heavy, and with a slimy consistency: such as food made from cooked wheat with water, and rice, and heads and feet of vegetables, and sheep's entrails, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with this regimen, the coagulation of the fracture occurs more quickly and better.
And know that bones which are fractured when the men who are in their first old age and decrepitude are not possible to be continued and consolidated according to their natural state because of drying up of their limbs; and those things which come from them at the end of relaxation, such as children's bones.
However, nature attaches something similar to glue above the fractured bone from all sides, which has thickness, by which it adheres and tightens itself until it is thoroughly congealed and bound together until it reaches the end of strength and firmness, as it was in the beginning, until nothing prevents it from performing its functions: and for this reason it is necessary to provide nourishment to the sick person with food that has heaviness, sliminess, and thickness, as we said.
And know that the species of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of members: for a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the skull: and a fracture of the breastbone is different from a fracture of the backbone: and similarly all other members are different one from another: and I come with the reminder of every species of fracture exposed in its own chapter, distinguished from others. And the types of bone fracture are differentiated also within themselves.
Because it becomes a curved fracture, besides the stars that occur in it. And sometimes it happens that the fracture is according to the length of the bone: and there are fractures which are said to be sagittae, that is, stars, and additions proceeding, as they are on a reed when it is fitted with a pen for writing. And not proceeding; and there is a fracture with wound and disruption at the head; and it is a small cleft fracture.
And every species has its own ingenuity or proper instrument for restoring it, according to how its memory comes, distinguished in its own places.
And from the fact that a bone fracture is known, there is its twistiness and its prominence; and its appearance to the senses, and its sound when you compress it with your hand.
When therefore there is no apparent twistiness in the place, nor a sound when you touch it with your hand as you apply gentle motion, nor does the infirm person find great pain: then there is no fracture there, rather it is possible that it be a twistiness or small cleft: so you should not move it at all with your hand and compression, but rather place something of medicines upon it, whose remembrance comes after that moment which is suitable to the place; then let it be bound with a fine bandage.
And know that the place when it curves and splits into two, besides what occurs in it as stars, yet every part is removed from its companion: then you should start at your hour to correct it, equalizing it before a warm abscess comes upon it.
But if a warm abscess occurs, then let it be left for several days until the abscess subsides. Then equalize it according to any method possible by gentleness and ingenuity.
And know that the restoration of it and its adjustment is easier than bone, where endeavors occur.
Then tie it up, according to how its memory comes back to you.
If there are efforts in a bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, if it is an arm or leg; or with your hand, if the limb is small; or with two ropes, or with a rope and a hand.
And your position should be such that you place the limb on an equal location, according to its natural form, until when the parts of the broken member are extended: then strive to make those additions in every way and by whatever means you can in their places; and beware, according to your strength, lest there occur superfluous pain or injury due to your operation: and strive according to your strength, that you apply one bone with its partner, according to better forms.
And it is necessary at that hour for you to test and touch it with your own hand. If then you see something different there, correct it, and make it equal according to the quantity of your strength.
And beware of excessive extension and strong compression, just as many foolish people do. For indeed they often cause to happen through their own operation aposteme hot or contracture in a member: just as we have already seen many times from their operations.
Then bind after adjustment, and proper operation, and the constriction of that member, and rest, and calmness: and caution the weak person above it. And make it so that it does not move in its own hours of vigil and sleep, and in its own revolution and agitation, and in its own exhaustion, and all its movements with its utmost strength. And that it may beware not to be in a position of the member's position that would follow pain. What is this, because when it feels a pain or injury in the arrangement of a limb: then one should move it to another arrangement with which it does not feel pain.
And beware that the position of the limb is equal and straight, so that there is no twistiness in the member when it is restored.
And the quality of a broken limb's fracture is, as I narrate.
You should know that fractured limbs are differentiated by their smallness or greatness and by their shape.
Therefore, what is small among them, such as an arm, finger, and toe, and similar to these, then it is necessary that there be a wrapping of soft, thin cloth. But what is large among them, such as the hip and leg, it is necessary that there be a wrapping of broad, thick cloth.
Because the wide band connects a large limb and tightens it from every part with equal constriction, so that no swelling enters.
Then begin after your evacuation to place the suitable ointment on that, in a thin smear over the location of the fracture itself. Then begin to wrap the bandage over the location of the fracture itself with three or four windings, according to what is suitable for the limb; and grasp your hand slightly with the bandage.
Then go with it to the upper part above the location of the fracture and tighten less than your previous constriction by which you tightened the broken place. Then stretch yourself with the wrapping away from the location of the fracture for a little bit and gradually relax the constriction until you reach a large part that is healthy.
Then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken place with windings. Then go with the wrapping to the lower part below the fracture. And your operation will be on constriction and loosening, and softening of it, according to what we said in the first superior constriction.
Then place between the constrictions a piece of soft cloth or linen that will straighten out the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is tortuosity; and if not, do not put anything into it.
Then envelop above this wrapping another one. Afterward, apply above these wrappings small stones made hot at once, unless there is swelling or warm suppuration.
But if there is swelling or suppuration in it, then place above it what settles that suppuration and removes the swelling; and leave it for a few days. Then tie on top of it these hot stones.
And the stones should be from the middle of a broad cane, smooth and well-shaped; or they should be from wood, such as is used for combs, which are made from pine, or geraid, that is, palm branches, or calingi: and the width of every stone should be according to this form and same figure.
However, it is necessary that the stone which is placed on top of the bandage should be a bit thicker and wider than the other stones; and the length of the stone should be according to what allows it to fit onto the member by its size and smallness.
Then tie on top of the stones with another bandage, according to the first constriction. Then bind on top with threads that are well-centered, according to what we said about constriction; and it is, so that your constriction above the place of the fracture is more: and as much as it is farther away from the fracture, constriction should be less.
And it is necessary that the threads are medium-sized in thickness and subtlety, and they are made of soft linen.
Because if the threads are thick, as I saw from the operations of ignorant people who put their threads together from twisted linen cords, it is a great mistake: because the constriction falls short of its proper quality.
And fine threads do not fit together again: because you do not obtain with them that which you wish.
And it is not necessary for there to be less than a finger's width between one asterisk and another.
But if the patient is injured at the extremities of the asterisks after the stricture in healthy places: then place under them a soft cotton or a woven wool, until nothing is hurt from it.
But when there is a fracture with a wound, and there is a disruption of the skin, I come with the recollection of it in the second chapter according to the particularity.
And know that not every fractured member should be bound with asterisks from the first day. Which is because a member when it is large, should not be placed with asterisks above it unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your safety from the event of cold pustules.
And this is the method of plasters with which the ancients restored what is placed over fractures and dislocations.
¶ Common plaster method abbreviated, restoring a fracture, suitable for many complexions, especially women and children: because it is on account of which heat does not overcome it, nor cold.
And it is, that you take from the chaff of a mill, and it is the floury pulp that hangs on the walls of the mill near the movement of the millstone: and make it as it is, except that you should sift it with egg white: and put its confection not thick, nor thin. Then use it.
¶ Another plaster method, restoring a fracture, and dislocation, and twist. Recipe of alum, and laudanum, and acacia, and enula, and mugwort: and the juice of each one anise X myrrh, and aloe both equal V and alethi XX are mixed together, and sifted, and mixed with water of alethi: or with egg white, if the patient's complexion is warmed. Then use this poultice. For it is of good composition, quickly restores broken bones, and benefits many people.
Another way to make a poultice that also helps with fractures and sprains. Recipe: mix myrrh, mastich, and white aloe, all in equal quantities of 10; and aloes, ambrosia, and acacia, all in equal quantities of 5. Mix all the ingredients together with much pounding, and sift them, and make them into a liquid with water or egg-white: and administer them.
Another way to make a poultice for joints and separated bones from their proper places; and it calms sudden pain that has occurred, and splits in the bone, and fractures. Take succulent wool, immerse it in vinegar and a decoction of oil, and place it over the spot.
And in this poultice there is no power of restoration, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess and expelling pains properly.
Another way to make a poultice that restores a broken bone. Take the leaves of mulberry and the leaves of Silkworm tree; and grind all into a fine powder, and make a poultice from both.
Another way to make a poultice, administered for the restoration of a broken bone; and when you wish to resolve any remaining abscess. Recipe: take the root of aloe, and camomile, and the flowers of violet, and the flour of herb, each in equal parts; grind all into a fine powder, and mix with wine, unless the limb is already warmed.
If it is already warmed, then mix that with the moist water of coriander, or with water, and use it.
Another way to make a poultice that is stronger than the first one, when a hard abscess occurs during the restoration of a limb. Recipe of the root of hawthorn and the seed of flax and balm and melilot and sassafras and violet flowers and chamomile, all equal parts. Grind everything together, and make a mixture with water of willow or sweet water or wine. Use the entire thing according to the heat of the member and the quieting of its heat.
But Hippocrates did not say in his book that something should be put on a fractured member during its restoration, unless it is made from wax and oil: nothing else; and he said that it should be the middle between thickness and subtlety.
However, Galen's opinion is that things should be placed on a fractured member during its restoration which have cooling properties of heat, such as myrrh and aloe and frankincense, and similar substances to those we mentioned.
The method of making a plaster that relieves injury and pain. Recipe of equal parts of mugwort, and cypress, and human hair clippings, or bird's feather, and hawthorn, and salt. Grind them together, sift them, and make a plaster out of it.
But the quantity should be according to how much is needed so that the bandage remains, and then it is dissolved. Consider this: if the patient does not experience pain, or pruritus, or the fractured bone is not moved from its place: then do not dissolve it for many days. But if it happens that a severe itching occurs, or troubling pain, or inflammation; then hasten and dissolve it within an hour, and remove the plaster from him: and take a soft cloth, or a marine sponge, and wet it; and submerge it in warm water, and wash with it the place until the itching ceases and the pain subsides.
But if it happens that a severe itching occurs, or troubling pain, or inflammation; then hasten and dissolve it within an hour, and remove the plaster from him: and take a soft cloth, or a marine sponge, and wet it; and submerge it in warm water, and wash with it the place until the itching ceases and the pain subsides. Then let the member rest for one hour. Then place a piece of cut linen over it, soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose-colored oil: and bind it there for one night, until you are secure from hot abscesses, and the swelling of the member subsides, and the pain is removed.
Then go back to a thin stricture and apply a small plaster: and do not tighten it with your first constriction and subtlety, until it is healed.
But if you see that the abscess, redness, pain, swelling, and all the accidents are now completely gone, and you still need a plaster and stricture, then go back to doing what you did at first evenly.
But if none of those things happen to the member that we mentioned, then you should not release it until after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is released twenty days later, entirely as appears to you from the dissolution of the member, just as we said, until when the fracture adheres and the coagulation of flesh grows over it: add also then in stricture more than your first constriction altogether: and add also in the nourishment of an infirm person, according to what has been previously mentioned.
But if you see the location of the fracture already drying out and wasting away more than it should: then know that nourishment is being prevented from reaching it. Therefore bathe it with warm water all around as you dissolve it, and let it be so for three days, and a little loosen the stricture.
Through this operation, nourishment reaches the member, and it is healed quickly.
But what the foolish restorers do to a fractured member is different from how it should be restored, and instead they restore it by twisting, which is an error of their operation and great fear: and if they were right, they would have said so in their old books, and acted with it.
And I have not seen anywhere their signs in that at all, and it is better, that it not be done.
On the making of an accident on the head.
The species of fracture are diverse, and its figures many; and its causes are distinct.
For from a fracture is the one that occurs by percussion with an axe: and percussion takes away the bone entirely until it reaches the siphac, which is beneath the bone, just as an axle does in wood: and on account of this, this species of fracture is called Axialis.
Or the axe falls upon something of a bone, and cuts its face, and the cut does not penetrate to the end of it: and this species of fracture is called Kalaan, that is, Lateral absolutely.
And it is a wound of two fractures, or great, or small.
And from a fracture is the one that is crushing or grinding: and its cause is percussion with a stone, or falling on a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also either piercing, which is already approaching the membrane, which is beneath the bone: or it is on the face of the bone: and it is a wound of these two fractures, either small or great.
And from a fracture is the one that is hidden in the bone in subtlety of hair: and it is a small crack, and on account of this, this species of fracture is called Capillaris.
And from these is a fracture that occurs by falling or percussion with a stone, and similar things, which cause the bone plate to move inward and creates a hollow: just as happens in a cauldron when there is percussion, and part of it moves inward.
And indeed most often this occurs in the heads of humid bones, such as are the heads of children.
And all these species of fractures are separate and I will come with the recollection of that whole thing in its place.
And we know all these types of fracture by observation over them and inquiry with probes, and removal of corrupted flesh which is above them.
The species indeed of Capillary fracture is known by this, that it appears above the bone, and is wiped away, and covered with a poultice: for the fracture itself appears black.
In the treatment of the fracture, consider first the accidents of the patient: then if you see from the accidents a sign manifestly indicating fear, such as vomiting of choler, and sweating, and loss of understanding, and loss of voice, and syncopes, and acute fever, and evacuations of the eyes, and redness of them, and similar things to these, arising from accidents in many dispositions, by no means is it cured: and if you do not see threatening accidents, and hope for salvation: then begin its treatment.
What is this, if he comes to you wounded at first when it wounds him: and it occurs on winter days, then you must strive in the removal of bone before the fourteenth day according to every disposition.
And if it occurs on summer days, then you must strive to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest what is beneath the bone from pus corrupts and those accidents which we narrated occur.
What if the fracture of the bone has already reached pus touching the brain, and it is with minute cracks and attractions: then you must cut off the broken and worn-out part, according to what I tell you.
And it is necessary to shave the head of the wounded person: and wash over the bone in whatever way possible for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is easy on the sick person.
What if it happens to you during the detection of bone a flow of blood or a warm abscess: then apply to him what is necessary. And you should fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil; and make the wound quiet until the swelling subsides, and be sure of no bleeding. Then begin the treatment of the bone and its removal.
And this is done according to one or two methods.
One method indeed is to cut the bone with a narrow and sharp saw: and this is its form.
Then apply another Incisorium, after the first one, slightly broader: and this is its form.
Then apply also another Incisorium, even broader than the second one.
And the second method is that you should have with you a number of different saws: some of which are broader than others, and some of which are shorter than others; and they should be at the end of their sharpness, and made of iron or wood; and use ease in striking on the saw, so as not to shake the head or hurt it.
But if the bone is hard and tough: then you must first pierce around it with Terebras that are not deep-cutting; and they are not so called unless because they do not penetrate to the end of the bony part beyond it, because the edge of the Terebra is rounded above what is under its sharp head, similar to a margin, and a small circle prevents it from sinking in and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is fitting for you to take a large number of these Terebras, each one suitable for the thickness of the bone, until the present situation is such that there is a Terebra for every part of the skull: and the length and shortness of its sharp edge should be according to the thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three kinds of Terebras or Trepanums.
The quality of piercing around a fractured bone is that you place the drill on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know the bone has been penetrated. Then move the drill to another place and position it so that what is between every hole and the thickness of a radius, or about that.
Then cut with the incisors what is between every hole in the bone; and make it finer than you can on the edge of slightness, as we said, until you remove the bone, or by hand, or with some other instrument that you prepared for this, such as tweezers and fine forceps.
And it is necessary to beware of all caution, lest the drill or incisors touch anything from the splint.
When you have circumnavigated the bone by piercing and it has been separated from the splint, if it was continuous with it, and you have removed it, it is necessary that you smooth and equalize the extremity of what remains in the bone with another similar instrument, an incisor. However, it should be thin and fine rather than other incisors.
If something remains of small bones and is loose, then take it with ease with the tool that you have among your instruments. Then care for the wound after that with linen cloths and ointments which we mentioned.
And another mode of operation is easy, truly remote from fear, which Galen said and praised with great praise: and this is his saying. It is necessary for you first to begin uncovering the part of the bone from the place where the fracture is more violent and manifest: until when you have uncovered that part, and placed under it the extremity of this lenticular incisor, which has this shape.
And the lenticular part is not cutting anything smooth: and the sharp part of it goes along its two sides in length, as you see: so that the lenticular part is resting on the splint, with its cut side facing the bone.
Then strike the upper incisor on one side with a small mallet, until you cut through the entire bone with ease, as it yields: and be secure with a cloth, lest something unexpected happen that you would utterly fear.
And if the surgeon were not more foolish than men and more ignorant of his art, nor asleep, then if anything remained attached to the bone from a cloth in certain places, he would cut it off with the end of the incisor's handle and free it with ease. For it is freed by him without harm, and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the cloth and what is cut off from the bone is its surface, and there remain in it roughness and subtle ridges: then it is necessary that you file away this roughness and remove those ridges with fine rasps which you prepared for various quantities, so that it may be possible for you to apply these in every place more suitable and correct, according to what the operation leads you to, and the fractured bone and its shape. And it is necessary that you apply them in proportion to your own measure, as first you file the bone more widely with those fine rasps. Then use a still finer one after that.
And it is necessary that you apply them in proportion to your own measure, as first you file the bone more widely with those fine rasps. Then use a still finer one after that. And do not cease to do this according to continuity, until you come to administering more finely and subtly than all of them.
In each remaining small crack or fracture of the hair-like threads, and in a subtle break, it is necessary to apply care, according to what leads to its correction.
And it is a thing that is not hidden from anyone, to whom any study is devoted in this art, and stands over what we have written, and has been shown in great fractures.
But if the cloth is detected and retained when you are removing the bone: then it is necessary that you take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth, doubled or tripled, and immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth: and make it as easily as you can on top of that, so it does not become tight.
Then apply the wide bandage on top of it: and do not tighten it unless by the amount that holds the wound just so: and leave it for one day or two days, until you are certain about the absence of suppurative heat. Then loosen it and apply remedies after that which remove excessive dryness: such as lily roots, plantain flour, and powdered thuris, and aristolochia, and similar things to these: and it is, so you make a powder from these remedies which is powdered over the wound like the dried ones.
And universally apply all medicine to it that has a property to remove and not corrode. And beware according to your power, so that the wound is clear in your treatment: nor should it be in that dirty with ointment, nor befouled.
And beware according to your power, so that the wound is clear in your treatment: nor should it be in that dirty with ointment, nor befouled. Nor should you allow pus to gather there entirely: for when pus gathers on the linen cloth of the brain, it corrupts it and putsrefies it, and a great evil befalls the sick person after that; and indeed it often happens in the head wound, when the mouth is cleared from it, especially when its care is neglected, a blackness appears on its surface.
So then consider, if accidents happen to the sick person which we mentioned, know that it is certainly deadly.
And if blackness does not occur, except from the medicine that is placed on it, and it is in the power of that medicine to cause that blackness: then you must take one part from honey, three parts from rose oil, and linen threads with them. Then place it on the wound: afterwards, take care of it with remedies that are suitable, until it is healed.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You should know that only two parts of the nose above are broken simultaneously, or one of them, because it has two bones. Since what is below is cartilaginous, it does not break and only suffers from abrasion, twisting, and bending.
If one of the two parts of the nose is broken, then you should insert your little finger into the nasal opening and use your index finger and thumb to realign that fracture until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this with skill and ease. And beware that no severe pain occurs due to your operation.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then you should use the end of a radius bone with a small knob.
If the fracture is in both parts, then do the same for each one and strive to achieve restoration of its natural shape on the first day possible after the fracture. And if not, then seven or ten days later, in a state of calm and free from suppuration.
Then insert a linen cloth at the tip of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or two cloths if the fracture is in both parts, and let the thickness of the cloth be such that it fills the nasal opening.
And some ancient restorers said that linen cloths should be soaked in butter and changed every day. But that does not seem right to me; rather, it is fitting to soak the linen cloth in egg white mixed with miller's flour. Then let the linen cloth be left until the bone hardens and the cartilage becomes stiff.
And sometimes a goose feather is inserted into the nose instead of the linen cloth, after it has been wrapped in a soft cloth; and this causes the fracture to be held more firmly, so that an invalid may not be hindered from breathing.
And this thing is not necessary. If you wish, do that; and if you wish, sew with linen.
If an abscess should happen to occur on the nose again while you are operating, apply poultices to the nose with cerate, or with a poultice infused in rose oil, or a small one from diaquylon.
But if no abscess occurs, then it is necessary to bind it with poultices made of sesame flour and the powder of burnt frankincense mixed with white of egg. Then place a piece of smooth cloth over it, and do not bind the nose with anything at all.
If the bones of the nose are broken or crushed, then it is necessary to split them open and remove them with instruments that fit. Then bind the wound with a dressing and care for it with what closes and consolidates, using suitable poultices or ointments.
That if a wound should occur between the nose, then it is necessary to care for it with linen cloths and administer a leaden cannula until it heals.
Of the restoration of the lower jawbone when it becomes disjointed.
When the lower jawbone becomes disjointed and its fracture is not accompanied by a wound: then look to see if it is fractured only on the outside and does not split into two parts and curve towards the inside: then recognition of this is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side of the jawbone, you should insert your left index finger into the injured bone: similarly, if the fracture is on the left side of the mandible, then insert the index finger of your right hand: and push with it the prominence of the fracture towards the outside with ease, using your other hand from the inside part of the bone.
That if the fracture of the jawbone has already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to apply extension from both sides, according to straightness: until it becomes possible for them to be equal.
If however a commotion or disruption has already occurred in the teeth: then bind them with those that remain using a gold thread, or silver thread, or silk. Then place a cauter above the fractured jawbone. Then place above it a doubled cloth, and place above the cloth a large plaster, well-made, or a piece of equal-sized sole leather, along the length of the jawbone.
Then bind it above, according to the preparation of its binding and its application suits, until it is not destroyed; and command the patient to use tranquility and quietness: and place their food in gentle sips.
If however you think that something is changing its shape in some way: then hurry and release it on the third day. Then straighten out what has been altered from that and apply a poultice to it with barley flour, or with sheep's milk, after you have removed the cauter; and place wool on top of the poultice.
While therefore that poultice remains attached to it and the bone arrangement does not change, release it, so as not to break it, until it is healed; or bind the fracture. For indeed this fracture is bound many times over a period of three weeks.
But if meanwhile a hot abscess occurs, then administer what we have said many times to calm it down, until that abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, take note. Namely if the bone fragment or splinter is already separated from the bone: then take care of this carefully, so that you remove those fragments along with what suits you for their removal using instruments.
If however the wound opening is tight, then widen it with a lancet according to the amount of need.
Then when you have removed those splinters and nothing remains of them, or if the wound opening is large: and if not, place above it one of the plasters that fit for this and flesh out the wound until it heals.
About the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Indeed the clavicle is often broken from the anterior part near the shoulder and its fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Or indeed it is broken and separated into two parts, except that there are complications involved, and it is easier to restore it.
Or indeed it is broken in such a way that the complications occur in the bone, and it is more difficult to restore it.
Or indeed it is broken with an open wound.
And the operation in this case when there is no wound is to have two attendants, one of whom should hold support as follows after the fractured clavicle and the other stretch the neck towards that side.
Then straighten out the fracture with your fingers until its shape is restored, as it should be, and that there be no prominence or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then it is necessary to place a ball of cloth or wool under the weak person's titillic and make its size according to the quantity of your necessity: and extend and elevate the clavicle and tighten the ball with your hand until the fracture is equal, as it should be.
And if you are not able to pull the end of the clavicle to the outside because it has gone too deep: then it is necessary for the weak person to be raised up onto their own chest and you should place a pillow medium-sized under their shoulder, and have your attendant press down on their shoulder towards the lower part until the bone of the clavicle that is in the deep part is lifted up to the top: and then straighten out the fracture and equalize it with your fingers.
But if you feel a sathaium coming out of the clavicle and it moves: then it is necessary to apply pressure above it and extract the sathaium with ease.
If it is retained in the bone, then use your skills in cutting it with one of the instruments that you prepared for this purpose, after you have placed under the furrow an instrument that saves the flesh: and it is an instrument made of wood or iron. And this is its shape.
It is similar to a snail shell which has no hollowing out.
And let its width be according to that which you need for it from the size of the bone and its flatness. Its length, however, is also according to what is possible for you in the operation.
And let it have two ends, as you see: and one end be broad, and the other narrow.
If, however, the disruption of the wound that you made when you extracted the splintered bone is wide, and you have secured it from putridity by applying heat: then gather together the two edges of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear putridity: then fill the wound with linen and cotton according to the size of the wound's incision.
And if putridity occurs, then pour linen soaked in rose oil, vinegar, and wine over it.
And the binding of the bone when it is without a wound and without cutting is, as you put a plaster made from milling flour with egg white over the bone. And place a soft cloth on top of it. Then place a ball under the tilt of it, if you need to. Then take a hametah, that is, the wheel which the Saracens hold, which is very long: and its width be about the length of one's hand or roughly that. Then place a doubled cotton cloth over the cloth and plaster. Then take a needle from a fine board, whose width is three fingers, and similarly in length. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap that cloth with a little bit of thread around the fracture and the spot where the bone falls. Then place the bone above the fracture as it has been turned back, and wrap it around his neck and under the titillium of both the sound and the unsound parts: and bring it over all the parts, and as you see that the binding holds the fracture tightly bound: and this is what is not hidden from you, and all, so that the thread does not move away from the fractured bone above. And therefore it is necessary to look at the patient every day. Whenever then the binding loosens and you see the thread is already moving away: then correct it and tighten the binding.
Then place the patient's pillow behind his back, and place a small pillow under the titillium of both sides during sleep, so that when he sleeps, aid may come to him from his own side. The fracture of the wing is therefore lifted up through the elevation of the shoulder.
Or bind his arm to his neck: and do not loosen the bandage unless something happens in the place that is inflamed from itching or abscess, up to twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you see his face towards it. And add to the binding, and let him go, until he is restored and has healed.
And indeed the fracture of the wing is bound and comforted according to many, in twenty-eight days: and sometimes it happens in some people in a shorter time.
¶ On the restoration of the fracture of the Spatula.
The spatula is rarely broken and it breaks far from its edge: and the edges of it are not usually broken.
When then the break is in that place and it breaks in the middle of it, and it is not known except by touch: then prepare for it according to the shape of the fracture. And bring it back to its natural shape in whatever way your ingenuity makes possible.
Then place powdered linen with white of egg, and gentle poultice, and place a small piece of doubled cloth on top. Then place a wide plate made from thin board over it, according to the size of the spatula as a whole, or slightly larger.
If indeed there is a hollow under the plate in some part of the spatula, then equalize it with a gentle poultice, until the plate descends according to equality.
Then bind it with a linen cloth that is long and smooth, by gentle constriction and firmness of the plate, until it does not move from its place.
And check the bandage every day. Whenever the bandage becomes loosened, tighten it and adjust the plate if it has moved from its place, and let the invalid lie on his healthy side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or twenty-five days.
When this number is completed, then loosen the bandage: and you will be in safety. For it is from bones whose union is not to be feared, nor their separation.
If however a fragment of bone proceeds and pierces under the skin: then cut above it, and remove it. And do what we said regarding a fracture of the clavicle from cauterizing an apostema hot, if something happens as a result.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the chest.
The chest sometimes breaks in its middle part, and it rarely occurs. Its extremities indeed are broken and shattered by accidents that befall it.
When its middle is broken, which bends downwards and causes a severe pain, difficulty in breathing, and coughing; and perhaps it vomits blood, and the concavity of the fractured bone is revealed, and does not remain hidden from sense, its restoration is that the invalid be raised up on his back: and place between the spatulas a poultice.
Then press his shoulders and bring together the ribs from both sides with your hands: and make fine adjustments in proportion to him, according as it is possible and fitting, until the figure of the bone returns, as it should be.
Then place a poultice and plaster over him, and place a splint made from willow or hazel wood, or something similar, on top of it, after you have wrapped him in cloth. Then fine-tune the binding over the fractured bone so that it does not move; and go with the bandage according to the curvature to the back a few times, and tighten it in a decent manner.
Then consider the bandage at every hour, and whenever it becomes soft, tighten it; and if necessity demands to dissolve it due to itching, or corrosion that occurs in the area, or pain, or abscess: then hasten, and dissolve it, and remove the poultice, and correct what happens according to the method of its treatment.
Then reduce the poultice if you see it is needed; and attach a bandage to it until it heals.
¶ On the restoration of Ribs when they are broken.
You should know that a rib fracture does not occur except in thick places which follow the back and from the ends of those ribs on the anterior part. And they are not worn away except because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from sensation during an examination with fingers.
And its restoration is done so that you equalize the fracture with your fingers in a possible manner until the figure becomes equal as it should be. Then apply poultices and bind the broken bone with splints if it needs it.
And if the rib fracture is inclined towards the interior: then it causes the patient severe pain and puncture, just like the puncture that occurs in one who has pleurisy: because the bone pierces the membrane, and also difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood happens to him many times: and this is a difficult cure.
And now the ancients have been skilled in this with many skills: and among them are those who say that you should place foods for the sick person which will generate inflammation and swelling, so that the belly may be inflamed, and stretch out, and propel a fracture to the outside.
We however shun it, so that no quick cause may lead to making a warm abscess, unless it happens. But if it has already happened, then we add to it.
And some of them said: let something be placed over the swollen area, then it should be sucked with strength, and it is similar to a reason. However, it is feared that the swelling will attract superfluities to the place due to the condition of weakness.
And some of them said: it is necessary to cover the place with wool that has already been soaked in hot oil: and put small pieces of linen between the ribs, until it is filled: so that the binding may be equal when you wrap it around according to its roundness.
Then let the sick person be cured by the treatment of pleurisy from food and medicine.
What if the vital force is oppressive to the sick person, which they cannot tolerate, and the mouth is pierced by puncture or wound, and we fear for the sick person: then it is necessary that we open up over the place, and uncover the broken rib. Then let us put above it the instrument that preserves the suture, whose description preceded: and let us cut open the mouth with ease, and cut into it.
Then let us bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large with a suture: and let us care for it with poultices, until it heals.
What if a warm abscess happens meanwhile, then hurry and pour poultices into rose oil, and place them over the place: and let the sick person be cured with what is suitable for the abscess.
Meanwhile it will be spread over the side where he sleeps, until he is healed.
On the restoration of a broken vertebra of the back and neck.
Indeed, fractures of the vertebrae of the neck sometimes occur, and rarely does attrition happen to them; similarly with the back. So when this happens to someone, and you want to know whether they will recover or not: then you should consult. For if you see his hands already relaxed, stunned, and lifeless; and he is unable to move them, or straighten them, or contract them; and when you contract them with your fingers and prick them with a needle, he does not feel it, nor feels any pain in them: then you will know that he is not recovering, and in many cases this is mortal.
But if he moves them and feels constriction with your fingers and pricking: then you will know that the vertebra of the bone is safe, and that the patient will recover with treatment.
But if a similar thing happens to the vertebrae of the back, and you want to know whether he will recover or not: then consider his feet. Then if you see that they are relaxed, and what happens in them is the same as what happens in his hands; and when he lies on his back, flatulence and evacuation occur without his will; and when he is raised up over his belly, evacuation occurs without his will; and when he is raised up over his back, and he wants to urinate, but cannot: then you will know that it is mortal. So do not bother with treating him.
But if nothing like that happens to him, the case is easier.
And the treatment of him who suffers from that is to apply a cooling plaster to the apostematized vertebra; so that you put rose oil or lard on it, alone.
Place it on top of it several times a day until the apostema becomes cool; then place one of the comforting, drying, and binding plasters over the spot, and bind it with a bandage. And instruct the patient to use quietness and tranquility. He should not sleep on the part where he finds pain until he is healed.
If it happens that a bone is broken or something has separated from it: then you must make an incision on the skin and remove it. Then gather two flaps of the wound together, if it is large, with a suture. Then care for it with some ointment from unguents until it heals.
If the last bone of the backbone is fractured and it is the end of the tail: then you must put your left hand into the anus and with your right hand align the broken bone as much as possible, and with a second alignment.
Then place something on top of it and remove it; and care for the wound with the cure that preceded it until it heals.
The Restoration of Anches.
Chapter 11.
The bones of the Anches are rarely broken. For if they are broken, then the break of theirs is not, except for comminution at their extremities; and they split along their length and bend inwardly towards the interior; and it happens to the patient that there is pain in the place, and a puncture: and the leg that breaks becomes numb.
And its restoration indeed is, that you stretch out your hand over it, until you stand over the fracture as its shape is.
For if the fracture is only at its extremities, then align it with the fracture, according to how it is prepared for you from alignment, until it becomes like its natural shape.
If however a fracture is in length, or already inclines towards the interior: then make the patient lie on their belly until you prepare for them the restoration of that fracture. When therefore you equalize it, place a poultice on top of it: then place a splint made from wood or skin on top of it: and bind tightly above so that you do not fear the fracture's permutation, nor the removal of the splint.
And equalize the hollow with him as it fills her, until it is held tight by a binding according to equality: and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their healthy side.
If however a warm abscess should happen to him: then cease from stretching it and its restoration, until the warm abscess subsides: and place on top of it what settles on top of it, as previously, and then return to restoring it: and bind it as is necessary.
If however it happens that bone splinters or is crushed, remove it.
Of the Restoration of a Fracture Assisting.
The Assistant is that which is between the elbow and the head of the Saw.
If therefore it breaks, then its restoration is according to one or two methods.
One of which is: that you take a piece of flat wood of middle thickness, according to this shape, which follows.
And it is bound at both ends with two straps.
Then it will be suspended from a raised place, and the patient will sit on a seat. Then he will throw his broken arm over the wood, until it reaches the notch of its own, where a curvature of the wood is attached.
Then hang something heavy above it, so that the assistant may stretch it down below. Then the doctor will equalize the fracture with his own hands simultaneously, until the fracture returns to its proper state.
And another method is, that the patient be placed on his own chest; and suspend his hand from his neck with a ligament. Then instruct two assistants to have one of them hold what is above the fracture with his hands; and have the other hold below it and stretch out each of them to their own side.
And if you wish the extension to be stronger, then bind below the fracture with a ligament and above it with another ligament; and have each of the two assistants stretch out to their two sides.
If the fracture is near the shoulder extremity, then it is necessary to place one ligament under the deltoid and another under the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow: then it is necessary to place a ligament above that spot and above the elbow itself.
Then equal the fracture with ease and without labor, until the fracture is equal as it should be, and a good setting is applied: then bind it, unless a hot aposteme occurs.
If however a hot aposteme occurs, then loosen the binding until the seventh day. And place a compress made of linen soaked in vinegar and rose oil on top of it until the aposteme subsides: then bind it: and the method of binding is to put an poultice over the fracture.
Then place an inunction of new cloth on top of the poultice. Then bring the arm over to support it, and place his hand open on his shoulder.
And place a cloth and bind it over the supporting arm, so that the arm stands in its stellar position: if nothing prevents you from doing so, nor is anything altered on you from the broken bone.
What if you fear that something from the broken bone will be altered on you, then use stars: and it is to place a star over the fracture itself which is wider and stronger than other stars. And you will place between every stellar width of a finger; and the length of the stars should be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers from all parts.
Then tie tightly over the stars the constriction which I said at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is that your constriction should be tighter over the site of the fracture. And as much as the fracture elongates, let the constriction be less.
So if you see the position of the stars and the constriction as we said, in the hour that you restore the member immediately, then do so; and if you fear a warm abscess, then release the constriction and the stars until the seventh day, as we said.
Then examine the ligament in all three days, so that itching or swelling does not occur in the place, or food is prevented from reaching the member, due to the excess constriction. Therefore correct that entire thing according to what we said.
If you are very confident that nothing will happen from it: then do not loosen the ligament unless after three days or more.
And let the invalid's sleep be over his back, and his hand over his stomach; and place under his support a full pillow of wool equally.
And examine at every hour of the night or day, lest the shape of the broken member is not restored, or the ligament becomes relaxed. Therefore correct that entire thing with your power.
And give food to the invalid according to the order which we have prescribed, so that it may be a subtle diet at first, until his mouth begins to feel inclined; then it is necessary for you to increase his food.
For the habit of the aid and foot is, that it should be tightened for forty days; then therefore it is necessary to release it, and to administer a bath, and to treat with ointments which correct that.
If the fracture is foul, wear it out: then do not release from it a ligament and small bones until fifty days, and until two months.
On the Restoration of a Fractured Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the two humeri.
Of which one is small: and it is that which follows the thumb. And the other is great, and it is that which is placed under the small one from the lower part.
Perhaps therefore the greater humerus alone is broken, or the smaller one: and perhaps they are both broken together.
When therefore the small upper humerus is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower humerus is broken, it is a bad fracture, and its healing is difficult.
And worse it is, when both bones are broken together.
If therefore the bone which is broken is the small upper humerus, then it is fitting for a doctor to apply in its restoration a small extension with ease, until it becomes equal.
If however the greater humerus is the one that is broken: then it is necessary to apply a strong and very tight splint.
And it is necessary to place the shape of a hand in its restoration, and its extended extension above the elbow. And let the thumb of the hand be higher above all the fingers; and let the wrist joint be below all the fingers, or the rest: and let the patient sit square on themselves, and let the elbow be before him, or directly opposite to it, in height, so that the patient does not incur labor.
Then have the attendant extend the arm from the lower part, either by hand or with a bandage. And another attendant extend similarly above.
Then the doctor straightens the bone until it reduces to its better shape as possible.
If there are splinters in a bone fracture, then try to reduce every fragment into its place with your skill.
If indeed a separated splinter appears and causes a wound, and you have no hope of restoring it; then find something to cover it over, and remove it according to the method we mentioned earlier.
But if there is a fracture with a wound, I have already treated that separately, so take the cure for it from there.
But if suppuration occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then tie a cloth made from rose oil, white wax, and a mixture with a consistency between thickness and thinness: and bind the cloth tightly over it with a subtle string until the suppuration subsides: then remove the cerate and apply a prepared poultice made from miller's dust and egg white. Then place plasters, and let the plaster placed over the fracture be a bit wider and stronger.
And know that the number of plasters on an arm is six in many arrangements: whether there is a fracture in one or two places at once.
Then place your bandage over the fractured area stronger and more tightly, and a bit more so towards the upper or lower part of the fracture: or put a milder bandage on top of it for a little while, according to what was mentioned earlier at the beginning of this chapter.
And let the cloths wrapped over the fracture be soft, moist ones: and not hard, rough ones. And let the thread used for binding be made from pure linen, with a consistency between thin and thick, as we mentioned.
And examine the member and its ligaments after days. But if something occurs that requires correction, such as itching which happens to the member: then it is necessary to anoint the member with warm water until the itching subsides, and do not bind the member tightly until the itching subsides; then reapply the bandage.
If the stricture is already softened, and the bone is removed, and similar things: then correct that whole thing with your skill, and consider again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive stricture, then it is necessary for you to soften it slightly and leave it for a few days until it reaches the nourishment, and then bind it.
But if none of what we said happens to the patient, then it is not necessary for you to release it unless after twenty days or approximately those.
Then the patient's hand should be suspended from their neck. And let his neck be steady, and be guarded by his own power against any movements. And make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or perhaps in thirty-two days, and possibly even in twenty-eight days. That whole thing is according to the dispositions of temperaments and the dispositions of power.
About the restoration of fractures of the Hand.
Know that a fracture rarely occurs in the palmar aponeurosis and joints of the fingers. And it does not happen unless there is much wear and tear.
When therefore a fracture or wear and tear occurs in the palm, then it is necessary for the patient to sit square, and before him should be a seat according to equality. Then place his hand on top of that one, stretched out.
Then the servant should extend the broken bones and the doctor should set them straight until they are joined together with good connection.
Then it is necessary to apply a poultice and plaster, unless there occurs a hot swelling. Then place a bandage on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in a linen cloth.
If however a fracture is near the lower part of the foot around the belly of the plantar region, then make something like a sphere out of cloth: and order the patient to bend down over it with their fractured foot: afterwards be tied with a long piece of cloth.
And let it be a pad made of leather, in which there is softness, so that the leather may be applied to the foot of the body: and bind it as needed.
If however the fracture is to the exterior, then it is necessary: that you place a pad above, and another pad below on the foot: and let your hand be open straight. Then place the bandage as your hand is bent: and stretch between the fingers with a strap.
And if there occurs a fracture of any of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it will be set straight as needed. Then bind with the foot: and if necessary, place a small straight pad on it, so that the fracture may rise up and not be moved.
If however the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the middle, ring, or little finger, then it will be set straight and bound with the healthy finger that follows it: or all of them will be bound according to their continuity: and it is better. Or place a small pad on top of it, as we said about the thumb.
And consider in your restoration and after the aforesaid disposition of warm poultices: and apply with it what is necessary when something happens from that, according to how its narration goes.
§ On the Restoration of Fractures of the Hip.
The hip bone is often broken and declared to the sense: because it turns towards the inner and posterior part.
And its restoration is done in such a way that a bandage is wrapped above the fracture, and another bandage below the fracture. And the patient should be placed on their face.
Then the surgeon should stretch all his ligaments towards his own side according to equality; and this is done when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
But if there is a fracture near the root of the hip, then let one ligament be placed on the side of the groin, so that the extension falls upwards; and another ligament beneath the fracture.
And similarly, if there is a fracture near the knee, then let one ligament be placed near the knee, so that the extension falls towards the lower parts.
Then the doctor should equalize the bone with his two hands, until he reduces it according to the likeness of its natural shape; and the bone is joined together by a good union.
Then it is necessary that you place a poultice and bandage, unless an abscess occurs in the limb. But if an abscess does occur in it: then let it remain for several days, until the abscess cools down; and then return to your treatment.
And the bandage should be tied thus. It is necessary that you wrap something hard and firm over the fracture, namely a bandage: and double it twice, or thrice: and let the excess remain. Then wrap the leg, until the heel reaches the root of the foot.
And insert a long thread between the hip and leg near the knee towards the lower parts, and let the ends of the thread come from the upper part of both parts. Then wrap it back over the leg and hip, with what remains of the bandage.
Then place on the hip above the fracture small stones, and place one stone above the bone of the leg.
Then fill the spaces between the leg and hip with soft cloths, so that the bandage may be equalized.
Then begin with a strong bandage from the middle above the place of the fracture, in three or four windings. And as much as you stretch with the ligament from the place of fracture, your stricture will be less and softer, and gentler.
Then direct it to both ends of the bandage, that you have inserted between the hip and thigh. Bind therefore with each of the three small stones which are above. Then go with both ends of the bandage to the lower parts, until you reach the ankle of the foot. And with both, bind also the ends of the small stones from the other side: so that the bandage is not moved from its place.
Then release the stricture above that, while it remains, so that no damage occurs to the member, nor swelling, nor inflammation, and similar things. What if something happens from that. Therefore hasten with its resolution and correct what happens afterwards, according to what we have said many times.
If however there is a fragment of bone that hurts: then it is necessary to equalize it, if it is possible for you. And if not, find something above it and remove it: and care for the one whose previous mention preceded, until it heals.
And when this fracture of the hip is bound, besides which small stones are added to it, as we said in aid and arm.
However, in its restoration when thus broken, no lameness occurs to the one who is weak. And if it is restored alone, besides which another leg is applied to him, then it is necessary that he who has it will always limp.
And know that the hip is bound in fifty days, or a little added to, or a little diminished from, all this is according to the diversity of complexions and other arrangements.
About the restoration of a broken kneecap.
You should know that a fracture of the kneecap is rare, but attrition occurs frequently to it.
If a fracture does occur to it, then only by a fissure or an opening can its parts be split. And that is both with wound and without wound. And it is set above it entirely with sense.
And its restoration is such that what has been disrupted from its parts with fingers will be equalized until it is gathered and joined according to what is possible in equality and ease and art.
Then place a poultice made from sesame flour or miller's flour with egg white on it; and place above it a round splint, if you need it; and bind it securely with a suitable bandage over it.
Then consider all the arrangements that we have narrated regarding other fractures: such as applying warm poultices and similar ones; so that you oppose every accident with what is suitable for it, until it heals.
Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Leg.
You should know that the leg has two bones, one of which is thick and is called by the name "Cruris," and the other is thin and is called "Femur.
And it happens to both of them according to the forms of fracture which occurs in two arm bones; and because of this, its restoration is done equally, and the operation is one.
If the two bones are broken at the same time, the leg turns into a mass in all its parts.
And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg turns towards the anterior part.
And if the thicker bone is broken, you will find it below; and it is one of those that are not hidden from you.
Then apply extension, equality, and binding with splints according to what is equal.
However it is necessary, if there is a foul fracture of the leg, having many sutures: so that the extension be less and the alleviation of your treatment.
And in the leg indeed there is something from an operation above the arm: and it is, that when you equalize the splints, and complete all your operation, then take two pieces of pine wood, which is used in the manufacture of tables, which are placed under benches: and they are made from palm-shaped spatulas: and choose from them those whose thickness is small, nor are they minute; and let their length be according to the length of the leg from the knee downward.
Then wrap each piece around with two wrappings according to its length. And place one part of the leg from one side, and another from the other side: and let them be from the knee to the lower part of the foot.
Then tie the two pieces together in three places at both ends and the middle. For when a stricture is prevented, the leg inclines to the right and left, and stands in good position.
And now indeed a cradle should be made of wood according to the length of the leg, and placed in it, so that the leg may be preserved from movement.
And very much indeed it is necessary to do this when there is a wound properly with the fracture.
Then consider the leg every day and strive with it with utmost study against suppuration, or inflammation, or other things. If therefore something of those happens, then oppose it with what is necessary until it heals, if God wills.
On the fracture of bones of the foot and fingers.
Indeed, a complete fracture does not occur in the calcaneus.
The bones of the foot sometimes experience fracture, and also the fingers experience a little fracture: and it does not happen to them unless by attrition in many dispositions.
If a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and you see those bones elevated above themselves, then the invalid should place his foot on prepared ground as one walking.
Then stand still, and place your foot on what is raised from those bones; afterwards, press or trample it: and straighten it until it returns to its place.
Then apply a poultice and a bandage on top; and place a small flat board under the foot, with two flat heads.
Then bind it to the foot with a binding that is fitting, after you have wrapped it with cloths and other things that are needed.
When therefore three or four days pass for him, then loosen the binding. For you will find the bones equalized, whether they are fractured or displaced. The operation therefore is as you see.
But if some fingers are broken, then restore them and straighten them as I have narrated to you for the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint under your finger according to the length of the finger, and make it slightly wider; afterwards, place this board under the foot as I have narrated to you, and bind it with a binding that is fitting.
But if what is broken is from two or three or more bones, then place a splint over the entire finger of its own size, wrapped in linen cloth; and bind the board to the lower part of the foot; and let it stand on one head of the board outside the belly of the foot, in order to hold good retention.
And it is fitting for you to remember, and not forget, but rather consider all that I have told you about other fractures from the accidents we mentioned; and oppose each accident with what is appropriate.
Of the fracture of a woman's womb, and the bone of her pelvis, and the man's spine.
When a woman's vulva is broken, then make her sit square. Then incline her towards the side of her own back for a little while, and hold her back.
Then the midwife should fill up her vulva with cotton until it is full; and let it be in the vulva as a sphere.
Then the woman should be shaken, and her back lifted gradually. For that cotton will come out when it becomes like a sphere before the entrance of the vulva, and the broken opening returns.
Then place a poultice on her back. When she wants to urinate, remove the cotton with ease, then let her urinate; and return it according to the manner in which you first inserted it: then let it return to its original poultice.
Let that be done for seven days or about, for the opening is being restored.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and tie it over the hole with a reed tube, and insert the whole bladder into her vulva. Then blow into the tube with force, until the bladder is inflated inside the vulva, for the fracture returns.
Then it will be filled with cotton, and remain for a few days, as we have narrated, until she is healed.
And when the opening of the scrotum of a man or woman is broken, then apply what we have narrated for the restoration and equalization of that which was said about bone anchors.
And the rectum is not hidden in these nearby fractures which touch only slightly, especially for someone with a certain study or use.
And understand my book thoroughly, because the fracture itself signifies to you many ways of straight paths in restoring and constraining its own. Therefore, understand.
In the phallus of a man when it is broken, take a goose's gizzard and insert it into it. Then place a wrapping of cloth over it and wrap it up. Let it be for three days or nearly so, and it will heal if God wills.
On the restoration of bone fractures when accompanied by a wound.
It is fitting for someone who has experienced a fracture with a wound, especially if it is a major one such as the hip bone or some other similar area, to bleed immediately and then proceed to apply the remedies we have previously mentioned.
But if the wound flows with blood, then you should hasten to apply a poultice to it, crushing powdered verdigris over the top of it; or, if that is not available, then use something else.
Then begin to restore the fracture on the same day and do not delay it unless an abscess occurs.
But if a warm abscess occurs, then put off the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess subsides. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all, for you would cause bad accidents to occur.
But if the fractured bone is prominent and visible above the skin: then it is necessary that you gently bring it back into place with your hands, equalizing it with a small amount of ease and extension.
But if there is no preparation for its extension or equalization by your hands: then reduce it with this instrument. And the instrument is one made of iron, whose length is seven or eight fingerbreadths, and its width is according to the size of the wound. And for that reason it is necessary for a doctor to take from them three or four, according to the size which is needed for its cure, in every kind of fracture.
And let it be round; and let it have a small thickness so that it is not doubled upon itself under pressure during the operation; and let its sharp extremity have a rim at its ends. And let it be above him to the thickness from the middle of him up to the lower parts.
And this is its shape.
It is necessary in this operation that the acute and curved end of it be placed over the projecting bone; and push it with him together, until the bone returns and becomes equal by some measure.
Then therefore make the ends of the fracture equal to each other.
But if the ends of it are broken and fine, and do not receive it with good reception, then it is necessary to cut off that end of the bone until the instrument has power over it.
But if you are not able to reduce them as we described completely, then cut it off with the saws that suit it from the ones we mentioned: or saw it through with a saw in whatever way is possible for you.
Then afterwards remove what remains on the bone from roughness and small fragments of bark.
When therefore the bone is reduced and the invalid finds a severe and painful pain after the reduction of it, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Make it so. For you are doing a great benefit to the invalid when your restoration is completed which you do for the bone.
Then immerse the cloth in black wine that is stiptic. And properly if it is in summer. And do not place a cautery or anything containing oil on the wound, lest it cause putrefaction and corruption to occur within it.
Then administer honey in the hour that completes your restoration of the bone. And leave the wound uncovered: thus, you will cut with forceps a hole in the swellings according to the size of the wound.
And beware of every caution, lest you sew up the wound with the fracture. Many times indeed foolish doctors have done this: and they have brought harm to their sick patients, or death, or putrefaction, or gangrene. And let your constriction be soft, gentle, different from the other constrictions of broken bones.
But if the wound is bad or a great one, and you fear certain evil consequences that we have mentioned, and you find pain suspended in the place: then it is not right to apply poultices to it. And make them swellings from hard cloths in the place of poultices, and bind it with them.
But when it is after one day, or two days, and you see the wound already beginning to generate pus: then remove from above it the cloth that you placed on it with wine. Then administer lycium and ointments with which we are accustomed to treat wounds, as the four-pharmaceutical ointment and similar ones.
And it is fitting for you to loosen the bandage. And consider the wound every day morning and evening, until it consolidates and heals.
And it is necessary to prepare the limb in such a way that pus flows from it to lower parts with ease.
Which if many days pass over the wound and it does not consolidate nor is pus cut away from it: then you will know that there are small bone splinters inside. Therefore, it is necessary to explore the wound with a probe. As many of those bone splinters are separated, remove them and take out the others. And as for those that are not separated and pierce the member, causing pain and making it suffer, try to cut them away and remove them in any way that is possible for you.
Which if it happens to the wound to become gangrenous, or ecchymotic, that is, putrid, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction: then you should apply to each one of them what suits it for its treatment, as was narrated in its own chapter.
And as for that which is necessary so that my speech stands firm, and to whom you should present your mind when a bone breaks out and protrudes above the limb, just like the hip bone, and similar ones from major bones, it is, do not presume its attraction, for many times death occurs because of this, indeed let it be, until it putrefies.
Perhaps indeed it will fall by itself after twenty days or thirty.
Then therefore take care of the wound if you think fit; and if not, let it be.
About the treatment of a knot (or swelling) in the track of a fracture.
This knot often occurs in the track of the healing of a fracture. Especially those near joints: and it is corrupted from the figure of the member. And perhaps prevents the member from performing its natural function.
Then consider, if the knot is recent: apply medicines to it that have astringent properties, such as aloe, and olibanum, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, and acacia, and similar ones.
So that you take some or all of them: and mix them with astringent wine, or with egg white, or with vinegar: and place them on the knot in a poultice, and bind them tightly over it.
And let the stricture be, nor loosen it for many days. Then loosen it and repeat another one, until the knot is removed.
Or bind over it a lead plate decently. For lead has the property of removing everything that is feared from the body.
But if the knot has already become hardened into a stone, and is tightly fixed, and necessity presses urgently to remove it: then find above it on its upper part, and cut off the projecting excess: or shave it with certain rasps, until it is removed: and take care of it, until it heals.
Of the healing when it is restored and the member remains after that subtle, not according to its own nature.
When the bone fracture is restored and the member remains after that subtle and weak, then it does not become sound unless many causes intervene. One of which is the multitude of ligament solution and binding not according to what is necessary; or because of the excess constriction of the ligaments, until nourishment is prevented from reaching the member; or because of excessive embrocation at an unsuitable time; or because of a lack of blood in the weak body and its debility.
And the cure for that is to feed the sick person and make their body tender until the blood is multiplied within them. And administer a bath. And bring joy and gladness upon him.
Then place pitch on the member, so that it may draw the pitch to itself and receive much nourishment. And frequently apply an embrocation of it with warm water, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
Of the healing of bones fractured when they are restored in a twisted manner.
When it happens to a member that has already been restored after its healing and becomes twisted, or the bone is fractured, or swelled up; and is marred in this way by the form of the member, although the member is not prevented from performing its natural function: then one should not take heed of his speech who thinks that the member should be broken again.
And already many foolish doctors and restorers have done this on our earth.
And this operation is very reprehensible, leading to death or great fear, so that it becomes mortal.
But if the swelling and knotting are recent: then it is necessary to apply an embrocation with warm water in which soothing herbs have been decocted, such as the leaves of althea, its root, and melilotus, and similar things. And a poultice shall be made for him with a soothing poultice, as a diaper well-made.
Or the pulp of the tall-root shall be taken and pounded with hen's fat or sesame oil, and applied with it.
Or they shall take figs that are fat, and pound them with dove's down, and similar things which are called from medicines diminishing consolidation.
And sometimes the swelling is dissolved by frequent gentle friction with wet hands. And motion of the member should be administered to every part at all hours.
But if the curvature has already occurred and has become severe and has turned into a knot, and necessity demands its correction with iron: then it is necessary to cut above it, and to break the continuity of the bone, and to remove what exceeds from the swelling or bone with fine instruments; and facilitation should be administered in that place with solicitude and diligence.
On Speech in Dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of some joints from their place. Therefore it is prevented by its own motion, and the figure of the member is disfigured. And it causes great pains and injuries to happen to the weak person.
When therefore dislocation happens to someone, then it is necessary to hasten to restore it: lest it be utterly delayed.
For if it is delayed, the place will suppurate, and perhaps with that, the reduction of the dislocation.
Therefore one should not move or stretch it at the hour of its suppuration. For it often causes spasms and painful injuries.
But when that happens, then one should hasten to bleed the patient. Then let it be given a rest until the suppuration subsides.
Then let the member be anointed with warm water and oil. Then it should be reduced with ease.
And every member should be treated with that which its memory will come to its place.
I have indeed arranged the chapters on dislocations, and also according to what preceded on fractures, from the upper part of the body to the lower.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Lower Jawbone.
Two jawbones are hardly dislocated except rarely.
And the dislocation of both is done according to two methods. For either they are removed from their places with a small removal and are made soft for a short time. Or they are dislocated with a complete and full dislocation until they become soft up to the chest, until the patient's saliva flows, and he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around his speech.
When however the dislocation of it is small, then it returns to its natural state with a few movements by itself.
If however the dislocation is complete and full, then it is necessary that reduction be administered quickly and not delayed at all: and it is for the minister to hold the patient's head; and the doctor should insert his thumb into the root of the dislocated jawbone between the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side. Or he should insert both thumbs simultaneously if the dislocation is from both sides. And the remaining fingers of his hand should be outside, with which he can apply pressure.
And order the patient to clean their jawbones and prepare them for eating in all directions. And the doctor should apply pressure to the jawbone and push it until it returns to its place.
But if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jawbones are simultaneous: then administer a poultice with warm water and oil until the easy reduction of both is accomplished: nor should you delay the reduction of both entirely, as we said.
When therefore they return and are equalized, and the patient's mouth is closed, and they do not soften: then place over them wool pads with a mixture made from wax, and rose oil.
Then it will be bound with ease with soft ligaments.
And let the patient's sleep be above their back; and their head be placed between two pillows, so that they do not move to the right or left: nor should they attempt, nor be forced, to chew anything: rather, their food should be given by spoon, until when the pains are removed, and the jaw is relaxed: then let them eat what they want, and administer it with ease.
Let them not exert themselves over their own mouth's operation during eating and drinking, and also during yawning, until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
But if the reduction of the two jawbones becomes difficult when they are dislocated for some time and do not turn back to their places: then often fevers occur, and constant headaches; and perhaps the patient's bowels are loosened, and perhaps pure bile is vomited.
When therefore you see that: then you will know that it is a loss, and often he who experiences that dies within ten days.
Chapter on the Reduction of Dislocations of the Clavicle and End of the Shoulder.
The clavicle indeed does not become dislocated from the inward side, due to its continuity with the breastbone. And it becomes dislocated sometimes to the outside and is declared by feeling.
And its restoration is when the patient lies on their back and stretches out their arms. Then compress the place with your palm in strong compression, for it will return of itself.
Then place a poultice and wool pads over it, and bind it.
The extremities of his which follow the elbow and continue with it are not dislocated unless rarely. When he is dislocated on some day: then it is necessary that he be reduced and set right according to what we said, and what is prepared for you.
Then place a poultice and bandage over it. And command the patient to adhere to tranquility and quiet until he is healed.
And with this same treatment the shoulder extremity is reduced when it also separates from its place.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the Shoulder.
Know that the shoulder does not become dislocated except in three ways.
One of which is that it becomes dislocated towards the lower part of the scapula. The second is that it becomes dislocated towards the breast. And perhaps it becomes dislocated towards the upper part of the shoulder: and this happens rarely.
And it is not dislocated towards the back due to the spatula. And it is not dislocated towards the front due to the nerves.
And indeed it becomes dislocated and comes out towards the lower part of the scapula, especially in those whose flesh is meager. Because it goes out quickly from them and goes back in quickly.
In those however whose flesh is abundant, it is the opposite of that, namely because it goes out with difficulty and comes back in with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some people that they are struck or fall, and the shoulder becomes inflamed with a warm abscess, and is considered to be because it has already become dislocated.
Therefore, you must try that until you are certain of it, and then proceed to its cure.
And it is known as a dislocation when it turns towards the lower parts in a tilting manner. And distinguish between a dislocated shoulder and a sound one. For you will find a manifest difference between them, and you will find a concavity on the head of the shoulder, and under the tilting part at the touch of the head of the shoulder as if it were an egg: and an infirm person is not able to reduce his hand to his ear, nor move it with all movements.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the breast or upwards: then you will find a manifest touch, nor does it hide.
And this kind of dislocation is easily reducible when it is recent or the patient is an infant.
And its reduction is by lifting your hand up above. Then place your fingers underneath the tilting part of it, and lift the joint with strength upwards to its place. And the minister will lift his hand and stretch it upwards. Then place it back down, for it returns quickly on its own.
But if it does not return as we said, and there are many days since the dislocation occurred: then it is necessary for the infirm person to bathe in warm water, and a poultice should be applied that softens and soothes, just as if roots of elder, foenugreek, and mellilot were being decocted in water, and it should be applied.
Then the infirm person should be placed on his back: and a ball and wool should be placed underneath the tilting part of it, which is equal to both softness and tightness.
Then the doctor should place his heel on top of the ball and lift the head of the shoulder with strength, and draw the infirm person's hand downwards.
And if you wish, reduce him according to this method: and it is, that you make the present man who is longer than the patient, stand at the side, and insert his shoulder under the armpit of the patient; and lift up the armpit of the patient to the higher parts, until the patient is suspended in the air. And let another assistant pull the hand of the patient down to his lower abdomen. But if the patient is light: then it is necessary to suspend something else with him, so that he may be weighted down: for the dislocation will return immediately.
And he is also reduced according to another method: and it is, that a long piece of wood be placed on the ground, whose head is rounded in shape, like the sleeve of a mortar, which is not too thick nor too thin. Then a soft cloth should be placed under the patient after soft cloths have been put on his head, and the patient should stand according to the length of the wood.
Then his hand should be stretched out to the lower part on one side, and his body should be extended on the other side with strength; for the joint returns to its place quickly.
But if his reduction is difficult through all that we have said, then use this cure: and it is, that you take a piece of wood whose length is the measure of two arms, and its width the measure of four fingers, and its thickness the measure of two fingers: which has a rounded head, so that its entrance may be eased into the depth of the armpit, according to this shape.
Then soft cloths should be wrapped around the rounded head, so that it may not hurt the patient.
Then it should be placed under the armpit of the patient, so that his hand or arm may be extended up to the lower part over the wood; and the wood should be tied above the assistant's help and arm and end of the hand.
Then the arm should be placed over the step of the stairs in width, and the hand should be extended down, and the rest of the body should be let go suspended from the other side. The suture indeed enters immediately.
So when the entrance is completed in whatever way possible: then it is necessary to place under the titillium a ball of wool of equal size. Then place the prepared poultice made from mill dust with frankincense and egg white on top of the shoulder, as it is wrapped over.
Then bind the string under the titillium with a tight knot that is fitting; and let the ligament be wrapped over the poultice above: and let his hand be attached to her neck, and let it be left undisturbed for seven days.
And it is necessary to place a light diet upon the weak person until the limb is comforted; for it is more helpful for its healing.
Then a larger one should be placed after seven days or five, and exercised with movement. If it is strengthened and not softened, then he is already healed.
If the suture is dislocated many times, due to moisture that happens to it, or due to another cause: then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three openings, according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery.
But if this is done and the ligament is released after seven days and the suture does not hold firm, and the poultice and bandage are reapplied several times and still do not hold, and it falls and cannot be lifted to its higher position: then you will know that the nerves of his shoulder which are related to the head have already been cut or stretched or softened: and you will know that the suture will never take hold in its proper place.
But the dislocation that occurs towards the chest and breast, or towards the back, happens with a push and stretching with one's hands: until it returns and a remaining bandage and care are administered, until it is healed.
If it happens after healing that heaviness occurs in a member and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use a bath many times until this heaviness is alleviated and returns to their natural state.
Of the cure of cubital dislocation.
Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated with difficulty, and similarly it returns to its place with difficulty as well; and indeed it dislocates towards all parts, and particularly towards either the front or the back.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: for it falls under sight and touch, according to whatever shape it may be dislocated. And when you bring together the dislocated elbow with a healthy one, it is made clear to you. For the joint is hollowed out, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder with it.
And it is necessary to hasten and reduce the dislocation immediately, before a hot abscess occurs.
For if a hot abscess occurs, it makes the reduction difficult: and perhaps it will not be cured at all, especially when it is towards the back. For it is worse than all kinds of dislocations, and more violent in its pain; and often descends with it to death.
And the restoration of it when it is one of those that can be reduced is, that his hand should be stretched out with two hands: and his arm should be expanded, and the doctor's hands should be above the elbow and below it, and he should push the joint with the tips of his fingers or with the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Or indeed the dislocation is to the front: then it returns in such a way that he doubles his hand with his own, until he strikes the dislocated elbow with the base of his palm.
What if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then apply a violent and strong stretching: and it is, that two assistants should stretch out his arm: and they should also hold him so that he is not moved during the stretching.
Then the arm is turned towards every part after it is wrapped around his hand with a doubled cloth, or a wide band.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his own hand, he should anoint it with oil, so that it may be one of those things which aid in the ease and facility of the joint. Then he should push the joint with a strong thrust until it returns.
And after the reduction, it is necessary that a poultice be placed over it, which has purging and cooling properties with white of egg: and it should be bound tightly with a suitable bandage. And the arm should be suspended from the neck of the invalid, and let it rest for several days.
Then it should be released. If the joint is stable in its place, then release the bandage from it and let it go.
And if you see the joint not well bound, then apply a poultice, and bandage, and let it rest for several days until it is bound. Then release it.
But if heaviness occurs to the joint after the reduction, and it is in motion: then administer a moistening treatment by bathing, and gentle friction, and compression, until it is relaxed, or place a poultice of fat goat's milk over the joint. Then bind it, and let it rest on it by day and night. Then remove it, and introduce him into the bath. When he sweats, then stroke the joint with a tempered friction. Then apply over it an ointment of aloe, one way, and secondly, and thirdly, with the entering into the bath, until it is relaxed.
And if you wish, place over it warm cow dung, moist and heated with butter, and bind over him.
Do that several times. This is itself soothed and returns to its natural condition.
On the treatment of a dislocation in the shoulder.
The shoulder of Mahassem is frequently dislocated, that is, the joint which is between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of his dislocation is easy. On the contrary, it is not so with other joints. However, it is necessary that the speed of reducing his dislocation be in the hour when it is dislocated, before the place becomes inflamed: or a hot abscess occurs in it.
And the reduction of his dislocation is, to place Mahassem's weak hand on a table, and have the attendant extend it; and the doctor should put his own palm on the prominence of the joint, and push it until it returns.
However, it is necessary to consider whether the palm has already receded towards the front of the hand; then the weak person should place the back of their hand on the table for extension and reduction: and if the dislocation is proceeding towards the back of the hand, then let the position of his hand be inward on the table, that is, the inner part of his hand should be placed on the table so that the doctor's hand falls on the prominence of the joint.
If it returns immediately, it is good; and if not, then bind it with a soothing plaster over the abscess: and let him go, without repeating that.
For if it does not tolerate, nor can you effect a reduction after the days have passed, but the joint remains according to its own twisting: and it harms the patient nothing, except that the hand is softened and cannot grasp anything: then you will know that the nerves are cut or rubbed.
It is not suitable for it to be treated with an operation, except to cauterize it near its fall. And perhaps it does not matter.
So when Almahassem does not return, then place upon him the poultice that we have described. Then it should be bound and left for five days: afterwards it should be loosened and left, and the hands should be exercised.
But if it is deprived of movement and something heavy happens to it; then soothe it with warm water and gentle friction a few times, until it becomes soothing.
On the healing of finger dislocations.
When a finger is dislocated in any direction, or from one of them towards the back of the palm or its belly; then stretch out the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger and suspend it towards the direction in which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend it and stretch it out until it becomes straight on that day itself.
When night falls, bind it as previously described: and do not cease to loosen it by day; and exercise it with movement: and bind it at night.
Do that for several days until it is bound.
And similarly do the same with him if it is dislocated towards the palm of the hand; and bind him to that part, and perform your initial operation with him until he is healed.
And similarly do the same with him when it is dislocated to other parts.
On the healing of dislocation of the spine.
When it happens to someone that the spine of their back or neck is fully dislocated, or many vertebrae are moved from their places; then there is no cure for this, since death hastens the invalid.
And the sign of this is that the invalid's discharge flows out without his will, nor can he restrain it; and many times certain parts of his body become soft, or one of his legs, or one of his arms, or one of them: or one vertebra is moved from its place.
Many times it is removed because many times it is removed to four parts.
Therefore, that which is removed towards the back, is called Humpiness.
The cure of it is that you consider then if Humpiness happens from childhood: then there is no cure in it nor any healing whatsoever.
But in that which happens by chance or striking or similar things, the old methods of treatment have already been described at length. Of which most do not return with benefit.
But I have already shortened it from that which has little excuse due to its proximity to my intention: and the explanation of mine in which I explained it, and shaped the instrument differently than they showed it, and explained it.
Therefore, I say that in humpiness which occurs from the anterior part, there is no remedy nor healing from it.
And similarly in that which occurs on both sides as well.
And it is not cured from them, except that which occurs on the back properly, as I narrate: and it is, that the infirm person lies on his face on a level platform near the wall: and a damp cloth is spread under him, so that his chest is not hurt.
Then a straight piece of wood is placed and fixed in the hollow of the ground at the end of the platform, near his head: and another piece of wood around his feet at the other end of the platform: and the attendant holds onto the wood and stands not steady in the hollow. And the other attendant hold the other one.
Then wrap a soft and firm bandage around the head of the infirm person, and extend the end of the bandage to the wood that is by his head: and tie it to it.
Then tie another bandage above his ankles, and above his knees, and at his calves. Then gather all the ligaments and tie them to another wood that is near his feet.
Then let every assistant stretch out to the part of the wood where the ligament is, and the two woods should not be removed from their places where they are fixed; yet they should not be secured as we said.
And let the doctor place his palms on the spondyle with strength until he returns; or place them on it on a board. Then let him connect his feet to the board until he returns.
If however he does not recover through this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three arms' length. And make an opening in the wall of which we spoke, which is near the sick person, to where the end of the board will go. Then place the middle of the board on the spondyle. And let the doctor place his feet on the other extremity. And tighten well, until the spondyle is compressed, and he returns to his place.
Then if you wish, work with a drill that is wrapped around your hand; and it is, to fix two wooden poles in the ground at the head of the sick person, one foot long each, and at his head.
And let the length between all the wood be one palm; and now a hole has been made in every place where the drill runs: and let each piece of wood be firmly fixed in the ground very much, so that it will not move at all.
And insert a round wood: and the drill is where the ligament is twisted in two holes of two woods.
And at the end of it is a hole where the wood is secured, whose length is one palm along with what twists around: and similarly on two other woods.
Then tighten the ligaments that you tightened in the chest of the sick person with the drill that is at his head: and the ligaments that you tightened in his legs with the drill that is at his feet.
Then let him stand by all the sawing ministers, who tightens his hand with a linen cloth, with which the saw is turned; and the surgeon adjusts the spongy thing, as we said.
This is the shape of the saw that follows.
Then after the sponge returns and the place is adjusted, then it is necessary to put on an absorbent plaster with egg white. Then a poultice. Then place on top of the plaster a plate from wood, whose width is three fingers, or roughly that. And its length should be as long as to fit the space of the gibbousness and above the healthy part of the sponge.
Then it will be bound with the bandage that we said. And the patient should use a subtle diet until he is healed.
But if something remains prominent in the place at the end of the healing process: then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and soothe, with application of the plate which we narrated over a long period. And now it is administered with a lead plate.
And sometimes it happens that prominence occurs at the end of the back's sponge and is thought to be through it a displacement, and that bone which now protrudes. Therefore one should not presume on him with this medicine: perhaps indeed it will cause death.
A cure for a dislocated Anca.
Know that the joints of the Anca and the joints of the shoulder do not occur except by dislocation alone; nor does it happen to them what happens to other joints due to slight removal and hollowing.
And indeed the joint of the Anca is dislocated into four parts. Which is because it is dislocated to the front and to the back.
And indeed it is dislocated very much towards the inside; and a little towards the front and back.
And the cure for this dislocation towards the inside is: because when you join a sick leg with a healthy one to it, it is longer; and his knee is prominent more than that of a healthy person, and the sick person cannot double his foot at the groin; and the next place following the groin is inflamed by a hot apostema, because the head of the femur has already reached there.
And the sign of it to which a dislocation occurs towards the outside is, that its accidents are contrary to these accidents.
And the sign of it to which a dislocation occurs towards the front is, because it stretches a healthy leg according to its complement; yet it does not double it without pain in the knee: and if it tries to walk, it cannot step forward beyond that point: and it retains urine, and the groin becomes inflamed, and during walking there is a bruising over the heel.
And the sign of it to which a dislocation occurs towards the back is, that it does not stretch the knee, nor can it double it before doubling the groin: and its leg is also shorter on one side: and the groin is softened, and the head of the femur is at that place.
The reduction indeed of this kind of dislocation is, that you should consider then, whether the dislocation is old and has already become chronic with the person having it. Then if you administer its reduction, and it remains according to its natural disposition: then there is no cure at all. So therefore it should not be presumed of him entirely.
However, in the one whose dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four kinds of dislocations: then hasten to do this, that you will loosen the joint, and stretch it towards the inside and outside, and move it right and left: perhaps it will return, and not require another cure.
If it does not return in this way, then one should prepare a strong servant, and have him stretch his leg from the lower part: either with his hands or with a band that will be fastened above his knee on his leg. And let another servant stretch out his hand above, so that he may insert his hands under the patient's thighs. Then let him bind with a soft band over the root of the hip joint, and hold the extremity of the other band.
And let his extension be either from the front part of the groin to the part of the fork, or from the back to the part of the back.
And let all their extensions be one by one, until the patient is lifted up with his body from the ground and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is a common type among four kinds.
So if the dislocation returns as we said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for all four kinds of that which I shall say about proper cure.
Indeed, in the proper reduction when the dislocation is to the inside, it is necessary that the patient be raised up over his healthy side. Then he should place a band above the root of the hip joint, in that which is between the head of the hip and the place that is below the groin. Then he should extend the band upwards from the part of the groin to the higher part of the body, to the part of the fork.
Then let another strong servant take his arms and reduce the swollen part of the weak hip joint, and stretch it out to the outside with a vigorous extension. Now it is returning to its place.
And this kind of treatment is easier for the other kinds of cure by which this member is reduced.
But if it does not obey you and does not enter with this kind of treatment altogether: then one should bind the two legs of the patient at the same time with a strong, soft band, over both heels, and over both knees; and let each length be as long as four finger-widths from its corresponding part: and let the weak leg be stretched out longer by an amount equal to two finger-widths.
Then the patient is suspended above a wooden head, which is located in the house: and its length from the ground is the measure of two arms.
Then instruct the strong youth to support the patient's head with his shoulder blade; and let another young man suspend himself along with the patient; and let the other youth push with all his might, supporting the hip joint with vigor, for the juncture returns to its place quickly.
But when the reduction is done by his own effort, and there is a dislocation to the outside, it is necessary that the patient lies on a platform, as we have described for one with a hump. And let the ligament be stretched over his leg, by himself, and over his chest.
Then two pieces of wood are placed, one at his feet and the other at his head. Then a piece of wood is placed in the middle of the platform, fixed well, on which wet cloths are wrapped so that the patient is not hurt; and let the wood be between his hips, so that he is not drawn down to the lower parts during the stretching.
Then every assistant stretches out to their side, and the doctor equalizes the reduction with his own hand.
If then it yields to reversal, it will be good.
And if not, place it on the table and press it down, as we said for a humpback, evenly. However, it is necessary that the patient lies on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary that the patient's leg be stretched quickly; and it is according to this same description on a platform: and let the doctor place his right hand on the patient's groin. Then pull him with one hand, and with that traction place him extended to the lower part of the knee.
And if the dislocation is to the back: then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended downwards, and let him be raised above the ground: rather, let him be placed on a hard surface, just as it is also necessary when his ankle is dislocated outside, according to what we said about his lying on two anchors: and it is above his face and stretched ligaments: just as we said recently.
And it is necessary that a compression be applied with a splint also on the place where the joint will emerge, when the reduction is complete according to what is needed.
And the sign of its return is not hidden from you: and it is, that you stretch the two legs of the weak person; and when you see them equal, and the weak person tightens his leg and expands it without resistance: then you will know that the member has already returned as needed. Then join the two hips, and apply a poultice, and tie with an emplastrum, that is, a bandage: so that the groin does not move to any part; and the weak person should remain quiet for three days or four.
Then loosen the bandage and poultice, and compare the leg with the other one; then if you see them equal in status, then you will know that the dislocation has already been stabilized. Therefore, let the weak person go to walking.
And if you see something softening: then go back and reapply the poultice to it, and tie it according to your initial tightening; and leave it also for three days.
Then loosen it and make it slow down in walking on both sides for several days, until it is well comforted.
Of the Dislocation of the Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated outwardly, inwardly, and downwardly, namely, to the rear.
And it does not dislocate forward.
And the sign of this dislocation is that you hasten the weak person to place his leg against his own hip. But if it does not adhere to the hip: then you will know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all three forms of this dislocation is that you make the weak person sit straight, so that he already stretches his leg if he can over it, and adheres your back to his face; and place his foot between your feet.
Then attach your face to his knee with your palms, and straighten them between your fingers over his knee. Then apply both sides of his knee with your palm with force. And let another assistant stretch out his foot until it returns to its place.
And the sign of return is when the leg adheres to the hip with gentleness, not with difficulty.
Then bind him and attach the leg to the hip. Then bind them together with a bandage for three days or four. Then loosen them.
And the sick person should not use walking for several days until he is healed.
But if the return is refused to you, then apply a strong extension with bandages, of which the previous account was given in the cure of ankylosis, until it returns.
Of the Cure of Dislocation of the Heel.
The heel is sometimes moved slightly and sometimes dislocated according to its nature. And the dislocation occurs either towards the inside or towards the outside.
And the sign of this dislocation is that you see the Heel inflated, proceeding to the part to which it dislocates.
But the cure of this displacement is easy and simple: and it is, to stretch with ease with your hands, and equalize, until it returns.
And in the cure of this when it is displaced according to its nature, it is necessary that you make the sick person sit straight: and let a strong assistant hold him very firmly from behind at the middle part of his back.
Then hold with your right hand his foot from the upper part of it, and with your left hand from the lower part of his foot like a cauls.
Then draw his foot towards you with your right hand. Then with the left hand two fingers.
Then stretch with the left and push the ankle bone of the foot with the right towards the knee without strain.
Do that twice as we have told you.
Then push the ankle bone of the foot towards the knee on the third side and you pull back the ligament.
So if it returns to its original position or to one of the two sides according to this method, and you see the foot is straightened, that is good; and if not, then iterate the procedure on it again, since it will return.
But if its reduction is prevented from you as we have told you: then make the patient lie on his back on the ground and place a wedge of earth firmly fixed between his thighs: and you wrap yourself around him with a cloth so that he does not hurt himself.
Then let the assistant take hold of his thigh: afterwards let the assistant straighten out the other foot, either with their own hands or with a bandage that ties above the ankle. Then let all assistants stretch out against the stretching of their counterpart: and the wedge shall stand between the two thighs of the patient holding him so that his body is not drawn towards the lower parts at the stretching.
Then let the doctor straighten out the dislocation with his own hands and have the assistant hold the healthy leg towards the lower parts. For the dislocation returns quickly.
When therefore the dislocation returns and its reduction is declared to you as healthy: then apply a poultice and bandage, and bind it firmly with bandages, and tie the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And it is necessary that you beware or fear of the nerves which are above the posterior heelbone, lest the bandage be too tight and hurt them.
Then let him go for two days, or three. But if the bandage becomes loose, bind him again: then release him on the third or fourth day: and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. If indeed he is attempting to walk before that space, there will be no security lest a dislocation occurs on top of him, and it is corrupted, and does not receive subsequent treatment.
What if a warm abscess should happen to him: then you must administer to him that which our previous account told of in another place for treatment, and an embrocation, until it is removed.
On the Dislocation of Fingers and Foot, and Curing.
It is necessary that what has been dislocated from them be reduced with a little extension without effort: and indeed it is not difficult, nay rather easy.
But if the dislocation is in certain knots of the back of the foot: then it is necessary that the sick person should sit with his foot on an equal spot on the ground, or on a board: and he should stand as one walking.
Then you stand, and place your foot over what protrudes from those joints. Then press that with your foot with strength, until it returns, and you see it is now equal, and does not appear in its elevated place.
Then place a board under his foot that will take the whole foot, which has two ends. Then bind him with a bandage to a decent tightness for three days. Then loosen it and make him rest from walking for many days, until he is bound and secured by the reduction.
On the Kinds of Dislocations with Wound or Fracture.
When something like this happens, and you attempt to cure it and restore the person, death often follows many times: and because of that, one should not assume about curing it, unless he is wise in long practice, merciful, pious, slow, not bold or presumptuous: and use remedies for incipience, which soothe warm abscesses only: and leave the sick person to divine judgment. Unless you see, or hope for salvation from destruction with the gentleness of illness, and where something appears to give rise to hope. So then perform immediately at the beginning of the thing, before a hot abscess occurs.
So then if the member returns as we wish, then administer a treatment that soothes the abscess; and care for the wound with ointments that are drying.
What if there is a dislocation with fracture, and the separated fragments are situated in bone, then try to remove them; and do as we said for simple illnesses in those places from which it preceded.
And beware according to your strength, and guard yourself from entering the path of fear: just as my preceding prediction has come to you.
For it is better for you with your Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and more safe for your body among those in your time.
