After I had finished the book for you, my sons, this book, which is the last part of knowledge in medicine with its complement, and I have reached the end of it, based on explanations from it, and declarations by it, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you along with this Treatise, which is a part of operation, namely, surgery with hand.
Since the operation with hand is almost forgotten in our region and time, and its knowledge has almost perished, and a trail of it has been cut off: and except for brief descriptions in ancient books, which hands have altered: and mistakes and hesitation occurred to them until the intentions were closed off and the force was spent. It seemed to me that I should revivify it with the arrangement of this Treatise, according to the way of exposition, declaration, and abridgment: and come along with the forms of iron instruments Cauterii, and other tools of work: as it is necessary from the addition of declaration, and its properation.
The reason why a good craftsman of it with his own hand is not found in our time, is: because the art of medicine is long and requires its author to be exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy, as Galenus narrated, until he knows the benefits of limbs, and their forms, and their connections, and separations, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, tendons, and their numbers, and their exit, and the emergence of veins, both pulsating and quiet, and the locations of their exits.
And for that reason Hippocrates said that a name is much with a name, and little with a work, and especially in the art of hands.
We have already spoken about it at the beginning of this book.
For he who is not knowing what we have said about anatomy, is not purified, but rather falls into error, by which men are killed: as I have seen many of those who claim to be formed from this science, and boast about it without knowledge, and without experience.
What happened was that I saw a foolish doctor cut away a scrofulous abscess on a woman's neck and then severed some arteries on her neck. Wherefore the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead between his hands.
And I saw another doctor who attempted to remove a stone from an elderly man, and the stone was large. So he came to him and removed it with a piece of bladder. Wherefore the man died on the third day.
And I myself had been summoned to remove it; and I saw from the great size of the stone and the patient's condition that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was receiving payment from a certain Duke of our land for his medical services; and it happened to a black eunuch who was with him that he suffered a fracture in the leg near the heel: and the doctor hastened without knowledge, and bound the fracture over the wound with bandages, and with strong ligatures, and did not permit the wound to breathe.
Then he finished with him according to his own desires. Afterwards he released him after a few days and instructed him not to loosen the bandage; and he stood thus until his leg and foot became gangrenous and he came to ruin.
I was summoned to him: and I hastened to loosen the bandage; and as a result there was peace, and he was relieved from his pains.
However, corruption had already taken hold in the member, and I was not able to prevent it.
Then the corruption ceased to spread in the member until he died.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess; and it ulcerated after some days, until the wickedness of his patient was glorified with his lord.
What is this? Because when a pure cancer arises from melancholic humor, then it is not necessary to cut into it entirely with iron, unless it is in a limb that can tolerate it, so that the whole thing may be removed.
And for this reason, O sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation is divided into two divisions by hand: namely, an operation with which salvation is associated: and an operation, with which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already stirred up everywhere in this book where the operation comes that has fear and trembling.
Therefore it is necessary for you to beware of that and leave it alone: so that the foolish may not find a way to speak and shamefully expose.
Therefore, receive with solicitude and protection the measure, and treat your infirm patients with ease and firmness, and use a better way guided by the grace of God to salvation and a praiseworthy succession: and leave behind terrible sufferings that hinder difficult healing; and lift up your souls from what makes you fear, so that hesitation may enter upon you in your faith and comfort.
For it is more remaining for your glory, and higher in this world, and finally for your accounts.
Galenus indeed said in some of his warnings. You will not heal bad illnesses: lest you be called evil doctors.
But now I have divided this Treatise into three Chapters.
The First Chapter.
On cauterization with fire and cauterization with sharp medicine, set forth and arranged from head to feet, and the forms of instruments and tools of cauterization: and all that is necessary for the operation.
The Second Chapter.
On section and perforation, bloodletting and venesection, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows, and similar things to these: and all set forth in the forms of instruments.
The Third Chapter.
On restoration, and dislocation, and curing of twisting, and similar things to these: set forth in the forms of instruments, from head to feet.
But first of all it is necessary to recall the nature of its benefits and harms, as well as how it should be exhibited in a given complexion.
I say therefore that the discourse on the quality of the benefits and harms of cauterization is a lengthy and subtle one, requiring knowledge and secrecy.
And many wise men have spoken on the subject, and they have disagreed among themselves; and for my part, I am content with a little of their words, fearing prolongation.
I say therefore that cauterization is beneficial to all complexions, both those with material and those without; excepting only two complexions, which are the hot dry complexion without material and the dry complexion without material.
But in a hot and dry complexion with material there was disagreement. For some said that cauterization is beneficial in it. And others said the opposite of this, namely that cauterization is not suitable in a disease which arises from heat and dryness; because nature's fire is heat: and it is unsuitable to heal a hot and dry disease with something hot and dry.
And he who said the opposite of this said: that through cauterization there is benefit in every hot and dry disease which occurs in human bodies; because when you compare a human body and its moisture to the fiery complexion, you find the human body to be cold.
And I indeed say so by his words; because through experiment it has been revealed to me on several occasions.
However, it is not proper for someone to attempt this unless they have already been proven and trained in the last exercise of Cauterization, and know the diversity of human complexions, and the disposition of diseases within themselves, and their causes, and accidents, and the time span of these.
But as for the other complexions, there is no fear over you: and particularly in cold and moist diseases. For now all doctors have agreed on these, and have not disagreed with the use of cauterization in them.
And know, sons, that from the secret of healing by Cauterization with fire, and the excellence of it over Cauterization with medicine burning together is this: because fire is simple, whose action does not reach unless to the part that is cauterized; and it does not harm another adjacent member, unless for a small amount.
The action of medicine burning together reaches to that which is separated from the member; and perhaps makes an affliction occur in the member difficult to heal, and perhaps kills.
But fire, because of its subtlety and goodness of substance, does not do that unless it is excessive.
And now it has become known to us through experience, because of the length of service and study with art, and standing on the truth of things: and because of this I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if it were not so, because it is not permitted to this book of mine, I would reveal to you the secret mystery in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies of expulsion, whereby it expels diseases by a philosophical demonstration, which would be sharpened in your minds.
And know, sons, that they themselves disagree on the time in which cauterization should be done, and put forward a better time for truth.
And I say that cauterization is fitting at any time: therefore, since the harm occurring due to time is submerged in the benefit that is attracted with cauterization. And especially if cauterization is done on account of necessary pains, strong ones, festive ones, which do not tolerate delay: therefore because one fears from them that a greater mischief may happen, than a small harm that passes by due to the time.
And let it not fall into your minds, O sons, that which the uncouth and foolish doctors do not esteem, namely that those who are sickened by what is cured through cauterization are not always restored: and they put forth as a consequence, and it is not as they suppose: therefore because cauterization is not, except in place of medicine, which alters the complexion, and dries up the moistures that are causes why pains occur.
However, cauterization is superfluous over medicine due to the swiftness of its own health, and the virtue of its own operation, and the vehemence of its own dominion: and it is possible that illness returns at some hour's time according to the patient's complexion, and the location of their illness, and its virtue: and what is prepared in their body from the aggregation of superfluities within them: and what reaches it through acquisition from foods and similar things from causes, unless there is an illness where cauterization is administered.
A subtle illness in a member of few superfluities and moistures, such as cauterization of the tooth, on account of pain, and similar things: for it is possible that the pain does not return in that place. But this happens in a few cases.
But the common people's saying again is that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, it is a true statement: not as they intend in that respect: because they believe that there is no cure which contributes along with medicine, nor along with anything else after the occasion of cauterization.
However, the fact and intention are contrary to that, because cauterization is not the last resort of medicine, unless when we administer methods of cure for some illness, and they do not contribute with medicines: then we administer at the end of things cauterization, and it contributes: thus it falls out, that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish doctors understand.
The ancient ones said that the cautery instrument with gold is better than the one with iron. And they didn't say this unless it was due to the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance. And they said that the place of the cautery does not create pus. But that is not absolutely true: for I have already tested it and found that it does not do so in certain bodies without other things.
And the cautery instrument with that is good, and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you put the gold cautery instrument into fire to burn it, it is not revealed to you what is burning according to the amount you desire, because of the redness of the gold: and when it cools down a bit, and if you add superfluous ignition, it melts in the fire and turns into plates.
Therefore, the craftsman falls into that occupation: and because of this, a cautery instrument with iron is quicker and more nearby among us, due to its rightness for the operation.
And I indeed have arranged this Chapter on Caustic Instruments, according to chapters, and arranged it from head to foot so that those seeking something from it may easily find what they want.
Chapter 2.
This cauterization brings about the dominance of moisture and coldness over the brain: which two are the causes of headache, and the multitude of fluxes of humors from the head to the eyes and ears, and the multitude of sleep, and toothache, and throatache: and universally all kinds of illnesses that occur due to coldness, such as paralysis, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar ones from those illnesses.
The method of cauterization is, that you prepare the patient: so that it may be done with a solvent and cleansing medicine three nights, or four, according to what the weakness of the patient requires, and his age, and custom.
Then instruct him to make his head bald with a razor. Then make him sit between your hands square, so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger has reached, mark that spot with an inkstick.
Then apply the oil cautery by fire: which is in this form.
Then place it on the marked spot with ink, slowly turning your hand down and reversing it. Then quickly lift up your hand and look at the spot.
For if you see already opened up from bone a quantity of skull or a quantity of zeuberbe, then lift up your hand. And if not, repeat your hand with the same iron or with another one that has been cooled; until you see the bones which I told you.
Then take something from salt and dissolve it in water, and pour it into the wound, and place it on top; and leave it for three days.
Then place the soaked compress on top of the wound and leave it there until the scab is burned away. Then care for that with the ointment Tetrapharmakon until it heals.
They have said that the more a wound remains open, the more it discharges pus: therefore it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized all the way to the bone: and the cautery should be held until something thickened on the bone is burned.
Then it should be scraped after what has been burned away from the bone, then it should be healed.
And others say that it is necessary to reach the very end with the cautery, until it imprints on the bone a form like a kirate: or an instrument which women use, infused with small alphabet letters; and they suppose that vapors of the head are exhaled from this place, and the wound should be left open for a long time.
Then it will be treated until it is consolidated.
But these two kinds of cauterization do not seem to me entirely evident, except in certain people according to the way of fear.
And to let him go, with his own safety, is better for him in my opinion.
For the head is weakened by the dissolution of its natural continuity, as we have testified in other members; and especially when the head of the weak person is naturally feeble: and indeed, the first kind of cauterization seems to me more salutary and better, and I use it: therefore, I operate with it for the sake of health.
Chapter 3.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the whole head and is prolonged in the sick person, and they use hellebores, cumin, heads of garlic, and oils, and emplastrums. And especially if it has already been cauterized with the first kind of cauterization that we have described, and does not bring him any relief from those things; then consider. For if the head of the weak person is strong in natural creation and is not feeble, and finds a moderate coldness: then cauterize with another kind of cauterization slightly below that. Then cauterize him above all the horns of his own head with a cauterization, so that it does not pass through the skin and open up on the bone as much as we have described. And cauterize him with the first kind of cauterization on the back of his own head, in the place which is called the "vase": and it is a location where the vertebrae are placed: and lift up your matron's hands in this way, and do not open up the bone. For the sick person finds that because of that severe pain, it is different from the pain of all the other cauterizations of the head.
And I will say this about the cauterization in its place: and it is necessary that it be a cauterization by which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of his head is slightly cauterized with a cauterization by which the middle of the head is cauterized.
Chapter IV.
When pain and swelling occur on the head, or when the pain extends to the eye, and the head is cleansed with medicines and the rest of the treatment, which I said in the divisions of illnesses, is not effective; then cauterization should be done in this case by two methods: either with a burning medicine, or with iron.
The cauterization with a burning medicine is this: you should take one tooth of garlic, remove the bark from it, and cut off the ends on both sides. Then split the painful area with a wide lancet until a space is made beneath the skin where the tooth can be inserted.
Therefore insert it into the space beneath the skin until it is hidden; then tie over it with a thread of decent constriction, and leave it for fifteen hours; afterwards dissolve it and remove the garlic, and let it rest for two or three days: after that put on top of it a poultice soaked in butter until the wound produces pus; then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to do this with certain burning medicines that I wrote about in the twelfth book of my treatise on Igniting Medicines.
The cauterization with iron is according to this method. Fire Cautery, whose form is this.
And it is called Clauilis: because the form of its head is like that of a hook, which has some curvature, and in the middle of it is a small prominence.
Then place it on the spot and hold your hand; and turn the iron slowly with some speed; and let the amount that is burned be equal to the thickness of the skin, like its middle. And lift up your hand so that the artery below may not be burnt and a flow of blood does not occur.
Then soak the poultice in salt water, and place it on the spot, and let it be for three days. Then place the poultice with butter. Afterward care for it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize this cerebral hemorrhage with the second edge of a cauterizer. And beware of cutting into an artery in this cerebral hemorrhage, nor make it one's own.
On the manner of cauterizing in old-fashioned brain hematomas.
When you are treating a brain hematoma, as we have said in the preceding cure, and what we have said about the divisions of illnesses, and it does not help to treat: and you see from the illness that what we said from the first cauterization with medicine, or with burning cauterization, is not sufficient for him; then it is necessary that you ignite the Cauterium with a knife, until it becomes white after you have marked on the place of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger or nearly so: and put your hand in one way, and grasp it until you cut the artery, and reach up to the mouth.
However, it is necessary for you to beware of the jawbone's movement during mastication, lest the side or nerve that moves it be burned, and thus a spasms occur.
And be on guard against bleeding from the artery that has been cut. For the cutting of it is fearful, and especially for one who does not know what he is doing and is not studious or experienced: and he abandons the operation at first.
And I come with a reminder of the regulation of the flow of blood that occurs from the artery according to its own manner, and in its place in this book.
If you see that from illness, this cautery does not suffice for him, and you see the sick person bearing a cautery in the middle of their head, as we have narrated, treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, apply the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on extracting an artery with a cautery having two knives. For this cautery is better and more effective.
About the manner of cauterizing in earache.
When earache occurs due to cold and is treated with poultices and the remaining treatment which we mentioned in the division, and the pain does not cease, then use a cauterizing fire: and it is that which is called a Point, whose form is this.
Then, the point with him after its ignition is applied around the entire ear, as it revolves; or around both sides if the pain is simultaneously present on both. And stretch yourself with the cauterizer from the root of the ear for a little while, after you have marked the places with encaustic; and let the quantity of the cautery be ten points on each ear, and so forth.
Then, care for the places until they are healed.
About the manner of cauterizing in Torture.
Chapter VII.
The torture that is cured with cauterization is not excepted from the species that occur due to phlegm, according to what we mentioned in the divisions of illnesses.
And after the cauterization, treat the species that occurs due to drying up and nervous spasm.
When you treat this species of torture with purges, and head-purgings, and gargles, and your treatment does not bring relief, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient three times: once at the root of the ear, and secondly a little below its natural position, and thirdly at the conjunction of the two lips.
And place your cauterizer opposite the weaker part. Because softening does not occur unless it is in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is, that you cauterize it with your cauterizer directly on the upper end of the ear, near the horn of the head a little; and again at another time: whose length shall be according to the length of the thumb. And put your hand with the cauterizer until the quantity of the middle thickness of skin is burned.
And this is the form of cauterizer, and it is a type from a knife, whose shape is given before: yet not so fine as you see: and it is necessary that the knife be in a little excess of thickness.
Then take care of the place with what preceded it, until it heals.
Of the manner of cauterizing in ancient apoplexy.
When ancient apoplexy becomes old and you have treated it with what we said, and your treatment does not help, and the patient has no fever, then cauterize him with four cauterizers on all of his horn of the head, and a cauterizer in the middle of his head, as we said, and a cauterizer on the back of his head, according to what came before: and the manner of the cauterization is according to what came before.
And also cauterize with a cauterizer on the mouth of the stomach: and it is the final one.
Then take care of it, with what came before.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in the drink, for the first patient, there be given great hyoscyamus and cleansing pills for the brain.
Then quickly shave the whole head of the patient and place on the back of his head an ointment of honey described in the treatise on ointments, and put it on him several times.
This is the way of cauterization. And make it in the same order as I said before that.
So if it is healed through this, it's good. If not, then make three cauterizations on the back of his own head, which are descended from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye; and place between every cauterization the thickness of a finger.
Then take care of the cauterization, along with what preceded it.
If however you wish to add and he is weak and endures that: then make a cauterization in the middle. What if you wish to add: then cauterize him above both horns.
Then take care of him until he is healed: and let the cauterization be anointed with oil according to the form that was mentioned beforehand.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in paralysis, and relaxation.
Chapter X.
You should proceed to the clarification of the head with hot irons and with what we said.
Then shave the head of the sick person: afterwards cauterize him with a cauterization on the middle of the head, and a cauterization above every horn of the head, and a cauterization above the back of his own head, and three above the vertebrae of the neck.
But if you need to relax the body more in his illness, and he is weak and endures it, and the sickness is strong: then cauterize him with four cauterizations above the vertebrae of the back, and the last one with a cauterization, until most of it is burned from the skin, and raise your hand. Then take care of him until he is healed: and thus anoint the cauterization with oil.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized, unless he whose epilepsy is from phlegm.
It is necessary therefore that you cleanse his brain first with myrrh, and along with the other treatment which we mentioned in the division; when the patient is very sick or is able to tolerate medical remedies.
But if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then a gargle and cleansing mastications of the brain are administered beforehand, many days in advance with good nourishment.
Then shave his head, and afterwards cauterize it with the first cautery in the middle of the head, according to what has been done before; and with another cautery on the back of his head, and over all the horn of his own head. If the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize him with the cauteries that I mentioned in the one having paralysis, and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and back: and let the Cauterium be olive oil according to the manner that preceded.
But if the patient is a child, then place a subtle cautery in this way.
Of the manner of cauterizing in Melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries that we mentioned in the one having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that tends towards melancholy, and his body is weakly moistened, then give him to drink what will cleanse his brain, according to what has been done before in the division: afterwards shave the head of the infirm one, and make a tortellum afterwards, well made from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of his head: and the infirm one sitting square should be held back by all parts.
Then apply the ointment. And it is more worthy from old sheep's tallow butter. And warm it over a fire with tempered heat measurement, which the finger can tolerate when inserted into it. Then remove it from the middle of his head in a circle and leave it until it cools down.
Make that for every invalid once a week, along with the rest of his good regimen, until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making small holes in many places, except for that which you hold with the caustic instrument; and let there be a smell.
For this kind of caustic dries out the brain along with its quality.
Then place over it a poultice soaked in butter or chicken fat.
On the method of cauterizing in descending water to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When you are shown the principle of water in the eye by signs which I mentioned in the division, then begin and administer to the invalid with what will cleanse his head.
And guard him from all moistures, and make him sit in a bath on fasting days for several days.
Then command him to shave his head and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize it over the two temples with two caustics, if there is an onset of water flowing down into both eyes at once: or from one side alone, if there is an onset of water flowing into one eye; and cut off with the caustic all the veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the caustics be long on each temple, and beware of bleeding.
And if you see anything else from him, then cut off immediately with whatever medicine is possible; and I come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and cutting off of them, and caution against bleeding.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck, under two bones, with two last-produced caustics.
On the manner of cauterizing in ancient tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and persistent, and they flow over the veins and arteries that are manifest on the outer surface of the head, it is verified that this is due to excesses of cold and phlegmatic humors: then cauterize with a caustic in the same manner as I described for the incision of water flowing down, one caustic in the middle of the head, and two caustics on both temples, and two caustics on the neck beneath two bones. And if you desire an addition, then cauterize it on all sides of the eye cautiously, above the outer edge of the eyebrow with a small caustic.
On the manner of cauterizing in foul-smelling snot.
When you are treating it with the remedy that we mentioned in the division, and the treatment does not take effect: then hurry and give him three infusions of warm poultices at night. Then slowly wet his head, and cauterize it with a mid-caustic and an olive oil caustic. Then cauterize it with a caustic of cloves, two caustics, above the two eyebrows beneath the slightly raised hair.
And take care not to cut the artery.
And this is the form of the caustic of cloves.
On the manner of cauterizing in softening the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye becomes soft from disease or moisture: then cauterize the eyelid with one caustic, together with this lunar caustic.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows a little with two caustics on all sides: and they should be distant from both temples: and let the length of all the caustic be according to the lengths of the eyebrow: and do not extend your hand with the caustic beyond what is consumed by the third eyelid.
On how to cauterize the eyelid with hairs that are turned upside down and piercing the eye.
The cauterizer is in two modes: either a burning cauterizer or one with a medicine that consumes.
In the cauterizer with fire, first instruct the patient to remove their hairs, if they are one of those who pluck them out, until they are lengthened and straightened. But if they pierce him at the beginning of his growth: then compress his eyes with a bandage, so that they do not move, until they are formed.
When they are formed and straightened, then place the patient's head on your shoulder: next mark above his eyelid with a cauterizing instrument, marking it so that it is according to the shape of a myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then place the soaked cloth in egg white: or in psyllium mucus over the eye.
Then apply a burning cauterizer of this form.
Then cauterize over the figure you marked little by little in many places, until the surface of the skin, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, appears entirely burned.
And the sign of the success of your work is: if you see the eyelid contract now and the hairs raised at the puncture in the eye.
So lift up then your hand, and let him go for three days.
Then place over him a cloth with butter, until the scab is removed. Then care for him with an ointment, until he is healed.
But if some of the hairs return after an hour and the eyelid becomes soft: then repeat the cauterization over that place, just as you did at first.
If however hairs are on the lower part: then cauterize it, until it is elevated to its natural place: and it will be even so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
It is necessary to press hard on the patient, so that they may dismiss their hair, until it is lengthened and evened out. Make a shape of a myrtle leaf from cloth or fabric.
Then take known soap and unimbued plaster, one pound or almost that much from each, then grind them together with good rubbing, and do it quickly so that it does not become cold. Then spread it over the fabric you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on one or two eyelids. And place the poultice soaked in chicken broth under the eye, and hold the patient's head on your lap.
And put your index finger on the medicine, and press it gently. And you move it as often as the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for the stinging is like fire.
While therefore the patient continues to feel this stinging, then let go of the medicine, and move it with your finger. When therefore the stinging ceases, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And then consider whether you see the eyelid raised, like it is raised with contraction caused by fire or incision, and if so, that's good: and if not, then apply medicine again on top of it to the same spot where the medicine did not penetrate, and do not stop until your operation is complete and the eye is contracted.
Then place a poultice with butter on top of it, until the burned skin is eradicated. Then treat it with a balm of diaphanous quality, or another one, until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to be vigilant during the operation, that you guard the last vigilance, lest anything from the medicine fall into the eye.
But if the eyelid becomes soft after a few days and something from the hair is struggling in the eye, then apply medicine to that spot which becomes soft from the eyelid itself, just as you did at first. Then treat it until it is healed.
And this is the shape of a mulberry leaf.
And know that the eyes of humans differ in size and smallness. Therefore, according to this, your consideration should be thus: and the way of rectitude is not hidden from him who has a zeal for this art.
On the manner of cauterizing in the fistulous tear duct.
When you are treating a fistula, as we have said in the divisions of afflictions, and your cure does not bring relief: then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Order the patient to place his head on your shoulder, and to hold his head in a minister's hands between your own hands in such a way that it is not moved or shaken with his head.
Then place the infused balm on the white of the eye, or on the mucus of psyllium over his eye: then apply the cautery iron, which has this form.
Let it be concave, like the shape of a crane's feather at one end, with which the cautery is made: and if you wish it to penetrate up to the other extremity, and if you wish it to go upwards, then pull it.
However, this concavity is better for your work.
Then express the fistula, if it is open, and extract the discharge from it, and dry it out: and if it is not open, then open it, and extract its pus.
Then place a cauterizer on it that is very hot.
And hold your hand with him near the cauterizer at the eye, by the nose, so that your hand does not wander or disturb the patient; and place the cauterizer on the fatty part of the eye, and destroy it.
If you then reach to the beginning of your cauterizer right up to the mouth, it will be good. And if not, then reiterate your cauterizer once or twice as needed; and leave it for three days.
Then place a poultice with butter, and care for it with an astringent ointment, until it heals.
But if forty days have passed and it has not healed: then place a sharp, corrosive medicine on top of it, until the mouth is exposed; and scrape it according to what comes in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula that some have said first. Direct your attention to the location of the fistula, and find it; then place into the same opening a thin cannula, that is, a thin tube, whose form is this. And pour into it a quantity of a drachma from molten lead, and hold your hand with the cannula in good retention, and let the patient not move at all, lest he run or get the molten lead in his eye.
And it is necessary to place a poultice infused with egg white or water over the eye of the patient.
For lead burns the location of the fistula and heals it with a wonderful healing.
But if the fistula is healed by what we said from the cauterizer, and by the cure, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to open the nostril and redirect the fistula to its natural course, according to what will come into its own place.
Here is the translation:
Many times wounds occur on the lip that are called "Pili," and particularly in the lips of boys.
When you are treating these wounds, as we said in the division of illnesses, and the treatment does not help, then take a small pair of scissors, like this.
And let its concavity be according to the subtlety of the scalpel.
Then place the heated instrument quickly into the very fissures themselves, until the cauterizing instrument reaches to the depth of the fissures.
Then care for it with cerate, until it is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing in the mouth's fistula.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gum, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth: then pus forms and bursts forth; afterwards it becomes old and runs, and a fistula is formed: after that, care for it, and if the treatment does not help in it, then you must use fire to cauterize according to the size that fits into the fistula. Then insert the heated instrument into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand steady, until the hot iron reaches to its depth and its last part: do that once or twice.
Then care for it afterwards, with what we said about treatment until it is healed.
If the pus is then drained and heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what comes into its head.
On the manner of cauterizing in Gums and Softened Teeth.
When the gum becomes soft due to moisture and the teeth move, and you care for it with medicines, but it does not help: then place the head of the invalid on your shoulder.
Then apply the burning cauter to which this form will come after these things, so that you place a cannula over the tooth; and insert into it the ignited cauter quickly: and hold your hand for a little while, until the patient feels the heat of the fire has already reached the root of the tooth.
And lift up your hand: then repeat the cauterization a few times, as you wish.
Then let the patient fill his mouth with water of salt, and keep it that way for one hour: and spit it out.
For the tooth is strengthened by movement, and the softened gum tightens up and dries out the corrupted moisture.
Of the manner of cauterizing teeth in pain.
When the pain of a tooth is due to coldness, either the tooth itself is cold or worm-like, and treatment does not agree with medicines; then the burning in it is according to two ways: either with butter or with fire.
The burning of that kind with butter is, to take a waxy butter and boil it in an iron pot or in a bronze one. Then take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the tent. Then plunge the cloth into the boiled butter and place it quickly over the aching tooth; and hold it until it cools down: then repeat it several times until the power of fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, plunge a cloth or a rag into cold butter and place it over the painful tooth; and place over it a burning iron until the fire reaches the deep hollow of the tooth.
The burning of that kind with fire is, to take an air tube or a metal tube. And let there be something thickened in the body of it, so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the sick person.
Then take a cauterizing instrument, whose shape will appear; and place it on that tooth; and hold your hand until the cauterizing instrument cools down.
Do this several times, for the pain is removed, or on the same day, or another day.
And it is necessary when the cauterizing instrument makes an impression, that the patient fills his mouth with good butter and holds it for one hour; then he should spit it out.
And this is the shape of the cauterizing instrument.
Cauterize with whatever extremity you wish, according to what is possible; and this is the shape of the cannula.
Of the manner of cauterizing on the strophules.
When the strophules are from phlegm and from cold moisture, and they do not obey digestion through medicines, and you wish to hasten their digestion: then take a concave cauterizing instrument, whose shape is this.
Having two open extremities, so that smoke may exit at the cauterizing instrument from one of its extremities: and place it ignited on the aposteme once, and again if needed, until it reaches to the depth of the apostema.
What if the apostema is small: then place the cauterizing instrument according to the size of the apostema.
Then let it be for three days, and place a compress soaked in butter on top of it, until what the fire burned is removed.
Then care for it with tooth ointment, until the shape of the cannula heals.
Of the manner of cauterizing in the roughness of the voice and constriction of breathing.
When the humors overflow above the pulmonary canal, and especially when that is accompanied by coldness of complexion, then it is necessary for the patient to be purged first with soluble medicines.
Then cauterize it at the back of the neck near the root of the throat in a depressed location; and be careful not to reach with the cautery either to the throat or the skin, except for some small part of it.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck in the last vertebra, and let the cautery be as deep as the one that preceded it.
Then care for it with what came before until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing for lung diseases and coughs.
When cough and lung disease are caused by cold moistures, and the patient has no fever, nor phthisis, nor old complaint: then cauterize it with two cauterizers above the furrow in depressed, soft, empty places. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between two breasts: and let the cautery be like a cannula according to the shape that came before.
And if you wish, let your cautization be with a point-like cautery called the Point, whose form came before in piercing the pain of the ears; and let there be points from thirty points almost to others.
Then care for it with what came before until it is healed.
And now let the cautery have three branches: according to this shape. Why is relief obtained with that cautery when you do it with it once using three cauterizers.
Chapter XXVII.
When the head of the assistant is dislocated because of moistures and does not return to its place until it has become accustomed to returning to itself from its dislocation, then until it becomes a habit for it to return, and afterwards it is dislocated by a small movement which occurs as we have already testified, then you must reduce the dislocation first. Then let the patient be placed on his back, or on a healthy side. Then elevate the scalp, which is on the inside of the skull towards the top with your left hand's fingers; and if the joint dislocates to the inside.
Then having a cauterizer with two handles. Whose form is this.
Then cauterize the scalp until it penetrates to the other side and comes with a figure of cauterization with four cauterizers.
And sometimes it is done with a cauterizer having three handles, so that the figure of cauterization then has six cauterizers: and they are handles according to the subtlety of the test.
And this is the form of a cauterizer having three handles.
And sometimes one is added to this method, so that there are eight cauterizers.
Then place crushed reeds with salt on top of the cauterizer. Then make the patient remain calm and still, so that he does not move a limb at any time, until he is comforted.
And if the dislocation is above, and this rarely happens, then cauterize it on top of the shoulder with a cauterizer having a claw-shaped point, or with many piercing cauterizers.
For the joint is strengthened and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Of the manner of cauterizing the Stomach.
When coldness and many moistures occur in the Stomach until they extract it from its natural constitution and multiply catarrhs towards it, and the patient does not recover with continuous modes of treatment: then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back, and stretch out his legs and arms. Then cauterize with three cauterizers, one having the shape of a cochlear pectoris the size of one finger with a claw-shaped point, and two cauterizers below from both sides of one cauterizer, until the figure of the cauterizers becomes triangular. And make space between them so they will not unite when they form pus.
And let the depth of the cautery be the quantity of three skin thicknesses.
And let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without addition: and if you wish, cauterize with a great cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cautery be one which is made in the shape of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by piercing it with a cautery which fears this cautery; and thus, signs are marked above the stomach's puncture according to the quantity you wish with encaustic: then cauterize it with the cautery of the puncture: then care for it with the cure that preceded until it is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing a cold liver.
When it happens that a person with liver pain from cold and moisture, or from thick phlegm, has not been able to rid themselves of their natural superfluous excretion, and the patient is cured by what we have said, but does not benefit in this: then it is necessary for the patient to be lifted up onto their own head, and three cauteries are marked with encaustic according to this shape, on the liver below the hypochondria, where the elbow of a human reaches: and let there be space between each cautery equal to the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery be straight according to the length of the body: and do not compress your hand with the cautery much.
And let the quantity of what is burned be equal to the thickness of the skin, not adding anything to it: and let the patient stand on their own feet.
But if they are not standing, then let them lie down, who have already extended their legs and raised their arms.
This is the shape of the cautery.
And it is possible for you, to cauterize these wounds with this cauter and the surgical knife, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And take care that you do not proceed too late in cauterization, and the thickness of the skin is thoroughly burnt, so that the whole body is burned and reaches the intestines; for the skin is thin there, therefore know this.
On the manner of cauterizing apostemes of the liver.
When it happens that an exitus occurs, and you wish to know whether this aposteme is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic: then if it is in the flesh of the liver, it invades the patient with a severe pain and gravity without sharpness; and if it is in the tunic of the liver, with pain it becomes sharp and vehement; and you see now that its cure has wearied out doctors.
Therefore, it is necessary for the patient to lean back over his own neck. Then mark the place of the aposteme with an encaustum; then ignite the cauter which resembles a ray. And this is its form. And cauterize with this cauter one, until the skin is entirely consumed and reaches the siphac, until all pus exits; then cure it by the cure of abscesses, until it is healed.
And it is not necessary for this kind of cauter to be used by anyone except one whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged; and through whose hands these illnesses concur with some experiment several times: then indeed he may dare to undertake such an operation.
But rather to leave it alone, I think better of it.
On the manner of cauterizing in Pleurisy.
The ancients have said that one should use a cauter with the roots of Aristolochia for cold Pleurisy in this manner. And it is that you receive from the dry roots of Aristolochia, one root longer than another which is found in it, and it should be as thick as a finger. Then immerse it in oil; and burn it over fire. Then cauterize it with one cauterizer at the point where the beak of the fork meets the neck, and two small cauterizers slightly declined under the guidance to the part that is below the beard.
And also with two cauterizers in the place where is between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly declined towards the back a little; and another cauterizer in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach. And three cauterizers from behind: one in the place where is between two spoon-like protrusions; and two cauterizers on either side of the chest, with the lower one being the one that is between two spoon-like protrusions.
And it is not necessary for you to compress your hand with the cauterizer, but rather let it be openly on the surface of the skin, smelling.
And already some ancients have said that there are people who use a cauterizer like a iron rod, and they burn, and put it inside in the place where is between the ribs, until it reaches with it to the abscess, and pus comes out: as we said in the abscess of Epatis.
But in this perforation with a cauterizer there is fear that either the patient immediately dies, or a fistula occurs in the place, to which there is no cure.
¶ On the manner of cauterizing the Spleen Chapter 32.
When you cure the disease of the spleen, with what we said about curing diseases in division of diseases, and your cure does not help, then the cauterizer is used in three modes, all of which are straight.
One of which is, that you make three or four cauterizations, lining them up according to the length of the spleen, following the figure of the cauterizers of Epatis, whose preceding form came before.
And let there be among all cauterization a quantity of thickness equivalent to that of a finger, or slightly more.
And let the method of cauterizing be as we have described for cauterizing the liver.
And do not compress your hand with the cauter, and let the patient lie on his back in a weak position.
And another method of cauterization is this: that you take a cauter with two handles, as we described in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder; and lift up the skin which is directly above the spleen, where the patient's left arm lies; and let your elevation be according to the width of the body, so that the cauter falls along the length of the body.
Then insert two very hot handles into the skin, until you pierce it on the other side; then withdraw the cauterer; thus four cauterizations are made.
And if you wish to use a cauter with three handles.
Then care for the cauter wound after you have stopped it from discharging pus over many days; for it is more helpful than all the other things that preceded in the cure.
¶ On the manner of cauterizing in Hydrocephalus.
The cauter does not fall in Hydrocephalus, unless it is properly applied.
When you are treating Hydrocephalus with the methods of treatment that we mentioned in the division, and the treatment does not take effect, then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauterizations around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back between the vertebrae, one directly on the chest, and another directly on the stomach: and let the quantity of depth of the cauter be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then leave the cauter open so that it discharges pus over a long period of time.
And do not remove the patient from treatment after cauterization with him, since it is necessary that two intentions aggregate to him; and the cure will hasten to him with God's help.
The form of the caustic with which the belly is cauterized should be a key shape; according to its previous form. And the form of that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, according to its previous form.
On the manner of cauterizing Feet and Legs.
When they apostemate in hydropica and are filled with citrina water, it is necessary that you cauterize above the dorsal part of the foot, which is between the auricular and anular parts; then lift up your hand with the caustic and do not twist it; afterwards lift up your hand again and do not repeat it at all.
The citrina water will drain away, and the caustic should be according to this shape.
Then make two caustics on each leg, one on every calf, and the caustic should be made with the edge of a knife-shaped caustic; and it should be made according to the length of the leg, one under the knee and another below that, about in the middle of the leg. And above all the hip make two caustics, and leave the caustic open without treatment for a long time until something drains out from it; then cure it with the rest as we have said.
On the manner of cauterizing in the dissolution of the Womb.
Chapter 35.
When the womb is dissolved due to cold and moisture, until the retaining and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines are weakened, which is cured with methods of treatment but does not heal; and you see the patient tolerating a caustic of excessive power, then cauterize him with a great caustic above his stomach, according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with a circular caustic and four small caustics around the navel, with a key-shaped caustic; and a large caustic above the cecum or two caustics.
And if you see excessive moistures and the patient tolerates that, then cauterize it with a cautery over the ribcage, and a cautery over all the hipbone; and perhaps add two small cauteries near the large one on the stomach.
For indeed, the cure is progressing, whose benefit does not fail.
On the manner of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When in the anus are old and many hemorrhoids, or one, and they are formed from thick, cold, or corrupted humors, and they are cured as we said in the division, and it does not help to cure; then cauterize three times with a cautery over the lower vertebra of the back under the navel somewhat triangularly, and a cautery under the belly button almost two finger-widths.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and his food is not digested, and you see his face breaking out with pimples, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery, following what came before: and a cautery on his spleen, and another on his liver, with a thumb-sized cautery; and leave the cautery open for some time: then cure him until he is healed.
Chapter 37.
When you cut away the altitudo, then ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray. Then insert the ignited cautery into the cut altitudo: and with your last hand, until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows: do this once or twice.
If then there are many altitudos, then cauterize each one with a cautery as we described. Then cure those things with the ointments that are useful for them, until they heal.
And if you cauterize him with a great cauterizer above the bladder, it is more effective for his benefit.
On the manner of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter 38.
When an invalid does not obey the cutting and operation that we described in its place, and is terrified by it, perhaps he will be healed with a cauterizer.
Therefore, when an abscess occurs in someone, and it becomes old, pus flows from it, and corrupted moisture flows out. It is therefore more fitting that you probe it with a thin probe. Then know the depth of it with the probe.
Then apply a cautery fire, which is like a ray. Then insert yourself, burning, into the abscess and as much of it as you have entered with force.
And repeat the cautery over it until all those corrupted bodies are burned away, once, twice, or three times, according to your necessity.
And take care to avoid burning the nerve if it is there, or a large vein; or if the abscess goes to the bladder's body or the intestine's body, then take care to avoid these places all.
And do not do that unless the abscess is in a fleshy place; and think, because it is not piercing.
Then take care of the place until it heals.
But if the place is sealed, and the materials are cut away from it, and it remains thus for a long time: then you will know that it has already been healed entirely.
And if the materials are not cut away from it, then you will know that it is piercing, or there is a corrupted opening deep within it, or something similar: of which the recollection will come to its place.
Chapter on the manner of cauterizing Kidneys.
When it happens that pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold or thick phlegm, and is diminished because of some infirmity of its own, then it is necessary to cauterize it above a layer of alum above the kidneys, cauterizing over all the kidney with a caustic implement, which was previously mentioned.
And perhaps we cauterize it again on top of that alum. Why are there three stripes? So they will be more useful afterwards.
About the method of cauterizing a Bladder.
When debilitation and softening occur in the Bladder due to cold and moisture, until the infirm person no longer retains urine, then one should cauterize it at the lower part of the back above the Bladder, where the pubic hairs begin, and with a caustic implement on the right side of the back and another on the left side of that: and let the length of this cauterization be according to the size of a thumb's knuckle: and one should cauterize it with an inferior caustic or two caustics if needed, in accordance with what has been previously mentioned.
About the method of cauterizing the Womb.
When cold and moisture occur in the Womb, and it prevents conception by means of that, and its menstrual fluids are corrupted, and their production is delayed, and pain occurs to her at their arrival, then it is necessary for three caustic implements to be applied around the navel, as we mentioned in the cauterization of the Bladder, and a caustic implement below the belt on the back or two caustics: and let there be a caustic implement with a clasp.
About the method of cauterizing the Shoulder in a Dislocation.
When the mucous humors are poured out at the shoulder blade of the Shoulder, and become the cause of its exit from its place: and the sign of this is that the leg extends over another when they are brought together; and the location of the dislocation is found to be in a vacant spot.
It is necessary therefore that you cauterize the patient over a lump of pine resin, similar to the circle made by Albucasis' own cautery; after which you mark with encaustic around the circumference of the pine resin, just as it will roll: and so that the pine resin falls in the middle of the circle.
But if this cautery is not present to you, then burn the patient with three cauterizations, using a great olive oil cautery; and let the depth of the burning be according to the thickness of the skin in its entirety.
Then take care of him until he is healed.
Of the manner of cauterizing for sciatica.
When the pain occurs in the pine-like anchae, and the cause is coldness and moisture; and the patient is treated with what we said in the division, and the treatment does not bring relief, and the condition becomes worse: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with foul pills, or artificial pills, and similar ones. Then burn him.
And the method of burning in this case is according to two modes: either a burning with incendiary medicines, or a burning with fire.
Burning with fire is according to many methods.
One of which is that you burn over a lump of pine resin anchae its own three triangular cauterizations, according to this shape. And make their depth good or bad. And let the space that is between all of these burnings be the size of a finger's thickness; and let the burning be with olive oil.
Sometimes, however, the burning is done in the middle over the head of the pine resin itself. Therefore there are four burnings.
And if you wish, burn with a circle, whose form preceded in the burning of the dislocated anchor, one, so that the circle contains the entire anchor.
And burn the thickness of the skin entirely.
This is the method of cauterization for sciatica, when the pain adheres to the backbone itself and does not extend as far as the hip and leg.
But if it extends as far as the hip and leg, then you should cauterize that spot on the hip with two cauteries, above the spot where the patient is afflicted by pain, and cauterize your own with a small knife for about four finger-widths towards the left side: and let the cautery be a cutting one.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
But if the patient indicates that the pain extends as far as the toes of the foot, then you should cauterize him there where he indicates with a cautery point, three or four or more times, if necessary.
And if the patient indicates that the pain is under the knee towards the leg, then you should cauterize him there with one cutting cautery.
And beware of yourself in every cautery of yours, lest you burn a nerve or a major artery and cause harm to the patient through it, or contraction.
And I myself have seen one and another of those who have cauterized above the calf, and have burned themselves in the cautery, and the leg has become swollen until a tumor has developed at the foot, and the entire foot has been perforated and corrupted: then followed abdominal dissolution, and death after that.
But if the pain is in both parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
And certain wise men have said about the cautery of the backbone, whose method is this one. Make a similar one from iron, whose diameter is the middle of the hand: and let it be at its opening according to the thickness of the tip of the finger, or slightly less: and inside that samian be another samian.
And let there be space which is between all the bones by the quantity of a thumb's knuckle; and let the bones be open on two sides; and let their height be as a knot, or two knots; and make for them a wing-shaped handle from well-fitting iron in the bones.
Then let it be ignited in fire until it is red and sends sparks: then place it on a piece of wood above an anchor for the weakly seated person, sitting over a sound limb. Therefore, cauterize him with three round cauters one after another.
Then let him go for three days. After that, apply poultices with butter; and let the open wound be left for many days. Then care for him with ointment until he is healed.
Albucasis says, that in this manner of cauterization, my sons, we have used it little, on account of the fear caused by its appearance; and therefore, because few are found who will venture to apply it.
Yet it is from good cauterizations that one who suffers finds relief, and finds a place for himself with it.
However, the cauterium with burning medicines is, as you make two bones having a perforated ring, into which descends the hinge of its gate from air or iron, of the length of the wall: whose height they are two knots, or almost so.
And let there be space which is between the two by the quantity of finger thickness, and let them be open below and above; and let it be so that they contain themselves together, according to this shape.
Then place it on a piece of wood above an anchor, for the weakly seated person sitting over a sound limb. And press your hand firmly onto the piece of wood above an anchor very much. Then pour between the two circles hot water which is heated with fire for a little while, and hold it for the length of an hour: and let the infirm person endure its burning and charring, for he finds the burning as if by fire, until the burning subsides.
Then elevate your hand with the instrument and wash away hot water from the entire area along with sweet water; then let it be for three days.
And place butter on top of it, until the blackening of burning is removed; and let it be for several days, and a discharge will flow from it. For this is the last resort.
Then take care of that with ointments, until it heals.
And if the pain extends to the hip or leg, put it in a position that contains water, as you did for the groin.
And this is the method of hot water; and I have already written it in my treatise on the correction of medicines. Take alkali and unburned lime, each one part of both, pound them well, and put them in a new pot whose lower part is perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity that will fill the radius; and place another earthenware pot beneath the bottom of the first pot: and pour over the alkali and lime with sweet water, so that it covers both by the finger's breadth; after which you compress them with your hand in good compression: and let the pot sit until the sharp water flows down into the lower part of the earthenware pot.
Then gather all that water together and pour it over another lime: and let it stand until it is renewed.
For then it will be very strong and sharp, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of other limbs. Because it produces a burning operation of its own.
And from medicines are those with which one cauterizes the groin, as well as testicles, and honey of bitter almonds, and lime with soap, so that both are mixed together.
And Galen indeed reported, while telling the story of some ancient man's cure, that he was healed from the pain in his groin and sciatic vein by this treatment, and magnified its great effectiveness. And he said, because it does not need another cure, and because it was healed by one treatment, until it returned, because the man himself perhaps entered the bath carried away, and went out from there already healthy.
And it is, that it should be taken from the green aloe: and if it cannot be found, let a dry one be taken, fresh: and let it be rubbed much with some fat, and placed above the hip, where there is pain, or thigh, or in the groin: and bound, and left for the amount of three hours, or as long as the sick person feels relief from burning. Then introduce him into a bath.
When therefore his body becomes clammy, introduce him onto a couch. For the pain subsides and he is healed.
And know that it is not proper for anyone to use a cauterizer with these medicines, unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides said that goat dung, when applied with it to cauterize the sciatic vein, is beneficial to him: and it becomes a caustic in this way. Let wool be taken and soaked in old oil, and place it on a deep spot, which is between the thumb of the foot and the ankle bone, and is closer to the ankle.
Then take dry goat dung, and set it on fire until it becomes ash.
Then place the ash on top of the wool, and leave it until it is extinguished. Then repeat that. And do not cease to do this until the sensation reaches the hip and the pain subsides.
And this method of cauterization is called the "Vaccinium" caustic.
¶ On the Cauterization of Back Pain.
Sometimes it happens that there is pain in the back due to many causes, or by chance, or from a blow, or from excessive evacuation, and similar things, due to the infusion of cold and moist matter: and cauterization indeed does not apply, unless in this single case which occurs through the infusion of cold matter.
Therefore it is necessary after the patient has been purged with pills and things similar to them, that they be placed on the back where there is pain, three lines according to the width of the patient's body, after which marks are made with encaustic in each line five cauterizations, or more as much as comes from the patient's endurance by their own virtue: and let the cauterization be done with a cauteriopunct.
And if you wish, cauterize three times or four with the middle key cauterizer, in this form.
On the method of cauterizing for Gibbous Inflammation.
This affliction often occurs in small children.
And the sign of its inception is that it occurs on a child as a constriction in breathing when they are lifted up and moved: and you will find it in the last vertebrae of the back and knots thereof, which has already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When therefore you see this and wish to do it, then cauterize it with a cauterizer that is a circle in this form.
And take the cauterizer over all parts of the vertebra equally: and if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a cauteriopunct two lines or three: and let the points be close together.
Then care for the place until it is healed as we have said.
And beware, lest you apply the cauterizer to a gibbosity that occurs in a muscle spasm.
On the method of cauterizing for Gout and pains of joints.
When the pains of joints are caused by cold humors which flow to any part of the body, and when they occur in the feet, it is according to the custom of physicians to name that properly Podagra.
When therefore podagra is cured due to cold causes with modes of cure and pains are not removed, then a cauterization removes them.
And it is, as he cauterizes him after evacuation in the surrounding area of the ankle joint, with many cauterizations; and let the cauterization be olive-like.
And if you wish to make points on the surface of the foot, then do it with a cauterization point. Which if pains ascend to the knees or other joints, and often this happens, then cauterize him on all of his knee with three cauterizations or four from every part, with the same cauterization as a chisel.
But if you need more of this cauterization, then cauterize him. And do not immerse your hand with the cauterization, rather let it be as much as the thickness of the skin.
If however pains ascend to the knees and back: then apply what we said in its own chapter from the cauterization.
Which if pains are only in the hands, then make a point in the surrounding area of the fingertips, as two lines revolve.
If however there remains pain in the fingers, then make a point on them, above every knot of a point, and on the palm of the hand.
If however pains ascend after days to the hips or shoulders, then cauterize both from every part.
And do not remove a patient from good management, by rejection of medicines. For if good treatment is made, and the phlegm is evacuated, he will be healed with the help of God by means of this cauterization.
Of the manner of cauterizing in Wounds.
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestine or bladder descends to the testicle, and it is beginning to be near: then it is necessary that you hasten to have the patient stop eating on his day. And he should use mild substances so that stool descends from his belly.
Then sit him between your hands on his back, and command him to hold his breath until he goes, or a flatulence appears, or the intestine.
Then lead him back with your fingers and mark with an enema under the rupture on the pubic bone, with a sign whose extremity is like half a circle above the body.
Then apply a cautery to fire, which has this shape, until white comes out and it discharges pus. Then lead the intestine or flatulence back to its concavity. Then the assistant should place his hand on the spot so that the intestine does not come out: and you have now opened between the patient's legs, and placed a pad underneath him, and another servant above his legs, and another above his chest who is holding hands.
Then place the cautery on top of him, with your hand standing straight with the cautery. And hold him until you reach his mouth: or else go around with him the other way, if you are not able to reach his mouth on the first try.
And carefully observe from the exit of the intestine during your cautery hour, lest you burn him and harm occurs to the patient through that or death, or great evil.
And know that when you do not reach the mouth with the cautery, your operation is of no use.
And it is necessary for a cautery to be made for infants, according to their measure.
Then take care with the other ointments until he is healed.
And let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary to put his food in proportion to the length of time of his cure, so that it soothes his stomach: lest his intestine goes out during eating and evacuation.
Then when he wishes to operate after forty days, then administer a well-made ligament, and hold it for forty other days.
And let him be freed from labor, and the filling of food and drink, and loud voices.
For when he uses this regimen, so he is healed by a complete cure.
And I will say the treatment of ruptures with an incision in its chapter.
When, however, ruptures occur in the remaining part of the belly, and are beginning to form, and it is desirable that they not be added to, then cauterize the rupture with a round cauterizing iron according to its size: and let what is cauterized from then on be like one-third of it. Then care for it as we have said, and nothing will be added.
And already certain ones have said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cauterizing iron, according to this shape.
After it has been marked with encaustum, and a line is placed which is along the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with a curved cauterizing iron.
But the first cauterization is easier and better.
Of the manner of cauterizing for pains due to fall or blow.
Chapter 48.
When it happens to some members from a fall or blow, and the pain persists for a long time, and there is no relief in that pain with medicines: then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the puncturing cauterizing iron.
And let the cauterizing iron be for every part of the body according to its size, and its smallness, and weakness, and power, and twisting location, and pain from it.
If then he is healed by the first cauterization, that is good. If not, then proceed with the cautery instrument over it.
Because of the custom of these pains, they change from member to that which is nearest to them. Therefore it is necessary that you follow them with a cautery instrument until the patient recovers.
On the manner of cauterizing leprosy.
But lepers are sometimes helped by cauterization, with the greatest benefit. And especially those types of leprosy that occur due to the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile; when you wish to cauterize this, take heed.
So if the leprosy is not subsiding and you have treated it as we mentioned in the division, and it does not descend or remain steady: and you fear for the patient, because corruption may spread to his entire complexion; then cauterize him with five cauterizations: one in the middle of the head, noted; and a second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; and two above the two horns; and one behind on the nucha of the neck.
And then hold your hand with the cautery instrument for a little while, until it impresses a small mark on his skin and loosens the scabs: so that he may be relieved of the expiration of thick vapors from him; and cauterize also the spleen with the same cautery, according to what has preceded.
But if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is manifestly apparent: then it is necessary that you cauterize with those cauterizations which we mentioned in the chapter; and with a cautery instrument on the tip of the nose, and two on each cheekbone, and two on the vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large on the alhahos at the granular part of the tail and one above it in the midst of the loins: and two on the shoulders; that is to say, one on each shoulder; and two on each knee, and two on each upper arm, and two on the tendons of his chest: and cauterize him over all the joints, from the joints of the fingers of his hands and feet, and cauterize also over every heel of his feet, and the soles of his hands.
And beware of the nerves which are above the last bone of the heel, so that you do not burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cauterizer over the bone of the hip, and another over the bone of the stomach, and another over the liver.
And know that as much as you add to the cauterizer, it is more beneficial and more effective.
And know that an invalid does not find pain in the cauterizer as the healthy do; therefore, since his body is already numb.
And it should be that the cauterizers are of great size and smallness according to members and joints: according to which preceded from the species of tools.
Then cure the wound with a cauterizer made from wheat flour mixed with honey, and other treatment, until it heals.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing in numbness.
When some member is numb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, and does not heal, then cauterize the numb member with cauterizers, according to the size or smallness of the member.
And let your cauterizer go into the thickness of the skin a little bit. Then cure it with ointment, until it heals.
And sometimes it is cauterized for some numbness that occurs in the hand and foot at the vertebrae of the back near the exit of the nerves that move that member; and the numbness is removed.
But one should not presume to do so unless he is wise in the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves that move the body.
Book 51
When an ulcer ages and does not respond to anything from the skills of medicine: then cauterize over it with a deep cauterizer for a little bit, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the white part is removed and its color changes.
Then take care of it with barley flour and lentils mixed with rose oil, and the leaves of arnoglossa, and the blood of a dove, and the blood of a hoopoe: each part should be one: mix all these together, and spread them on a cloth, and let them adhere to the place until it is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing in Cancer.
When cancer is beginning to form, and you wish to stop it: then cauterize it with a caustic ring around its perimeter, as if it were revolving.
However, the wise have said that one should cauterize with the last caustic in the middle.
But it does not seem right to me: because I fear that it will be inflamed: and I have already seen this happen a few times.
And it is more right to cauterize around its circumference with a circle, as we said: or with many caustics.
On the manner of cauterizing in Adenomas.
When someone has an adenoma and it is delayed in its maturation, either because of excess making it so or because of the old age of a weak person, when he is worn out by little blood, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the adenoma, then cauterize around its circumference with small caustics, puncturing many times. Then leave it. For it will hasten along with the maturation.
But if you wish to make a perforation in it with a caustic, then ignite the caustic, which has this shape.
And place it in the middle of the adenoma, until it pierces through to the skin: and let the caustic be from what follows weakly, so that the flow of pus may be alleviated.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Decaying is not except corruption in a walking limb and it decays itself; just as fire consumes dry wood.
So then if you see a decaying thing in a place that can be cauterized with fire, then many little and great iron clamps will fit, according to the place where the decaying thing is.
Then cauterize it from every part until you eradicate the entire corruption, and nothing at all remains of it.
Then let it be for three days, and place over the cauterized areas powdered sulfur with oil, until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
Then care for it with ointments that promote flesh growth.
So then if you see that after three days the flesh is born healthy and uncorrupted, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery over what remains of the corrupted areas.
And the decaying thing is healed sometimes with sharp medicine. Itself rises in the place of the cautery.
However, the cautery with fire is a more speedy remedy: and I have already said that its division with sharp medicine is for this purpose; therefore, take it there whenever you need it.
About the method of cautering in Claws, and Warts.
Chapter 55.
This illness often happens in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a thick, filtered thing that injures the foot.
And there are two ways of cautering in them: a cautery with fire and a cautery with hot water.
And as much as it is with fire, so the cautery should be made like a concave spoon similar to a vulture's claw: which is made of iron, according to the quantity that contains the nail from every part, and has a thin edge.
Then place the heated instrument over the nail. Then turn your hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail: and leave it for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply poultices to it with crushed wild mullein, mixed with salt: and leave the poultice on it at night. For it will be uprooted from its roots.
Then take care of the place with a flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
But if they are not converted and frequently occur on the surface of the body, especially in hands and feet: then apply to them a cautery with hot water: and thus take a tube made from air, or iron, or from a bird's quill: and place it over the nail, or elsewhere. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube: hold your hand firmly and turn it with pressure from your hand for a little while, so that the edge of the tube is impressed on the root of the nail, and the hot water finds its way to the depth, to the root of the nail: and the patient should wait for a little over one hour above the morsuration of the hot water.
Then leave it alone, for the nail is uprooted with its roots.
Do this with each one after one, until you come to all those that are in the body.
Then take care of them after they have been uprooted, with what generates flesh from ointments.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in Tremor.
When someone suffers from Tremor due to cold in the nerve, or quartan fever, or another cause: then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four or five cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and between each vertebra, and in his chest, and above his stomach.
Shaking ceases with an olive oil cautery, and the recovery from cold illness hastens.
On the manner of cauterizing by Albatheer.
Chapter 57.
Sometimes unclean things are purged from the body by Albatheer, that is, pustules which arise from corrupted gross matter.
It is therefore necessary at first to cauterize with a fine cautery and myrtle wood, the ends of which are set on fire, over all the pustules that appear. Or with the root of long Aristolochia. Or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized again at the beginning of their evacuation in this manner: and they do not increase; and the superfluity is broken up making them healthy, and healing ensues from them.
However, it is necessary that this be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
On the manner of cauterizing in a flow of blood from an artery in a wound.
Many times it happens that a flow of blood occurs from an artery which has been cut at the wound, either because it happened externally or at the incision of an apostema, or at the cautery of a member, and similar things: and it becomes difficult to stop it.
When therefore it happens to someone, then hurry with your hand to the opening of the artery, and place your index finger upon it: and grasp it tightly until the blood is pressed beneath your finger, and nothing escapes from it.
Then place a small and many large olive oil cauteries in the fire, and blow on them until they become very hot.
Then take one, small or large, according to the wound and place, where the artery is disrupted, and place the cautery on the wound, after you quickly remove your finger; and hold the cautery until the blood is stopped.
If an artery is expelled as you raise your finger from the arterial opening and you extinguish the cautery, then quickly take another cautery from those that are prepared in the fire.
Therefore, do not cease to do it with one after another, until the blood is cut off.
And beware that you do not burn the nerve that is there, and another evil occurrence happens on the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to cut it off: especially if the artery is great, unless by one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we said. Or with an extraction, when it is not extracted. For when it is drawn out, its ends are contracted and the blood is cut off. Or it should be tied with a strong binding thread. Or medicinal substances of the kind that stop bleeding should be placed on it and tightened with a decent compression.
But whoever performs the removal of it with a binding and compression with a cloth, or positioning of things that constrict, and similar things, does not benefit it greatly, unless rarely.
If it happens to someone and there is no doctor present nor medicine: then he should begin by placing his index finger over the opening of the vein itself, as we have said, and constricting it very much, until the blood is blocked on the superior part of the wound, and above the artery. And the finger should not be removed from above it with cold water of great coldness always, until the blood congeals and thickens and is cut off.
And meanwhile he should consider what treatment by cautery or medicine it needs.
About incising, perforating, and bloodletting in wounds and similar things.
We have already spoken in the first chapter about every affliction which is suitable for burning with a caustic and medicine consuming fire, and its occasions, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterizations.
And I have placed the chapters there from top to bottom.
And I will proceed in this chapter by the same path, so that what is sought may be found for one seeking it.
And before I begin that, it is necessary for you, my children, to learn what is in this chapter, which is a terror, just as it was in the first chapter on cauterization.
And because of this, it is necessary to be all the more cautious, since in the operation that is in this chapter, evacuation often occurs with blood, which, when it flows from an open vein, or incision over a suppurating wound, or opening of an exit wound, or cure of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision over a stone, and similar things: from all these, fear is associated, and terror falls upon many of them, leading to death.
And I warn you, lest that which is uncertain fall upon you, for sometimes such people as are feeble-minded and weak in this art come to you. For one of them is the man who grows angry at his own affliction, and death is light to him because of the intensity of his anger which he finds from his own weakness and the length of his wickedness. And with affliction it is from fear that signifies death.
And one of them is the man who gives his doctor, and trusts in him with his illness, hoping for recovery, and his affliction is deadly.
Therefore, it is not fitting that you should agree with one who comes to you from among them, whose manner is such. And let your caution be more vehement than your desire and avarice. And do not presume over anything from that, unless after certain knowledge has been verified in you, which confirms what it achieved through praiseworthy succession.
And use prognosis and indication for the cure of all your patients, so that salvation may be suitable.
For in him there is help to you for acquiring fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with His own understanding, and not take away from you guidance and inspiration; for it is in His hand.
And I indeed have arranged this Chapter by dividing it into sections, just as it preceded in the chapter on Caustics, from head to feet: so that what you seek may be alleviated to you and what you need.
On the Cure of Water which accumulates in the Heads of Boys.
Book One.
Know that this weakness often occurs in boys at birth: or when the afterbirth is tightly wrapped around the boy's head without gentleness.
And sometimes it happens even due to a hidden cause that is unknown.
And I indeed have not seen this affliction in anyone except in boys: and all of them whom I saw succumbed to death because of it. Therefore it seemed to me that I should abandon the treatment for it.
And I indeed saw one of them, a boy whose head was filled with water, and his head was swelling every day until he could no longer sit up due to the magnitude of his own head; and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture either accumulates between the skin and mouth: or it accumulates beneath the bone above the sphenoid.
And the operation in him, if there is moisture between the skin and mouth, and an abscess is small, then it is necessary to make a incision in the middle of the head, one cut in breadth: and let the length of the incision be almost two knots, until the moisture flows.
And this is the form of a spatula.
So if moisture is greatly increased and an abscess is larger, then place these two incisions according to this form.
And if moisture is under the bone, and its sign is that you see the commissures of the head open on every part: and water is pressed down when you compress it with your hand to the interior, and it does not hide from you: then it is necessary to make incisions in the middle of the head three times, according to this manner.
And after making the incision, remove the moisture entirely. Then tie the incisions with cloths and poultices. Then pack that over it with wine and oil up to the fifth day.
Then loosen the bandage, and care for the wound with threads and ointments.
And do not stop binding the head evenly. And feed the sick person with all dry food and little moisture, until the limb is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision is, to consider where the magnitude of the abscess appears, and the collection of water.
Because sometimes it is more on the back of the head, or on the forehead, or on the right side, or on the left.
So climb up with an incision where you see the abscess and filling of water, and cut it as far as is possible for you.
And beware that you do not cut the artery, and a flow of blood occurs, and the sick person dies from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
De incisione Arteriarum quae sunt post aures.
Caput II.
When anyone suffers from cataracts to the eyes or to the chest, and it becomes old and does not improve with medical treatment: then the final cure for this is the incision of these two arteries.
Therefore it is necessary when you wish to cut them, that the patient should place his head back. Then prepare a spot with a rough cloth, so that the arteries may be visible. Then the patient should tie his neck with any of his own cloths. Then observe where the pulse beats in the vein. And the places are those which are behind the ears, depressed; and it is rarely hidden, except in certain people.
Then mark both with encaustic above each one; and cut both with a spatula on either side to the point of being able to reach the mouth, and make it along the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatula under the artery, and cut it upwards with the incision.
And let the length of the incision be almost two joined fingers.
For when the vein is cut, blood flows out with a pulsating gush, which jumps to the inside with frequent leaps.
But if the artery does not appear to the sense, then it is necessary to measure from the ear a space of three fingerbreadths. Then mark with encaustic and find your way up to the mouth.
And that which is necessary to be emitted from blood is six ounces, and perhaps you may emit more or less from it. The whole of that according to the quantity which appears to you from the virility of the patient and the filling of his artery.
Then examine the wound. Then if anything remains at the mouth from the flow, then cut it off so that a warm abscess does not occur; then bind the wound with linen cloths.
Then care for him with ointment until he is healed.
Of the Extraction of Arteries which are in Temporal Regions.
Chapter III.
When an old hemicrania or acute catarrah occurs in a person due to bitter humors and heat in the temporal limbs, or ancient ulcers, swollen, and similar ones: and it is treated with modes of medical cure, and not by this means: then we are experienced in these afflictions with the extraction of arteries from the temporal regions, or their cauterization, as we have described.
And the method of the operation for extracting them is, that the patient should shave off the hairs which are on the temporal regions, and direct himself towards the artery appearing in the temple. For it is shown to you by its pulse, and rarely hidden unless in a few people or by excessive cold.
For if it is hidden from you, then the patient should tie his head with any of his cloths: afterwards, he should rub the spot with a rough cloth. Or he should apply a poultice to the place with warm water, until it appears to you in manifest appearance. Then take the spatula, which I shaped a little while ago. Then scrape with it the skin with ease until you reach the artery. Then insert the hook into it and pull it out upwards until you pull it out of the skin and make it pass through all the tunics which are underneath it from every part.
If however the artery is slender, then wrap it around with the end of the hook. Then cut from it a portion according to the length by which its ends are extended and contracted, and that no bleeding of blood may occur. For if it is not cut and not severed, the blood will not rise deeply.
Then remove from the blood six unciae up to three.
For if the artery is large, then it is necessary to tie it in two places with a double thread of strong silk or from the intestines of an ass, so that it may not proceed to putrefaction before the wound is consolidated and bleeding occurs.
Then cut away the excess which is between two ligaments. Do that at that hour or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cauterizing knife up to the bone, until the ends of it are cut and it remains in its place as part of the same operation.
And it is a better operation, unless the patient has a fever or a warm complexion. Because the cautery is one of those things that help to dry up humors. Therefore it is a better remedy.
And after the removal of arteries, the location should be filled with old boiled cloth, and small lint pillows should be placed on top.
And after the wound has been cleansed, it should be treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow and with lint, until it is healed.
Which if a bleeding occurs from an artery while you are operating, then hurry to stop it with a cautery or by filling the location with wool: and tie your hand, until the blood is stopped. Which if none of those things are present to you, then place your finger on the location until the blood coagulates. And moisten the location with water of very cold heat, until the sharpness ceases and is bound as needed.
And because it is easier and less difficult to extract an artery, it is that you should cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives: let the sharpness of the two knives be like a well-cut thread. However they are much less sharp than two knives. Because if they are as sharp as two knives, the cold will rush to both and not cut through the flesh quickly enough. Therefore when there is a certain amount of coarseness in them, the heat of fire is held within them, and the flesh is cut quickly; with this therefore the work is better than any other, and easier.
And this is the form of the cauterization.
And make a space which is between the two knives the thickness of a finger, after you mark two places with encaustic: and place both of them very hot, until they reach the mouth, and cut the vein in two places: so that what is between its extremities is separated. For they are not thoroughly consolidated with this cauterization.
Book IV Chapter 4
On the treatment of constant and sharp eye discharges from the eyes.
When there are constant discharges and the flow of them is from the veins which are above the outer surface of the head: and nothing contributes to their healing with medicines, and you see the sick person's face already reddening, and he feels a walking sensation in his forehead, just like the marching of ants: and his eyes are worn out, damp, so that their hairs have already been corroded along with the corrosion: and his eyelids have been heated up by the sharpness of the discharges: then the ancients had to resort to this treatment, and they called it a cure with forceps.
And so you should have the sick person shave the hairs that are on his forehead. Then make three incisions in the forehead, equidistant from each other according to the length of the forehead: and let the length of the incision be almost two fingers long, and one incision be equidistant from the middle of the nose on the forehead, and the second according to the length a little bit away from the movement of the arms, and the third on the other side: and beware of cutting the arteries which are in both sides: and extend your hand from the continuation of the two jawbones, and let there be space for all the incision, the quantity of three connected fingers: and have prepared a sponge fragment or many pieces of dry cloth with which to absorb the blood.
Then insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, whose form follows next. From the incision that is from the part of the temple, up to the second incision: and remove with it all the skin which is between two incisions, together with the saphenous vein that is above the bone. Then make also from the middle incision up to the second incision. Then withdraw this spatula and insert another instrument into the first incision again, which is called a sharp scalpel, blunt on one side and not sharp on the other. And this is its shape.
And place the sharp side of it towards the attached flesh with the skin, and the blunt side towards the bone; and push it until it reaches the middle cleft: and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes: except for what is contained in the incision up to what appears on the skin.
Then do this in the middle cleft up to another cleft.
And after an equal amount of blood has flowed out, express the areas from the clot of congealed blood.
Then place linseed oil from old bread into every cleft, and put over them poultices soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar. And take care that no hot abscess occurs.
And on the third day dissolve the bandage and administer a great infusion with warm water. Then take care of that with basilicon ointment and other remedies with which wounds are treated until it is healed.
V.
Of the cure for sharp lachrymation and catarrh affecting the eyes from internal head causes.
When sharp and constant catarrh occurs to someone, and you see their eyes are worn out, small, and already weakened in appearance: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hair falls from them, and there is a sharp pain deep in the head, hurting, and coughing follows; then take note of these accidents, that those materials do not come unless from many veins.
And the better cure for them is this. And it is, that you should order the sick person to shave his forehead. Then cut one incision in the middle of the forehead, or on either side for a short distance, and begin with the incision from the left time to the right: and let the incision be up to the bone; and stretch out your hand from the temples which move during mastication: until when the bone is exposed; and dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with a warm cloth, or with linen strips. Then bind it above with poultices: and soak the poultices with wine and oil, so that no hot abscess may occur.
And when you dissolve that and see that the hot abscess is already subsiding: then it is necessary to burn the bone, until flesh begins to grow in it.
Then care for it with a regimen of drying that makes flesh grow: just as if you were to take two parts from wheat flour and four parts from colophony: and prepare an ointment from them, and administer it to the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter VI.
Of the Cure for What Falls on the Ear.
All that falls on the ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or like a stone, such as iron and glass; or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans; or it is a fluid substance, such as water, vinegar, and things similar to them; or some animal.
When therefore a stone falls on the ear, or one of those kinds that do not accumulate and do not grow in the ear, expose the Ear alone. If however you see a stone, then pour something from violet oil or sesame oil into the Ear. Then administer the extraction of it, and make him sneeze with you, and block his nostrils at the approach of the sneezing, after you put strips of cloth or wool around his ear, and stretch his ear upwards.
For many times it goes out with this treatment.
But if it does not go out, then administer the extraction of it with Gesti, that is, Pizigarolis subtle ones: whose form is this.
So if it goes out with the Gesti, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction of it with a blind and subtle forceps for a few doublings.
And if it does not go out through that, then make a pipe of air, and insert the end of the pipe into the ear canal very much, and block what is around the pipe with wax softened with oil, so that there will be no way except the pipe: then draw it out with your breath attraction strong.
For many times it goes out with that which we narrated. But if it does not go out this way: then take a small amount of helkalimbat or veso, that is, prepared glue with which birds are caught: and place it at the end of the radius after you have wrapped around it a cord decently placed: then insert it into the ear canal with ease, after you have dried the ear from moisture.
And if it does not go out with all that we narrated, then hasten to cut, before a warm abscess or spasms occur.
And the method of cutting is, as phlebotomists cut the weak first in the head: and draw out from him a measure of his strength. Then make the infirm person sit between your hands, and turn his ear upwards, and find a small incision in the root of the ear at the fatty part in a depressed place on him: and let the incision be of a lunar figure, until you reach the bone: then take it away with whatever is possible from your instruments.
Then you should cut open the wound as soon as possible with speed and care it until it heals.
If something falls into the ear, such as a grain that grows and swells: then perform its extraction.
But if it does not obey you at the exit, then take a thin, fine forceps, according to this shape.
And administer with it the cutting off of that kind of grain which falls into the ear, and do not do what you think when you see that grain is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you have placed many plugs: then extract it with a hook or with a fine gauze or with suction, as we said, for the extraction of it is eased.
However, when water enters the ear, it is necessary for a weak person to use expectoration first, and then fill their own ear with some warm old oil; and they should be lying above that ear where there is water. If therefore it comes out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many small stones, according to the length of a finger, thin, soft, and warm them with fire for a little while; and the infirm person should insert one of them into the ear canal of their own ear; and let them step over one foot from that side, and strike with another stone on top of the stone which is in the ear. And therefore do not cease to do that with stones and stones until all the water has gone out.
And now that the water has gone out, take a papyrus or a reed, and insert one end of it into the ear; and light up the other end with fire, until most of it is burned. Then take another reed and do that many times, until all the water has gone out; and extract it with a cannula as was mentioned earlier.
In extracting an entering animal from it, if it is a small body like a flea and similar to it, cure it as I said in division.
But if it is a large body that appears to the sense: then administer its extraction with gestures and hooks; and its result is easier for all those held in gold.
In extracting a generated worm from the ear, when you cure it with what we said in division and in the treatise on distillations, and your treatment does not bring results: then it is necessary to look at the ear in the sun. If therefore something appears there from worms, then extract that with gestures or with subtle hooks.
But if nothing appears there, then take a cannula of this shape, narrowed below and broad above: and insert the thin end into the ear according to the amount that a sick person can tolerate it; then suck with a strong suction. Do that many times, until all the worms come out.
But if they do not obey you at the exit, then wrap a strip of caur around the cannula as I said in stone.
But if they do not come out with what we said, then administer the distillations which ancient people have tried in the destruction of worms; and you will find that in the treatise on distillations.
And let your flowing be as you flow oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose shape is depicted here. Just as you see it made of silver or air, narrowed below, with a small hole at the bottom and broad above.
So let what is in the concavity of the cannula be made of air. And if you wish, take a radium and wrap it with cotton wrapping decently around the end of it. Then pour oil, or sap, or what you like from those medicines into the cannula: and let it be in the ear: then insert the radium with the wrapped cotton on top, and express it by your hand compression tempered until the oil is forced out into the concavity of the hearing, and the sick person feels it inside: and that which is poured into the ear should already be warmed up a little with fire: and beware lest what distills into it be very cold; for medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On the cure of accidental gold filling.
Sometimes certain infants emerge from their mothers' wombs unperforated.
And it also happens to some people that gold filling occurs in the ear from a wound, or flesh born in it.
And this filling sometimes occurs in the deep recess of the ear, which is not visible; and sometimes it happens near the outer opening of the ear, and is visible.
Therefore, that which occurs in the deep recess of the ear, and is not comprehended by sight, is often difficult to cure in many cases.
And in that which is visible, it is necessary to place the ear of the patient in the sun, and look at it: then if you see the filling appearing, open it with a small file having the following shape, with its end where there is some slight notch, one part being sharp: and the rest of the file should be two rounded sides so that it does not hurt the ear.
If the filling is from flesh born in the ear canal, then take it with a small hook and cut it with great ease until all the flesh is removed.
What if the filling is in the deep ear canal? Then take a small, soft reed and warm it with fire for a little while: then put it into the ear canal.
If you sense the filling with the patient who finds difficulty in hearing, try to open it with ease: and beware of not wounding the nerve of the ear.
Then put a linen cloth into the ear according to the size of the opening that you wrapped with Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure of the wound's consolidation.
Or take a linen cloth, and soak it in rose water; then powder the powdered bezoar on top of it, and use it.
If you see the ear already becoming inflamed: then it is necessary that you remove the ligature, and allow it to be tied with another ligature, which you should wrap in a cloth that has been made with rose oil, until the hot inflammation subsides: then care for it until it heals.
But if bleeding occurs: then submerge a sponge or cloths in cold water, and place them on the ear: and use the remaining treatment that stops the flow of blood mentioned in the treatise on distillations.
Of the cure for Althaea's eyelids.
Chapter VIII.
These Althelelia that occur on the eyelids of the eye are sometimes moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore it is necessary to keep them with lint or with a forceps, and cut them away from their roots. Then place powdered zinc over the places.
But if blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine glass cauterizer.
And to cauterize them is better after the incision. For indeed they often return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Of the cure for Granulation of eyelids of the eye.
Chapter IX.
It often happens on the eyelids that something forms which is similar to Granulation in its strength and hardness, and because of this it is called Granum: and it is a concretion of thick moisture on the upper and lower eyelid.
The operation therefore is to observe whether it is Granum growing out of the eyelid, which appears from the eyelid and moves to every direction, and its nature is easy.
Therefore find a slit above it across its width. Then strip it off from every part with ease until it comes out. Then hang it up with a hook, and cut it off.
But if it is not prepared for you to cut it off, unless after you have pierced the eyelid with a little incision, then that will harm the sick person in some way.
But if it is a large wound: then gather it up with stitches and take care of it until it heals.
And if it is small, no evil will come to you from it. For ointment restores it and fleshes it out.
And if the discharge is flowing downward from the interior of the ear towards the inner surface, then turn back the eyelid and hang the discharge with a hook: besides which you will need an incision, and press it off from every part.
But if the eyelid is lengthened by incision, that will not harm it in any way.
Then wash the eye after the incision of the discharge with salt water, and take care of the place with that which fleshes it out, until the sick person heals.
Of the Treatment of Eyelid Swelling.
Chapter 10.
Axirnath is a fatness that is generated in the skin of the upper eyelid: and it indeed happens most to children: and it weighs down their eyes, and causes them to have cataracts in the mornings, and they are unable to look at the light of the sun, because tears flow towards them, and therefore you see them lying down on their faces all the time, and sleeping on them, and their eyelids are wet beneath their eyebrows, which is already covered with swelling: and indeed Axirnath appears as a prominence to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the method of its treatment is that the patient puts his head on your shoulder.
Then take a piece of linen cloth, and prepare it with linseed, and make from it a circle of lint according to the size that contains Axirnath all around. Then place it on top and press with your fingers all around, so that the Axirnath may gather together in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a spatula or something similar, making incisions through its breadth, and let no incision be deeper than those made for bloodletting.
Or it is necessary to make the incision all the way through until you reach the Axirnath, for Axirnath proceeds from the incision in many forms according to the shape of white fatty residue.
Therefore, extract it with the cloth which you inserted between your fingers to the outside: and then turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and be careful not to add anything to the incision, lest you come with a spatula to the eye and hurt it.
But if Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the incision, you should add a little bit to the incision with ease until Axirnath proceeds. Then extract it as we said.
Then submerge the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the spot, and bind it with lint.
And there are people among men who scrape salt, and put it into the hollow of the incision, so that what remains of that moisture may melt.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
But if an abscess arises hot in that place, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.
On the modes of Ataxmir for the eye, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft and the eye swells up, so that it is rubbed as it should not be.
Chapter 11.
When hairs added to the eyelids of the eyes are born and grow beyond their natural course under the natural hairs, and become outdated: then they harm the eye, and cause various afflictions, such as constant tears, softening of the eyelids, and opacity, until it becomes a cause of destruction of the eye.
And indeed, ataxy of the eye is cured according to four modes. Or by cauterization with fire. Or with sharp medicine, according to what has been said previously in the chapter on cauterization. Or ataxy of the eye is cured by incision and suture. Or by probes, according to what I shall say.
You should place the head of the sick person on your shoulder. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it turns, that is good. And if not: insert the needle into it, at the point where a filament is from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the filament above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the margin of the eyelid, where hairs are born; and pull the filament upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with the radius.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid, beneath the added hairs, with the spatula slipping from the larger tear duct to the smaller one.
Then pull out the filament and place a small piece of cloth or linen under the eyelid; then mark on top of the eyelid with encaustic, so that it resembles the figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the figure be made according to the size and elevation of the eyelid; for this already differs among individuals.
For some people need to have a large amount removed from the eyelid, according to the amount that is softened by the eyelid.
Then when you find the spatiumili above two lines which you marked, and begin from the larger tear duct to the smaller one, and let there be a gap one near natural hairs, as is the thickness of a radius.
Then insert the forceps into one of the two corners of the skin. Then scrape off the whole thing. Then gather the two lips together with a suture, using a fine needle and subtle wool thread; and wipe away the blood, and make what remains superfluous above the two eyebrows adhere, with certain things that are bound together, if you wish to do so: and if not, don't bother.
Then let the suture and threads remain until three or four days later: after that, take care of it.
And if you wish, leave the wound open without a suture and take care of it in such a way that it dries out and tightens. For the eyelid is raised with respect to the cicatrization of the wound and its gathering: but it will be better in the future.
The ancient ones taught this method of treatment for ataxy.
However, there is concern for the weak one, and it comes from good practice, and there is no fear in this.
And another method exists in Ataxmir as well: and it is, to mark signs on the eyelid in the shape of a figure like that of a myrtle leaf, just as we have narrated.
Then lift the eyelid with three separated or gathered forceps, according to this shape which follows, then cut away what is superfluous with small scissors, according to this shape, with equal cutting.
But if it is not possible for you to hold the forceps and it does not remain equal: then take a needle with thread on it and insert it into the middle of the figure: and insert another thread near the larger tear duct, and a second thread near the smaller one: and gather the threads between your fingers with equality.
Then lift up your hand with equal elevation; and lift up the skin over which is marked out a cut, just as we have narrated.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture; and care for it until it heals.
But if an abscess should occur at your incision or cut, treat it with a poultice and such-like ointments that soothe.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelids also turn inwards, so that their hairs are inverted.
Therefore you should use what we said about the incision, but with a suture more artificial to both. Of the Cure of an Abscess with Canes.
And you should turn the eyelid and cut the cleft that is inside, as I have narrated. Then make two canes or two thin sticks: whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and their width is less than the width of a little finger; and you have already cut them at both ends from both sides where you hold the threads.
Then bring together both canes with subtlety over what protrudes from the eyelid of the eye, and tie the two canes tightly on both sides with a strong binding, and let it be for several days. For a tightened skin will die, and become blackened, and putrid, until it falls off by itself.
If then it is delayed, then cut it with forceps. Then care for it until it heals.
When it has consolidated, the eyelid will rise and the hairs do not cause pain.
And this is the shape of two canes which you will make according to this figure and proportion in length and width.
Here is the translation:
Of the Lifting Up of Hairs Causing Pain in the Eye with a Needle.
Operation is this: take a fine needle and insert into it a thread of fine silk, soft. Then gather together its ends, and tie each with a very fine knot: and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then place another fine thread under it, short, and tie its ends if you wish.
Then place the patient's head in your arm, and let it be near the sun as the operation is to be declared: for this is a subtle or minute operation.
Then insert the needle with Alinxotati into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid until you withdraw it from above a natural hair.
Then pull the hair up to Alinxotati and insert into Alinxotati that hair, if it is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair goes out with Alinxotati into the eyelid with a natural hair.
But if Alinxotati is pulled and the hair does not come out with it: pull Alinxotati down to the lower part, along with the thread that you placed in it, until Alinxotati comes out from above and you see it by the vision of the eye: then indeed pull Alinxotati and the thread; and extract both, and close the eye: and leave it closed for two days or three, until the hair adheres to its place and grows over it with flesh.
But if the hair is short, then either join a long hair to it from the natural hairs and elevate with it: or leave it, until it will elongate after some space, and then elevate it.
Chapter XIII.
When this happens to an eye, it is called Leporina.
And this is by Al-Xatrati, either natural or accidental.
So it therefore occurs from the consolidation of a wound, or a cutting, or a cauterization, and similar things to these.
And the method of treatment for this is that you should open up that consolidation, and separate its edges, and place a linen strip between them, and tie it until it heals.
And it is not necessary to use on its cure things that dry and constrict: for if you do this, Alxatrati will become worse than it was. Rather, use on it things that soften, such as Greek flaxseed: and smear it with a poultice made from the seed of althea mixed with water, and linseed; and anoint it with dyaquilon, which is mixed with some oil, and wrap it in linen and care for it.
And your treasure of treatment is that you should apply yourself with every skill, so that it may not consolidate, according to its original form.
And this operation that we have described is not more than a correction of Alxatrati, so that it does not return to its original form in every way.
On the cure of Alxatrati that occurs on the lower eyelid, and is a roughening or contraction upward to the right and left.
Chapter XIV.
This Alxatrati which occurs below is truly called Alxatrati. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And it becomes accidental from a wound, or a cleft, or a cauterization, and similar things to these.
And the method of treatment for this is that you should take a needle with a double thread, and dip it in flesh, and make it pierce from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh upwards with a needle and cut it with a broad spatula. If then the figure of the eyelid returns as it should be, it is good.
And if not, take a bone and place it in the cleft, and turn with it the eyelid; and make two clefts on the inner side of the eyelid, and let their ends be at the two corners of the incision until they meet and form an angle: until when they are gathered together the figure becomes this figure, and it is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that skin as far as its sharp lower edge below the eyelid. Then gather the separated parts together, or sew them with a thread of wool.
Then take care of them with what we have said, the softening medicines and lysonia, until they are healed.
And if the edge of the cleft, or seam, or cauterization happens to break open: then it is necessary that you make the cleft flat under the eyelashes, just as it happened previously. Then separate the two lips with lysonia, according to what we have said.
And the summary of the speech on curing Alxatrati, whether it is above or below, is that the operation should be carried out according to the preparation made from the form of Alxatrati.
For it is itself a multitude of diversities in form: and a skilled craftsman prepares the material according to whatever means are possible for him, until he makes the figure return to its natural form or nearly so, and the patient himself, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter 15.
¶ On the adhesion of the eyelid to the eye with conjunctiva or cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation occurs in many people, so that the upper eyelid becomes consolidated with the white of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural operations.
Therefore it is necessary that you insert the end of the radius under the eyelid and lift it up: or stretch it with a hook: then cut off the adhesion with a thin spatula, which should not be sharp like the incision of a spatula, but rather obtuse for a little while: so that the sick person is not disturbed during the operation, and the spatula is removed, and the eye is injured by its sharpness: and your incision should be as if you were scraping off that adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the adhesion is completely healed.
Then pour salt water into the eye, washing it with the same water: or let it drip into it from a piece of linen made wet by dissolving gum arabic in water.
Then separate the space between the eyelid and eye with a linen cloth: and place a woolen cloth soaked in egg white on the eye: and after three days use a poultice, and with salves, until it heals.
Of the cutting of the nail and the prominence of flesh tears.
XVI.
Know that a nail is according to two modes. Or it is hairy: and it is similar to a piece of skin, hard, thin. Or it is not hairy, similar to frozen white moisture: which when touched with iron or caught with a hook, is cut off and the hook does not stick in it.
And both kinds do not begin, unless from the larger tear gland, until it gradually flows, until it covers the visible part, and prevents light, and movement of the eye.
And the method of operation in cutting it is: that the patient puts his head in your arm. Then open his eyes and lift up his eyelid with your hand. Then collect the nail with a hook of slight duplication, and stretch it upwards. Here is the translation:
Then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a thin spatula or with small forceps: and let the natural flesh of the tear duct remain, so that it does not happen from its incision a constant flow of tears.
And sometimes it is stretched with a claw alone: or with a thread, as we have said. Then scrape off with a gentle spatula, which has this shape.
And beware, lest the spatula touch the cornified membrane and a tear occur, and the pupil be perforated.
Then after the incision, pour something crushed salt into the eye, or make a mixture from the root of the Zinnia plant, and leave it until another day. Then take care of it with what is needed, until it heals.
What if the claw is not fleshy and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor does a thread stick to it, then this kind of claw is often treated with medicines, and heals as I narrated in the division.
What if you want to cut it, then open the eye of the patient and take a thin, gentle, weak, sharp-edged spatula according to this shape. And scrape the claw off above with smoothness and subtlety. What if you see that it is becoming rarefied and broken, and impressing itself into it; then drip from your hour into the eye from the root of Zinnia, or from the red root, or crushed salt: and cover the eye until another day.
Then repeat the same operation over it, until the whole thing is removed. Unless there is an opposite hot aposteme in the eye; then indeed leave it and cure the aposteme until it heals.
Then repeat the operation over it with scraping, until it heals.
The prominence of the flesh of the eyelash, if it hurts the eye with great harm, should be suspended with a hook and cut from it that part; and do not make the incision too long, lest the flow of tears occur.
Then an ointment should be applied to the eyelash, whether it is red or made from safflower, until it heals.
About the incision of Alguarden and the flesh that grows in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
There are times when in some people's eyes flesh, red and composed or superimposed, grows to cover the pupil, approach it, or stretch over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids towards the outside, and is similar to a rose bush.
And the operation for this also is, that the patient puts his head in your lap. Then open his eyes and gather up the entire flesh with hooks suitable for this purpose; and hold it with a single forceps or instrument.
Then cut the flesh first, until you have finished the whole of it with a cutting instrument. And beware of the eye, so that you do not hurt it during the operation; and let your incision be as one that cuts it, or with a spatula, as we have narrated in the cutting of the fingernail: or with small forceps, by which a sebaceous gland is gathered, according to its shape as will come after this chapter.
When your incision is complete and the entire Alguarden is removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt: or distill red powder into it, and similar substances from corrosive medicines; and place a poultice made of wool and albino sheep's fat over the eye outside to secure it from warm apostema.
But if something remains from the Alguarden and a hot blood dominates you, and you fear hot apostema; then leave the eye alone and care for it with that which settles apostema.
Then proceed over him with an operation until he is healed.
And similarly do this with added flesh which happens in the eye of this kind.
However, it is necessary to let outsiders with weak eyes, whether the weakness comes from a natural or accidental cause, be treated with iron: and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that that member is bearing up under that treatment.
On collecting Sabi from the eye.
Chapter 18.
Sabi are red veins that form over the eye and prevent their own natural function from operating: and they weaken the eye with the passage of days.
Therefore it is necessary for you first to consider whether the eye in which Sabi are present is strong and not troubled by any disease other than Sabi: then collect its Sabi.
And it is, that you should instruct the weak person to place their head on your shoulder.
Then suspend those veins with one or two clamps, according to your prudence: and the clamp should be thin and doubled, like this, or there should be two clamps graded in one body, like this.
Then collect those veins with sharp forceps in a subtle manner, and wash away the blood an hour after an hour, until you see those veins being removed from the eye and resolving: and beware of hurting the eye with the extremities of the splinter.
And let your operation be at noon before the sun, and be steadfast in your operation very much: so that you do not cut unless those veins.
And when you have finished, then dilute into the eye whether it is green or red: so that its keenness may dissolve what remains of the Sabi.
But if it is not possible for you to collect the whole of it in that hour, then apply a poultice to the eye with what soothes the pain of the eye: and leave it for several days until the pain subsides: and guard against hot abscesses: then proceed over it in the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps.
On the reduction of a broken nose.
Chapter 19.
I name the doctor of Arissa's boil, which he treats with a cauter or burning medicine, according to his previous account.
And if it is not healed, then there is no talent in it; except that you should open up the abscess at its birth and extract all the moisture that is in it and pus, until the mouth is uncovered.
When therefore the mouth is uncovered, and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument whose form is this.
And it is called the scraper of the head.
Let it be made of tempered steel, and let the head of it be rounded like an azir, which is pierced with a filing or the fine puncture of a skiver's point; and place it over the corrupted bone.
Then turn the scraper between your fingers, and press your hand upon it for a little while, until you know that the corruption is now scraped away; and do this several times.
Then restore the place with medicines of dried herbs, stiptics.
If therefore the place is consolidated, and flesh grows in it, and the flow of pus ceases: and remains for forty days, and does not renew itself, nor apostematize, nor happen anything else to it: then you will know that it is now healed.
And if not, then there is no talent in it, except to reduce the fistula to a nasal opening, according to this form.
And it is, as you uncover the bone with a file or a sharp medicine; and when the bone is uncovered, then take the trephine according to this form, whose iron extremity is triangular: and its wood part is a thin pyramid extending to the end, as you see.
Then place that on the same eye: and let it be near the tear duct: and stretch out your hand a little from the eye. Then turn your hand back with the scraper, until it pierces the eye and the patient feels it: because through this, he finds air coming out of it when he holds his hand over his nose.
Therefore then restore the place with drying astringent medicines, as I have taught you.
When then the flesh grows and hardens the place: then the matter that was flowing out to the outside returns to the nose: therefore it is less troublesome for the patient.
A chapter on the reduction of a bulging eye.
Chapter 20.
When the eye bulges with its entire contents and does not cause harm or loss of vision: then it is necessary to let the patient sit down: afterwards have someone bleed him: subsequently place poultices on the neck without scarification, but with suction.
Then place over the eye a lotion made from acacia, and aloe, and frankincense, and wax. Then bind the eye above with a poultice and many linten strips.
And the method of linten strips is: to take soft cloths, many, and double each cloth from them over four; make many of them; then place one on top of another, according to the quantity needed by the eye; then bind over them with a strong durable cloth.
And repeat the poultices with suction without scarification.
Then remove the poultices and leave the eye bound day and night.
But if the bandage becomes soft again, then it is necessary to bind it tightly; afterwards remove the bandage after a day and night, as we said.
So if you see the eye has returned to its normal state, that is good; and if not, then repeat the poultice, linten strips, binding, and poultices until it heals.
On cutting the foreskin.
Chapter 21.
When a disruption occurs in the foreskin and it protrudes and proceeds outside of the eyelids like a grain of skin, and disfigures the shape of a man because of that, and one wishes to cut it off: then the operation is done as I shall tell. And it is, by inserting an instrument into the root of the foreskin from the lower part to the upper.
Then insert another instrument with a thread double from the lacrimal part and make it penetrate; and leave the first instrument according to its position.
Then cut the place of the thread, and tie with it the foreskin around the instrument; and tighten it much.
Then withdraw the instrument, and place a woolen cloth soaked in egg white on the eye's white; and leave it until the thread falls with the foreskin.
Then care for the eye with that, because it comforts it, until the wound is healed.
And sometimes the foreskin is tightened all around with a cloth circle, until the eye becomes very prominent.
Then pierce with a sharp awl that reaches the depth of the eye, and allow the moisture to flow into the white part, and let the eye descend and settle; then tighten it until it heals.
On curing the Alconny.
Chapter 22.
This affliction which is called Alconny is not anything except a discharge that gathers in the eye, like water flowing down, and it is not itself.
And the method of procedure in this case is to make the patient sit on a prepared seat or a straight one.
Then take hold of the patient's head with your hands on both sides and move it until you see the discharge reach the lower parts of your eyes. Then he is fixed and does not flow down, and the sight is cleared; and the patient will see things as he used to see them: and if it does not go down below, you know it is water.
If however the preparations for descent of the intestines are not made as we said, then make the patient sit between your hands. Then receive a thin spatula and insert it above the fatty membrane for a little while at the point of connection with the skin in the crown, until pus emerges.
When it emerges, then pour hot water mixed with honey into the eye, or water in which you have already boiled Greek chamomile and honey; afterwards, it should be treated along with the rest of the treatment until healed.
On the cure of water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter 23.
Now we have mentioned the kinds of water for division and what is suitable for piercing, as explained and demonstrated by speech; then take the same thing according to health.
Then it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, square and opposite to the light, near the sun; and bind his healthy eye, and tie him tightly. Then cover his eyelid with your right hand if the water is in the left eye, or with your left hand if it is in the right eye.
Then take your right hand as an almagda if the eye is left; or with your left hand if it is right.
Then place the tip of the almagda near the crown by the thickness of the radius on the apparent white of the small conjunctival eye: then push the almagda with force and you turn with it your hand, until it penetrates into the cornea of the eye; and feel that the almagda has already reached the empty space.
And it is necessary that the distance traveled by the almagda to depth be measured as far as the space from the pupil to the end of the blackness and it is the crown of the eye. For you will see these things in the very pupil of the eye, because of the clarity of the corneal tunic.
Then place the alum up to the place where there is water. Then press it downwards with a gentle motion, one stroke after another.
If then the water descends immediately, then the patient will see that thing which he opens with his sight immediately, and the alum is in his eye.
Then rest a little bit. If then the water has gone down, then remove it secondly, besides what comes out of the alum.
When it is fixed and does not rise: then draw out the alum with ease; and you revolve your hand slowly.
Then dissolve something from clear crystal salt in water, and wash the eye afterwards with it. Then place a whole poultice or a cloth infused with rose oil and the whites of an egg on top of the eye, and bind it to the healthy eye.
But we, and those who are of our time, place a powder of cumin ground with egg white over it.
But if the alum does not obey you at the entrance to the eye because of its hardness, since it is made of human bone, which is very hard: then it is necessary that you take a sponge called Alberid, whose shape is this.
Therefore tie it to that with the same connected thing just enough, and do not leave your hand in the opening; and there is nothing except that you make a path to the alum's subtle place.
Then introduce the alum, according to what we said.
And at the completion of your work, prepare for the patient a decent bedchamber, in which he will sleep on his back at home in a dark room; and forbid him from all movements, and from coughing: and give him food that soothes his nature; and do not let him move his head to the right or left at all.
And let the ligament be according to its arrangement until the third day.
Then dissolve that in that dark house, and try out what you see of it; and make him look at things. Then bring the ligament back until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary for him to do that at the time of healing or immediately after the incision, but rather let someone else do it, because water rises quickly due to a strong and vehement appearance.
But if a warm abscess occurs, then it is necessary to dissolve the eye before the seventh day: and correct it with what calms the abscess, until it is calmed; then release his sight, and place over his face an oral application by which his sight will be regulated under those days, while he remains in that dark house.
Then let him go out from the house gradually and live in his own tents.
And know that in zeal one's pupil is not exempt from seeing sometimes: then he may dare to operate.
And now indeed has reached us one of those from Alayrach who said that in Alayrach a madman had his perforation made through which water flows.
Therefore I have not seen anyone on your earth who has done that: nor have I read it in any of the ancient books: and it is possible that it is new.
And these are forms of kinds from madman, so as to stand over him who does not know them.
Let them be made from proper air: and let their extremities be like this same fine triangular shape, with an acute point.
Chapter XXIV.
¶ On the treatment of a born-in nose.
Sometimes flesh is born in the nose of different kinds added to which there is something that resembles a scorpion with many feet: and from it is the fleshy cancerous, stony, red-colored one: and from it is the soft flesh, not red-colored.
So then in the one which is soft from these meats, not deceitful nor cancerous, you should make the patient sit between your hands opposite the sun, and open his nostrils, and insert a hook into those flesh: then draw them out to the outside, and cut off what you have grasped of them with a sharp and thin scalpel on one side, until you know that all the flesh is already removed.
But if something remains of that which cannot be cut off: then scrape it away with one of the fine instruments with ease, until nothing remains. But if blood dominates you, or a warm abscess occurs: then apply to it as needed: but if it is from malignant abscesses, then hasten by cauterizing him, until the blood ceases and all flesh is removed.
Then a vinegar, water, or wine mixture should be poured into the nose after the incision. But if the nose opens and moisture flows from it all the way to the palate, then you will know that he is already healed.
But if moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that there is flesh that has grown above the bones of the nose, which the instrument cannot reach with incision.
Then it is necessary to insert a linen thread with some thickness and tie many knots in it: and place between every knot the amount of a finger or less: and let the patient, as he is able, pass one end of the thread into his nose with a rod, or whatever is possible for him after he has done so, similar to a string: and draw out his odor, until it reaches the hump, and emerges above his throat.
And many people indeed do this similar to the boy Attomus in schools: and it is an easy thing for one who wishes.
Then place the two ends of the thread, one end which emerges above the nose and the other end which remains inside the nose. Then one ought to sharpen the flesh-cutting saw with the knots that are on the string. Do that until you know that the skin is now tied up with the knots of the thread.
Then draw out the thread; and put it in the nose after wiping away the blood with what you have taken in Egyptian ointment: do that for three days or more, until the ointment has consumed all that remains of the flesh.
Then put a lead tube at the end of the thing into the nose for several days until it heals.
But if it needs to be dried out, use that.
To make a head-purging instrument with which oils and other medicines are poured into the nose, make that out of silver or air: which is similar to a small lamp, open like a shell, and its passage similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube, like a reed.
And the shell-shaped instrument for head-purging should be full and uncovered: with a handle at its end, by which you will hold it when you warm it with oil or whatever substance you wish from sap and flowing things.
Chapter 25.
A swelling called Thelul frequently arises at the end of the nose and grows and increases with days until its appearance becomes foul.
And because of that, it is necessary to cut off all of it at the beginning of its appearance and uproot the whole thing. Then place something over the spot, or a caustic or a burning medicine that will take the place of what was there.
So if the cutting of it is delayed until it grows large, then consider whether it is hard, stony, rough-colored, and has few sensations: then do not touch it with iron, since it is a cancrum-like apostema.
I have often seen many who cut away a swelling of the humors and afterwards a great evil befell him who had it.
And if the swelling is slight to the touch, not of a dark color, and you see that it can be cut in its entirety, then remove the patient, and cut it without fear, without anxiety: and care for the place with what coagulates and constricts, until he is healed.
Chapter 26.
On the stitching of the nose, and lip, and ear.
Know that when a separation of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it is not very useful to perform an operation on it, unless in certain people.
Therefore, when something occurs to someone from that, you should consider whether it is a fresh wound with its own blood; and then gather the edges of the wound with a suture: afterwards, care for it until he is healed.
And if the separation of continuity has already caused the lips to be separated, and each part is healed: then it is necessary that you remove all parts from their apparent skin until they are bled. Then gather the two lips with a suture and tie them, and powder over it dragon's blood and ground olibanum: and place above the powders a piece of diaphanous plaster or some other consolidating plaster: and let him be bound for two days, or three. Then loosen it and change the medication: and let him go until the strings detach on their own. Then care for it with an ointment, until he is healed.
The method of stitching is, that you gather the separation of continuity with needles, as we narrated in the stitching of the belly: or gather the separation with a thread, as I have taught you to know.
Here is the translation:
On the removal of nodes of lips.
Many people indeed have growths on their inner lips that are similar to seeds of herbs, and some of them are smaller, others larger.
Therefore, you should turn the lip and scrape over all its knot, and hang it with a hook, and cut it from every part.
Then fill the place after the incision with powdered alum, until the blood is stopped.
Then anoint it with vinegar, and treat the place where the inflammation is, until the wounds are healed.
Book 28.
About cutting the flesh born on the gum.
There is often born on the gum a piece of flesh which the ancients call an abuluss.
Therefore, you should hang it with a hook, or hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the pus flow, or blood.
Then place powdered alum, or other stiptic and astringent powders, over the place.
And if that flesh returns after it has been cured, for it often returns, then cut it again and cauterize it; for it does not return after cauterization.
Book 29.
About trimming teeth with iron.
Sometimes they gather on the surfaces of teeth from both inside and outside, and between the gums rough, foul, and sometimes turn yellow, green, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul through it.
Therefore, you should make the patient sit between your hands, and his head in the hollow of your arm, and scrape and file each tooth, in which rough surfaces appear to you, like sand: until nothing remains of them, and similarly do this for yellowness, greenness, citrineness, and other similar things, until they are cleansed.
If then what is in them from the beginning of reason is taken away, it is good: and if not, then iterate over them the reason on another day, secondly, and thirdly, until one arrives at the ultimate goal in that which one wishes.
And know that the tooth requires various forms and figures of rasps, many shapes, according to how you prepare your operation: therefore, because the rasp used to remove the tooth from the lower part is different from the one used between teeth, in other forms.
And those shapes of rasps should be prepared by you, which you see.
Chapter 30.
Of the Extraction of Toothache.
It is necessary to treat the tooth from its pain with all skill, and delay in eradicating it. For it is not the case that its place will be filled when it is eradicated: since it is a noble substance: until when there is no excuse for eradicating it, then it is necessary to eradicate it when the weak person is compelled, so that it may be strengthened and certified by you as the tooth that hurts.
For indeed pain often deceives the weak person and makes them think that there is a toothache and eradicates it; then the pain does not cease until the weak person's tooth is eradicated.
For we have already seen this in the operations of bloodletters.
When therefore the tooth that hurts is certified by you itself, then it is necessary that you scarify around the tooth with a spatula, in which there is something of virtue, until the gum is loosened from all parts: then move it with your fingers or with fine forceps little by little, until you shake it.
Then place the large forceps in a good location on it, and the head of the infirm person between your knees: which you have already held well, so that it does not move: then pull out the tooth according to its straightness, so as not to break it.
If therefore it does not emerge, then take some of those instruments and insert it under that part from all sides with ease, and try to move it as you did at first.
But if the tooth is perforated or corroded: then it is necessary to fill that hole with cloth and tie it with the end of a thin thread so that it does not break during your constriction upon it with forceps.
And it is necessary to do this carefully with scarification all around the gum from every side much.
And preserve your strength so that you do not break it and the part remains and returns above the sufferer from the greater evil that is worse than his first pain.
And beware lest you do what ignorant bloodletters do in their haste and boldness towards its removal, beyond what we have narrated.
For they often bring about great infirmities on men, which are more difficult to break and remain all the roots of it or some of them, or to extract it with certain bones of the jawbone: as we have testified many times regarding that.
Then it should be bound after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
But if bleeding occurs from the place (which often happens) then take something from zege and fill it with that in the place; and if not, cauterize it if zege is not convenient for you.
The shapes of the fine forceps with which the tooth is moved at first should be long in their extremities, short in their arms, and thick so that they do not bend when pressed upon the tooth: let them be like what you see as thick armors, until when you tie with them, they do not bite themselves nor bend: short extremities, and let them be made of tempered iron or well-forged steel, straight in their extremities: and on their extremities should be teeth that enter into certain ones and bind with decent constriction, strong.
And when they occur, extremities are formed like the beak of a bird called a heron, and they are strong in their constricting nature.
Chapter 31.
On the removal of teeth, and the extraction of fractured jaw bones.
When there is something left over during the removal of a tooth that breaks, then it is necessary to place a plug or poultice on the spot for one day, or two days, until the spot becomes soft: then introduce into it a gag or forceps: whose ends resemble the beak of a bird called a heron. The form of this is a forceps.
Let the ends of them be made like a file inwardly, or like an alkali-fig.
If therefore it does not yield to you at the exit with these forceps, then it is necessary that you cauterize above the root, and remove all the flesh, and introduce the instrument called a small lever, whose form is this.
Let the short end be thick for a little while: and not be wet, so that it will not break.
If therefore the root emerges through this, it is good: and if not, it is necessary to help with these other instruments whose forms are these.
The form of the first instrument is a triangular end, having some thickness.
The form of the triangular end is subtle.
And with other instruments and tools that have preceded for tooth extraction.
And it is also helped with this instrument that resembles a large hook, of this form, a twisted triangular end, having some thickness, so that it will not break: and let it be not wet.
And know that the instruments of teeth are many: and similarly other instruments do not count, and a wise and skilled craftsman finds for himself an instrument according to what is required by the operation and ailments themselves.
Because from ailments are those to which ancient people did not mention an instrument, due to the diversity of their kinds.
But if the jawbone is broken from the mandible or from other bones of the face, or it has begun to putrefy: then search on top of it in its place with what suits it from the instruments and forceps that I mentioned in extracting roots, and help with a gesture whose form is this.
Let something of thickness be placed in it gradually, so that it is tied or held with the bone, and does not flee or move away, until the bone goes out: and restore the place with medicines suitable for it.
But if there is a small rot in the bone, then scrape it away from its own rot, and care for it until it is healed.
Head XXXII.
On cutting out prominent teeth over others.
When prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and become deformed because of this shape; and especially when this happens to women and girls, namely those with venereal disease.
Therefore you should consider. For if a tooth is born after another tooth and does not fit, or it is possible to cut it off or smooth it down: then pull it out; and if it is connected to another tooth, then cut it off with this tool, whose form is this.
It is similar to a small rasp, and is made from an iron rod, very sharp at the end.
And let your cut be such that you cut it off on many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that another tooth is not disturbed.
But if it is prominent and exposed to its own smoothing: then smooth it with a file from an iron rod, whose form is this.
Let the whole thing be from an iron rod, and its handle have small pointed tips very sharp, like a file with which needles are made: with which the tooth is gradually filed down over many days with ease, so that it does not become disturbed, and falls out; then smooth it off, and finally scrape it with certain rasps.
If there is a tooth that breaks and causes harm to the tongue, then it is necessary to trim it too, until the roughness of the fracture is removed, and smoothed: and not hurt the tongue, nor corrupt speech.
Chapter 33.
On the removal of teeth with gold wires.
When the front teeth are shaken and moved by a blow or fall, and an infirm person cannot hold what they have eaten without it falling out; and you have treated them with stiptic medicines, but the cure has not worked: then there is ingenuity in this, that they should be bound with a gold wire: for silver turns green and putrefies after days: but gold never changes.
And let the thread be of a moderate fineness and thickness, according to the quantity that will fit between the teeth.
And the form of the binding is, that you take a thread and insert double its length between two healthy teeth: then tie it with both ends of the thread between the movable teeth, whether one or more, until you reach the end of the thread to the healthy tooth on the other side. Then continue to tie the texture up to the part where you started: and bind your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it is not at all loosened: and let your constriction be such that you bind the thread around the roots of the teeth, so that it will not come loose.
Then cut off the excess threads with scissors: and gather both ends together, and turn them back into their original shape: and hide them between the healthy tooth and the movable tooth, so that they do not harm the tongue: then let it be left thus bound until it remains.
But if it comes undone or is cut, bind them again with another thread, and it will stay thus for a whole time.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the binding of two healthy teeth and two movable teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one tooth or two returns to its place after a fall, and remains as we narrated, and does not occur unless the craftsman is skillful and experienced.
And sometimes a bone from the shin fits together: and it becomes like the form of a tooth, and is placed in the position where the tooth is rooted and bound, as we said: and it remains and serves with it for a long time.
Chapter 34.
Sometimes this ligament that occurs under the tongue is natural, which accompanies a person from birth, or accidental, caused by a wound that has already been consolidated.
And the operation is to open the patient's mouth in your lap and lift up his tongue: then cut that fibrous ligament from side to side, until the tongue is released from its constriction.
And if there is something hard and knotty in it, and that is from the consolidation of a wound: then throw in it a hook, and find it from side to side, until you cut the ligament, and the knot will be loosed.
And beware lest there be a tear in the deep flesh, and you cut an artery there, and bleeding occurs.
Then apply to the incision with rosewater, or vinegar, or cold water.
Then place a linen pad under the tongue that the patient should wear every night: so that it will not consolidate again.
But if bleeding occurs, then apply powdered alum above the spot. But if the blood overflows, then cauterize the spot with a caustic, which is suitable for it; then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Head Thirty-Five.
Sometimes it happens that a pustule forms under the tongue, resembling a small frog's skin, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function; and it may swell up so much that it fills the mouth.
And the operation for this is to open the patient's mouth before the sun and examine the pustule.
If then you see it is of a dark or black color, hard and insensitive to the touch, so that the patient cannot feel it; then do not touch it, for it is a cancer.
And if it is pale and has moisture, then insert a needle into it, and cut the pustule with a sharp, fine scalpel, and free it from all parts. And if blood flows on you during your hour of operation, then place a piece of crushed zengi above it until the bleeding ceases: afterwards return to your operation and extract the pustule with its contents.
Then wrap it in vinegar and salt: and care for it with a suitable remaining treatment until it heals.
On the cure of a pustule affecting both tonsils.
Head Thirty-Six.
Sometimes swellings occur between the throat's glands, which are similar to those that occur externally and are called two Tonsils; and when you treat them as we mentioned earlier, but they do not heal, then examine.
If it is a hard pustule of dark color and little sensitivity: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and its root is thick: then do not touch it with iron, fearing the flow of blood; rather leave it alone until it matures. And then either pierce it or allow it to burst on its own.
And if it is of white color, round, and the root is fine: then it is necessary to cut it.
And the operation is this: that you consider beforehand the wound of the patient, whether it has cooled completely and quietly or diminished by some diminution. Then, therefore, make the sick person sit before the sun, and his head be in your bosom; and open his mouth, and let the servant take hold between your hands, and press down his tongue with an instrument, whose form this is.
Let it be made of silver or copper, so that it may be as thin as a razor.
When you then press with it the tongue and the wound is shown to you and falls upon it as far as your sight reaches: then take a forceps and insert it into the tonsil and bring out as much of it as you can, except that you remove something from the tunics.
Then cut it with an instrument, whose form follows this: It is assimilated to scissors: yet the extremities of each are bent, so that the opening of each is on a straight edge of the other sharp one: therefore take care that it be made of iron inlaid, or else bronze anointed.
But if this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatula, whose form follows this: Be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other.
And after you have cut out one tonsil, cut out the other according to this same form of incision.
Then after the incision, let the patient gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
But if bleeding occurs to him, let him gargle with water in which the rinds of pomegranates have been boiled: or myrtle leaves and similar things from stiptics, until the flow of blood ceases: then take care of him until he is healed.
And sometimes other abscesses are born in the throat, besides the two tonsils. Therefore, make an incision accordingly as I said about the equal incision of two almond-shaped things.
And I myself have already been treated for the woman with an abscess, which had arisen between her throat and was drawing towards blackness, with few senses, because it had nearly closed off her throat: and the woman was breathing through a narrow opening, and had already forbidden her food, and drinking of water: and she had already reached death's door if she were left for one day or two days.
And the abscess had risen so high that it had discharged two sinuses, until they had opened above the two nostrils.
I therefore hastened and fixed one of those hooks into one of them. Then I pulled it out and drew off a large portion from it.
Then I cut away the part where it was grasped through the nostril.
Then I did to her what had protruded from the other nostril.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; and afterwards I fixed the hook into the abscess: then I cut away from it a part of hers, and only a little blood flowed out: therefore her throat was cleared, and she began to drink water immediately, then took food again.
I therefore did not cease to cut into that abscess many times over a long period of time: and the abscess kept growing in place where I was cutting, until it became too long with that.
I therefore conceived the idea and cauterized the abscess between her throat.
It stood still from then on; afterwards I walked away from there, and did not know what God had done with her after me.
A chapter on the cutting of a uvular abscess.
Chapter 37.
When a phlegm descends to the uvula and abscesses, and is long: then it is called perpendicular: and if it is in the lower part thick and rounded, then it is called a uvula.
When the cure is being done with what we mentioned in division, and the cure does not concur: and you see that the hot abscess has subsided from it, and is subtle: then it is necessary to cut it.
And what is attached to it, rounded, and does not have length, and is bloody, or of a dark or black colour, and has no sensation: then it is necessary to remove the incision from it. For indeed there is fear above the weak one.
Therefore, when you see it as I described by whiteness and its length, make the weak one sit before the sun: and press his tongue with an instrument whose previous narration was given: then insert a hook into it, and pull it down: and cut it with one of the two instruments which I mentioned in cutting both tonsils.
And it is necessary to not cut from it unless that which is added above the natural term without addition.
For if you cut from it more, you will harm the voice and speech.
Then after cutting, use what we narrated in cutting both tonsils: and care for it until it is healed.
But if the weak one is frightened by the cutting: then it is necessary to use cleverness in cauterizing it without fear and trembling.
And the method of cauterization in it is not, unless with sharp water: and it is, as you place the head of the weak one on your shoulder. Then press his tongue with the instrument which we mentioned. Then take from the water which I mentioned to you in the chapter on cauterizing, and fill with it a burnt hoof that is not extinguished, and place it not thick nor thin, and fill into its concavity this instrument, whose shape is this.
Let the extremity of it, where the medicine is placed, be hollow like the concavity of a radiating bone.
And place the instrument with medicine on the wound itself: and let the patient lie on his side, so that saliva flows from his mouth inwardly by means of the medicine, lest anything from it falls into his throat and harms him.
Then hold your hand with medicine. And you shall put it on the wound for a period of half an hour, until you see that it has become clean and the irritation from the medicine has ceased.
And if you wish to take a thread, and wrap it around the end of the radius, and pour medicine into the thread, and insert the radius with the thread into a tube above, until the thread sticks to the wound.
Do that many times, until you achieve what you wish from the cauterization of the wound. Then let it be: for it indeed becomes dry and falls off after three days or four.
But if you need to reapply medicine, apply it again: and after cauterization, wipe the surrounding area of the wound with a thread soaked in butter, and cleanse it with what is left from the medicine; and bathe it with cold water.
And be treated externally with ointments, and internally with gargles, until it heals.
This therefore is the more wholesome method of treatment by incision and longer to be feared.
And sometimes the wound is cured with what is finer than cauterization and incision: it is cured by fumigation, in this way. Take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, sseah, chamomile, and abrotanum, and similar herbs from the plants: and gather all of them together, or some of them in a pot, and immerse them with vinegar, and boil: and let the pot be coated with clay decently: and let there be a hole in the middle of the pot, on which a concave instrument is to be placed according to this method.
Let a silver or copper tube be made; and the end of it, where the stone is situated, be inserted into the mouth of an invalid until the vapor ascends to the throat above the tube, until the uvula becomes much obscured.
Then iterate over it many times, until it is cured.
And beware not to perform this cure at the beginning of an aposteme's outbreak. For it often adds to an aposteme, and you should not do that unless there is a decline of the aposteme's heat.
But if you do not have this instrument, then take a cane and bind the outer bark of an olive tree to its end, so that the mouth of the invalid is not burned; for the bark of the olive tree prevents vapor from burning the mouth: and this is good care with salvation.
Of the Extraction of Spines and Bones from the Throat.
Chapter 38.
Often a bone or spine of a fish sticks to the throat.
Therefore, you must extract what appears to be on top of it, after you have pressed the tongue with an instrument in the sun, and it is declared to you that it is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, you must make the invalid vomit before food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps indeed something attached will come out through vomiting.
Or the invalid may swallow a piece of frog, or a radish, or a piece of dry bread; or he may take a piece of dried seaweed and tie it to a thread, then swallow it. When therefore it arrives at the place where the spines or bone are, and is extracted, then it comes out.
If therefore it does not come out with what we said, then use a leaden instrument according to this shape.
Let it be situated so that the coarse one is a little longer than the radius, and at its end there is a curvature, which should be inserted into his throat with ease; and he himself should have his head raised upwards.
And beware of touching his epiglottis, lest he should cough; and push with him the bone or spine, or insert it himself with his own hand.
But it is truly better for the infirm to insert [it], that is, this: because of his knowledge of the location of the attached thing; and push downward or draw up his hand with the instrument, all according to the quantity prepared for him, until he departs.
Chapter on the Extraction of the Bloodsucker.
Chapter 39.
When the bloodsucker is treated with what I said in the division of treatment with medicines, and does not concur, then consider in the throat of the infirm before the sun or after the sun, having pressed his tongue with the instrument that I told you.
If then your sight falls on the bloodsucker, extract it with a small forceps or with subtle gestures of the fingers.
But if it is not possible with them: then take a hollowed-out cannula and insert it into the throat of the infirm up to near the throat; then insert into the hollow of the cannula a heated iron rod with fire. Do that many times: and let the infirm person refrain from water all day.
Then let him take a full vomit with cold water, and open his mouth in it; and swallow his mouth with it, and not swallow anything from it: and move the water one hour after another with his own hand. For the bloodsucker indeed immediately when it feels the water falls down.
But if it does not depart with what we have narrated, then suffumigate the infirm person with mice or with a feather with the instrument that I told you about in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Do that many times, because it will fall itself.
And the method of operation in suffumigation is, that you take a pot, in which are living apricots with fire: and the pot be covered with a coverer, in which there is a hole: and fit it into that hole the end of the instrument.
Then pour the suffumigation, and let the patient put his mouth into the end of the cannula, and shut his mouth, so that the suffumigation does not escape until you know that the suffumigation has already reached the bleeding point. For the blood-sucker will fall immediately.
Since it does not fall, then repeat the suffumigation many times.
And let the patient be thirsty, and eat salt, and vinegar, and not drink water.
It is necessary therefore that it go out with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood-sucker is drawn out from the throat when it falls over it in sight.
It resembles forceps, as you see: except that it has this curvature which is inserted into the throat. And its end is like the beak of a bird called a stork, in which there is the roughness of a file: when it catches something, it does not let it go entirely.
Of opening Apoemata, and their cutting, and care in general.
Chapter 40.
The species of Apoemata are many, of various kinds, according to the recollection of them, namely one, and one in this book; and they are diverse in their perforation, and cutting from two modes.
One of which is from the species of Apoemata in itself, and because it contains from moistures.
And the second mode is due to the places in which it occurs on the body.
Since an abscess occurs in the head, it is different from an abscess occurring in the anus. And an abscess occurring in a fleshy place is different from one occurring at joints: and each of them has its own judgment based on treatment.
And from abscesses are those which should not be opened unless after the maturation of pus within them and its completion; and from these are those which must be opened while still raw, and do not mature according to its completion.
Like abscesses that are near joints.
For since an abscess when it occurs near a joint and prolongs its presence until what is inside its surroundings has perhaps corrupted the ligaments or nerves of that joint; therefore, it is a more proximate cause of contraction of that member.
Or it is an abscess on the main limb: for if you delay piercing it until it matures, it will harm either that one or through that main limb.
Or it is near the anus, therefore pierce it unripe: and one should not open a raw abscess that has not completed its digestion, except when it is near the anus, so that it does not putrefy deeply and prolong itself to the interior of the anus, and become a fistula, or remain at its end and never be healed.
It is necessary to know the hour of piercing an abscess that has matured according to its completion: and it is at the time of soothing pain, reducing fever, diminishing redness, pulse, and keenness of the abscess: and other signs.
And it is necessary to make the same piercing in a lower part of the abscess and its most prominent elevation: and the perforation should go along the length of the body, if abscesses are in the parts of hands and feet, and places of elbows, tendons, nerves, arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflex.
In those however that are reflected, proceed with piercing according to that member.
When however an abscess is in fleshy places: then it is better to delay piercing it until its digestion is confirmed, as we said according to completion.
Because if you pierce it before that, the course of the virus is prolonged from it, and there is much filth and corruption, and perhaps its lips are hardened, and its depth.
And certain abscesses are pierced according to the breadth of the body in necessity, or according to that which the member requires.
And it is necessary to administer a small piercing for small abscesses, and a wide piercing for large abscesses: or multiple sections according to the similarity of the size of the abscess.
And there are abscesses from which the skin needs to be blisters: and it should be incised when it has become like a cloth, and has reached its term, that is now dead: just as what happens in many cases, such as boils, and bubos.
And there are some that are cut with a section having three angles. And there is one from which it is incised like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Such as an abscess of the groin.
And there are some in which a round section and a lunar section are administered: and similar ones from sections.
That thing which does not have a head, such as mild and superficial abscesses, should be pierced with a superficial or flat piercing.
And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has already collected a great deal of pus, that you pierce it so as not to hasten and draw out all the pus at once, but rather extract some part of it from there. Then apply a poultice to the abscess until another day. Then extract something again from the pus.
Perform that many times according to progression, until it departs; especially if the sick person is weak in vitality, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an old decrepit man: for the spirit of the animal is often resolved from the animal with departure of sickness: and perhaps the sick person dies, and you do not perceive.
Therefore beware this chapter with great caution.
And after your incision, by which you cut away the apostumes, it is necessary that you clean the wound: and take heed. If then the wound of the apostume is small or is a flat incision, then apply linen cloth from flax, or old cotton. And if the apostume is great and there are many holes of perforation, then it is necessary to insert linen into every hole until they reach each other.
And if you have removed a part of the skin from the apostume, or hollowed it out around it: then it is necessary to fill it with old cotton, or as when cloth is sewn together, or cleansed with fine linen without moisture: and bind it tightly until the third day.
Then throw that away, and care for it as is necessary with an ointment, until it heals.
But if bleeding occurs at the time of your operation, then apply cold water and vinegar, after a cloth has been dipped in them: and place it over the place of bleeding many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary that you apply a treatment, and cure, and powders which I narrated in many places of this our book, and from the division.
But if it is winter time, and the location of the apostume is near many nerves: then it is necessary that you mix powders with wine and hot oil: and place them over the places.
And if it is in the summer and the areas are fleshy: then you should put poultices soaked in water and oil, or one with wine and oil, and the whole thing cold. Until the third day, as we said, then you should open the abscess, and wipe it clean, and apply to its cure what is suitable for it, until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally.
According to the true distinction, I have already said about every abscess, how is the way to its cure treated separately by chapter.
Book 41.
Chapter on the Section of Abscesses that occur on the scalp of the head.
Abscesses occur on the scalp of the head, small ones, and they are of the kinds called nodules, which are contained in pouches that are bags for them, as if they were hatched eggs of a hen.
And their species are many.
From these there are fatty ones: and from these there are those that contain moisture similar to mud: and from these those that contain moisture similar to bran and pulse: and those like them, and from these there are those which are hard as stone.
And in the section of all and their extraction there is no fear, so long as in the section it does not make opposition to an artery.
And the operation in the section of these is, that you should experience them with an instrument, whose form comes after this, which is called the Intromittent, until you know what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then cut it off by sectioning according to the length of the superficial section in this form.
And begin with the section from line b to line g. When the moisture is evacuated, then remove the scab that contains that moisture, and do not leave anything from it entirely.
Many times it returns, if something remains from it.
Then dip the cloth in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; and if not, in water and salt: and fill the wound with it, and leave it until another day. For this eats away what remains from the gallbladder.
Then place the cloth on top of it with Egyptian ointment, second and third; and if you need to, do so until you are confident that nothing remains from the gallbladder; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
If the apostema contains a fatty knot, then cut it according to this shape, having the form of a cross: and place the probes between the divisions of the incision, and scrape away everything from all parts: and try your strength in extracting the skin that contains it.
But if an artery makes opposition to you, then do what I will tell you afterwards.
And similarly act on the apostema if it is stony, from the incision and same cure, according to what we said.
And the incision above a stony apostema is easier: because it has little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are certain of these apostemata that are on the head in some people, with which there is no moisture whatsoever.
Which is because I cut open the apostema on an old woman's head, and found a hard, solid, rough, white stone that could not be broken; and if someone were to strike it with a probe, throwing it away, it would wound him.
However, in other apostemata that occur on the head, except for those that occur on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, all their sections should be superficial.
Or make a perforation in them always from the lower part of them, so that the flow of pus may be eased downwards.
Then the care is that which is suitable for them in terms of healing.
On the cutting of abscesses on the neck.
Chapter 42.
Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin; and sometimes they occur elsewhere in the body.
And as for those that occur on the neck, there is one and many, and they are generated from each other; and every abscess of them is within its own tunica, just as it is with knots and abscesses of the head, as we have narrated.
And there are many forms of these abscesses. And some of them are stony: and some contain humours: and some are malignant, which do not obey treatment.
Therefore, if you see a good disposition of the abscess in touch, which is clearly close to the color of the skin, and it moves in every direction, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the muscles, nor to the artery, nor is it deep: you must cut it with a superficial incision from the upper part of the body to the lower part, along the line b. to line g., and scrape it clean from all parts; and stretch out two flaps of skin with a hook or many hooks if you need them, as we said in abscesses of the head, and draw it out gradually.
And be careful not to cut the vein or nerve.
And make sure the knife is not too sharp: so that you do not injure your own hand with the incision, or disturb the patient, and cut what is not necessary.
But if you cut a vein or artery, it prevents you from continuing the operation; then place some powdered eggshell or certain powders that stop bleeding in the wound, and bind the wound tightly, and leave it until the swelling of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes soft; or else it begins to putrefy.
For blood is cut off; so proceed to your operation until you complete it.
Then investigate with your index finger if anything remains from the other small wounds; so cut them and clean them.
But if it is a large vein at the root of the wound: then you should not cut that wound from its root; rather, you should tie it with a double strong thread and let it fall until it drops by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with the old dressing, which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it.
If the wound is cut entirely, then you should bring together the two lips of the wound; and stitch it immediately after you see that there is no longer any excess.
But if you see that there is still excess due to the magnitude of the wound, then it is necessary for you to bend towards cutting off its root and removing it; and administer the stitch as we said.
And what contains moisture from the wounds, pierce it with a superficial puncture, so that you may see its maturation location; and place the puncture below the part of the body that follows, as we said.
Then administer licinia after the puncture, with ointment and similar substances, so that it may corrode what remains from corruption, until you see the wound is now clean; then take care of it with ointment for generated flesh, until it heals.
Chapter 43.
Of the cutting off of the Epiglottis from an abscess occurring within the throat.
The ancients said that this cutting off of the Epiglottis was done, and I have not seen anyone on our earth who has done it; and this is the writing of their speech.
However, in those having synciesis, it is necessary to cut off the Epiglottis; since it does not provide benefit through that; therefore, because all veins and lung are weak.
In those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or throat, or both tonsils, when there is no illness in the canal, it is necessary to use an epiglottotomy, in order to prevent loss from obstruction.
Therefore, when we wish to do it, we should cut the Epiglottis under three or four Epiglottic circles, with a small incision by width, in what is between two circles by quantity, so that the section be in membrane, not in cartilage: and this place is suitable for the section, because it is free from flesh, and the vessels of blood are far away.
If the surgeon is timid, then he should extend the gullet's cut with a hook. Then he should deepen the cut until it reaches the canal: he should remove the blood vessels if he sees anything.
Then he should cut the membrane as we have described: and it is signified above the canal's section from the phlegm that flows out of it when it bursts, and with the vocal cord's division.
And let the wound be left open for a time.
When therefore the hour comes when one fears obstruction, gather together the two lips of the wound's skin, and close it up alone without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, until he is healed.
Says Albucasis. The sum of this discourse that we have narrated, is the explanation, except when they see that one of these abscesses has already blocked the patient's throat: and the patient is raised up to death, and wants to be cut open by his breathing: they go to cutting the Epiglottis, so that the patient may breathe above the place of the wound by some respiration, and be saved from death: and for this reason they have ordered to leave the wound open, until the malice of the disease is consumed, and it takes three days, and almost as much time: then therefore they have ordered to close the wound, and cure it, until he is healed.
And that which I saw by myself is, a servant girl received a knife and sent it with her into her own throat, and cut off with it part of the windpipe.
And I was summoned to cure her, and I found her groaning, as is the groan of one dead.
I therefore removed the wound, and found a little blood that had issued from the wound. I therefore became convinced that she herself had not severed the vein, nor had it been tied off; and air was issuing from the wound.
I therefore hastened and cleaned the wound, and cured it until it was healthy; and nothing happened to the servant except that she spoke hoarsely: and she returned after a few days to her better condition.
Therefore I say: there is no fear in cutting off the epiglottis.
Of the Cutting of a Throat Hernia.
Chapter 44.
This hernia is called a "guttural" and it is a great swelling according to the color of the body, and it occurs much in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either it is natural or accidental.
In the natural one, certainly there is no heredity.
The accidental one however occurs in two ways: one of which is similar to a knot like a bunch. And the other way is similar to an apostema that arises from the constriction of an artery. And there is fear in this case, and one should not make a presumptive incision into it with iron, unless it be small; and you must test it and investigate it with a probe. So if you find it similar to a fatty knot and it is not suspended with any veins: then cut it off, just as one cuts off knots; and extract it along with what contains it from the chest, if it is in the chest: and if not, then thoroughly examine its entire contents. Then care for the wound with what is necessary from the cure, until it heals.
Chapter 45.
Of the division above the nodules.
There are many kinds of nodules, and I have already said all their kinds in a division. And it is necessary to tell here the difference between a nodule and an exitium, since it causes doubt.
I say therefore that when an exitium is, there is heat, and fever, and great pains, until the effusion of superfluity ceases, and putrefaction is complete: then indeed the fevers and heat cease.
When a nodule is present, there is no heat, nor fever, nor pains, and it contains the knots of sifachin, which is their own sack, and it is according to the color of the body: and its inception is like chickpea, and it becomes like a pouch, greater and smaller.
And they are according to two kinds: either fatty or containing moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, according to what I said in a division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a nodule, it is necessary for you to test it and examine it first with an instrument called Intromissum, according to its form as will be shown in the chapter that follows.
And the method of examination for ulcers and all nodules is this: take this instrument and insert it into a moister place which you find in the ulcer; and then turn your fingers with it slowly until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin. Then place your hand last, according to the measurement of the size of the ulcer.
Then withdraw the Intromissum and observe what comes out with it.
If then moisture flowing out is observed, regardless of its color; then cut it off with a superficial section, as I said in the other ulcers.
And if moisture does not issue from the wound after the insertion, then you will know it is fatty. Cut therefore above it with a section having the shape of a cross, as I showed you: and suspend it with hooks, and remove the skin from all parts with ease: and preserve the gauze if possible over it, so that you may take out the healthy part with a knot.
But if the gauze is torn during the operation and it is not possible to take out the healthy part, often such a thing happens, then take out the fragmentary part, until nothing remains of it.
For if something remains from it, either little or much, the Knot will return according to most.
But if it overpowers you and something remains from it: then fill the wound at your completion with some corrosive sharp powders; and tie the wound, and place above it what is seated as a warm abscess, and care for it along with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
So if the Knot is great, then take two lips from it, and care for it along with that which is being fleshed.
But if there is a contrary pulsating or non-pulsating vein to you: then hurry, and fill the place with ground zegy, and leave it tight for two days, or three, until the wound putrefies and the effusion of blood subsides: then return to cutting into what remains from the Knot.
Chapter 46.
About the external instruments for cutting and piercing.
There are three forms of Intromissors, and they are of three kinds.
Of these there is a great one, and from these there is a middle-sized one, and from these there is a small one.
Let them be made of iron with flat surfaces, having four square extremities, so that they may facilitate entry into an abscess.
And these are the forms of Experience, and no, that is, perforating ones: and one of them is called beris, that is, perforator: and there are three species.
One of them is great, and middle-sized, and small.
They come together to be examined through those abscesses, and exits, and fistulas, and boils that are between them from the bones.
And others are made round, smooth, and gentle, like great needles with which the seats are furnished, from citron, that is, copper, or air, or iron, or silver.
And better ones of them are made from citron.
And Experience is also made from black lead, which comes together to be examined through those fistulas, whose concavities are reflections, so that they may reflect with their gentleness on those reflections.
And there are again three species. Because from them there are long ones, from them middle-sized ones, and from them short ones, according to the quantity of the amplitude of the fistula and its constriction.
The form of bandages, and there are many species.
Because from them there are simple ones, that is, those with one curvature: and there are three species as you see, Great, Middle, and Small.
And from them there are bandages blind: and there are three species.
And from them there are bandages having two curvatures, and there are three species: and from them there are bandages having three curvatures, and there are three species: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels, with which knots and abscesses are cut and opened: and there are three species: because from them there is great, middle-sized, and small.
Their extremities with which the cutting is done are sharp, other extremities are not sharp: and they are not placed thus except when with them there is benefit in opening knots at fear of incision of vein or nerve: and so that the sick may be healed through them and find tranquility for a short time from the inflammation which he finds upon opening an abscess.
They are made of air and are similar to Radium, with which alcohol is produced. And at the outermost point there is a hidden spot called Sputamile, where it flows inwardly and outwardly as you wish, just as you see.
The form of Sputamile that is hidden between the fingers at the perforation of abscesses: and the weak do not perceive them. And they are of three kinds, great, middle, and small.
The forms of Ventosarums with which the flow of blood is cut off: and they are of three kinds, great, middle, and small.
They are made from air or citron, rounded, to a length somewhat, just as you see: and they are fine.
And it is necessary that these kinds of Ventosarums are present with you, great and small: so that you may cut off blood through them quickly in necessity, and then when medicine is not present to you.
However, you should not use them for bleeding in every part of the body, and you should only use them in fleshy places: such as arms and legs, and thighs, and breasts, and belly, and groin, and similar parts from fleshy places, moist ones.
And sometimes they are made into small instruments similar to the rinds of figs, according to their shape: with which blood is cut off when it flows from a place of phlebotomy, or at an incision of a vein, or artery: and sometimes they are made into rounded ones according to this form.
Chapter 47.
About the care of human breasts which resemble those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men inflate during sleep at the end of a dream (that is, when they begin to urinate in their sleep) until they resemble those of women: and remain swollen and foul.
Whoever then shuns it, let them cut above the nipples according to the lunar section, following this form from line b to line g. Then they should remove all fatty excrescence. After that, fill the wound with medicinal ointment. Then gather together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and care for it until it is healed.
But if the breast inclines downwards and becomes softened due to its magnitude, as happens with women: then it is necessary to cut along two upper sections of the sides similar in figure to the lunar one, each section containing another at its ends, until a greater line contains a smaller one, following this form from line b to line g. After that, remove the skin which is between the two lips and take away the fatty excrescence, and administer what we have said regarding suturing and powdering, which is necessary for healing, until it is healed.
But if you do not complete the incision as you should, due to the patient's restlessness or excessive bleeding: then it is necessary to fill the wound with a poultice soaked in corrosive ointment, and leave it alone until what remains of fatty excrescence has been consumed. Then care for it until it heals.
About the piercing of an abscess that occurs under the nipple.
Chapter 48.
These abscesses that occur under the nipple are of a type called Strophulae, which contain pus, and there are those that contain humidity.
Those that contain humidity, therefore, should be cut according to the lunar section, following this form from line b to line g. When then all that is in the abscess has been evacuated through pus, then fill it with old poultice and leave it until another day.
Then the swelling should be removed and treated with suitable ointment until it heals.
If the swelling is of the type of strophulae (lumps), then cut above it, as we said in our discussion on equal strophulae.
But if the wound extends to this point so that it discharges pus, then apply a cautery to it, according to what we said earlier.
Chapter 49.
A chapter on the cutting of swellings that occur due to the artery and vein.
When the artery is severed and the skin above it becomes consolidated, it often happens that a swelling occurs; similarly, when the vein is cut, a swelling and inflation occur.
And the signs by which it is known that the swelling and inflation are due to the artery and vein are: because when the swelling is due to the artery, it is long and aggregated in the depths of the body; and when you push on the swelling with your fingers, you feel as if there is a hissing sound.
And that which is due to the vein is rounded in the visible part of the body.
And the cutting above this swelling is a mistake, and especially when it is located under the armpits, groin, neck, and many parts of the body; and it is very great indeed. Therefore, the treatment of this should be abandoned with a razor, and what is also located at the extremities or head should also be abandoned.
So then, above that which arises from the inflation of the artery's opening, make a cut on the skin along its length. Then open the incision with a hook, afterwards the artery: and free it from the tunics until it is exposed.
Then insert a subcutaneous needle under it and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I taught you about the extraction of the two arteries that are found in time.
Then puncture the spot that is between two ligaments with a spatula, until the blood that is entirely within it goes out and the abscess dissolves.
Then apply treatment that produces pus until the ligaments fall away; afterwards care for it with ointments suitable for it, until it heals.
If the abscess is due to a venous section, then you should hold with your hand as much of the abscess as possible with the skin. Then insert the point under the place you held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be a thread twice as long, until you draw it out through another side. Then tie with the abscess and good ligament; according to what I told you about the ligament of the grape, from two parts with two ends of thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert another point with a different thread under the entire abscess at the incision of the point; press and tie your threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in half, until what is inside it comes out; then cut off the excess skin, and let go of what has been tied from it.
Then place on top of it the poultice which you immersed in wine and oil. Then apply treatment that is done with lyciums and ointments, until it heals.
Chapter L.
Of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of Nerves.
Just as an abscess occurs in the Artery and Vein, similarly an abscess occurs in the Nerves: which occurs through blows or through excessive labor, and similar causes; and it happens mostly to those who are in auxiliary locations, or the heel, and in every place where joints move; and this is a serious abscess.
Its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it is found in many dispositions without pain; and when it is tightened with frenzy, the weak one feels like he is in a similar numbness.
And it is not a tumor that has gathered deeply within the body, rather it is beneath the skin, and it moves to every part, and does not move towards the front or before, nor behind to the rear.
Therefore, since what is from them is in joints, it should not be cut with iron. Perhaps indeed a contraction occurs.
However, since what is from them is in the head or in the forehead, make a cut with a sharp instrument. If therefore there is a small tumor, then hold it with forceps and cut it off at the root.
And if it is great, then suspend it with a hook, and scrape it off; afterwards remove it, and sew up the wound with stitches: and care for it until it heals.
Chapter 51.
On the cutting of tumors that occurs in the belly.
Some people are afflicted with these things in their bellies and in other parts of their bodies, which are called Fungalia, by similarity to fungi.
The root of which is fine, and the head of which is thick, and the lips thereof are turned. And there is a small one among them; and there is one that greatly increases.
And indeed I have already seen a man, and in his belly there were two thelils, which were more like fungi than other things: there was no difference between them, white, of small roots, and their lips turned back, and they spread out, and moisture always flowed from them.
I therefore cut them open, and I found one weighing about 10 and a half pounds, and the other about 6 pounds. And the operation in cutting them is, that you should then consider whether the patient is moist, and if the color of the tumor is white, moist, fine root: then make an incision with a broad sharp instrument, and have cauteries present to your fire.
Many times, however, much blood is expelled during the incision. Therefore, if blood overpowers you, then cauterize it at once.
But if you see a weak and fearful patient afraid of the incision with iron, then take a thread made of lead, well prepared, and tie it to his athel with this method which we have mentioned, and leave him for two days.
Then add the leaden binding. Therefore you should not cease to tighten the lead, as often as it may shrink in the swelling, until it is cut off and falls away of its own accord without any effort.
But if the swelling is large and from a root, then there is something to fear and dread in the incision itself, especially when it is in the abdomen.
However, it is possible for you to cut through its middle. Then cauterize it so that it will not recur.
Then take care of it until the wound is healed.
And beware lest you presume to cut into a swelling that is of a dull color, little sensation, foul appearance: for it is a cancerous aposteme; and I will come with a reminder after this.
Fifty-Second Chapter.
Chapter on the Treatment of an Umbilical Hernia.
A hernia of the umbilicus arises from many causes. Or from tears or fissures that are above the belly, and it exits through the allithube or intestine, according to what happens in other ruptures. Or from blood that flows from a vein or artery, according to what has been mentioned beforehand. Or from constriction of the ventricle within it.
If it is due to a tear or fissure, and the exit is through the allithube: then it has a color similar to that of the body, and it is soft, without pain, and appears in different situations. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its location is with that which we have narrated, of a more vehement diversity. When therefore you press it with your fingers, it is hidden: then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound with it: and it is greatly magnified at the entrance to the bath, and a violent effort.
If it is due to humidity, it is soft: then it does not hide when you press it with your hand, nor does it shrink, nor is anything added.
Which if it is due to blood, then with these signs it appears as an abscess towards blackness from the swelling.
But if it is due to natural flesh: then it is a grave abscess, thick, hard, and settles according to one quantity.
If it is due to inflammation, then its touch is soft.
And the operation there is, that you should consider then, whether the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or vein, or inflammation: then it is necessary to refrain from curing it. For in that case there is fear and dread, just as I taught you in the chapter where I said that abscesses due to artery and vein are.
Which if the prominence of the navel is due to intestine or wind: then it is necessary to hasten the sick person, as much as he can hold his breath, and stand standing stretched out. Then signs with a seal or mark on the entire circumference of the navel. Then command him to be laid back between your hands upon his back. Then encircle with a broad spatula around the circumference of the navel above the place which you marked with the seal. Then extend the middle part of the abscess upwards with a large hook. Then bind him around with a strong bandage, or with a cord from a linen cloth firmly knotted, and let the knot be not too loose.
Then open up the middle of the swelling above the ligament. If then you find it already caught by the ligament: then draw out the swelling, and introduce your index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the inner parts of the belly: and if you find a lump, then take it with forceps, and cut off its excess.
But if the artery or vein is against you: then surround it much. Then return to your operation. And take two needles, and introduce into them two strong threads: and introduce the two needles into the surrounding which you made around the swelling in the shape of a cross, making them penetrate.
Then tie the swelling in four places over the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place, until the extended flesh becomes putrid: and falls away by itself: or cut it when it becomes soft and putrid.
Then care for it with whatever is necessary from ointments, until it heals.
But if the protrusion of the navel is from raw flesh or moisture: then it is necessary to drain the swelling, as we said. And draw out the blood or moisture which you find in it.
Then care for it with whatever is necessary to harden the place.
Chapter 53.
§ On the cure of a Crab.
We have already said in the division of the species of Crab, and how it is to be cured with medicines: and beware of it when being cured with iron, so that it does not ulcerate: and we said that Cancer is generated in the womb, and take caution from its cure.
And the ancients said that sometimes Cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible: such as Cancer which is in the breast or thigh, and similar ones, from located members for extracting it entirely: especially when it is beginning to be small.
When it has become old and is large, one should not approach it.
For I was unable to heal anyone from it; nor did I see another before me who had reached it.
And the operation on it, when it is located as we said, is to precede and dissolve the patient from black cholera a few times. Then, if you find bloodletting with a clear filling.
Then prepare the patient with preparation, where it will be located with the operation.
Then place on the cancerous ulcers those that agree with it. Afterwards, hollow out the entire thing from all sides with a skin, according to investigation, until nothing remains of its roots: and let blood flow, and do not cut it quickly, but rather express the places and wash away thick blood entirely with your hand, or with whatever is possible there with instruments.
But if the flow of thick blood makes opposition to you from the incision of an artery or vein: then cauterize the vein until the bleeding is stopped. Then care for it with the remaining cure, until it heals.
Paragraph on the treatment of Dropsy.
Chapter 44. Now we have spoken about the division of types of Dropsy, and how water aggregation occurs: and signs of every type, and its cure with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the type of dropsy known as ascites, and it does not approach the type of tympanitis, nor the type of hydrothorax completely, for that is mortal.
When you are already treated with medicines for this type of Dropsy, tympanitis, and your treatment has not taken effect: then consider. For if the patient has already been weakened by debility, or is suffering from another affliction besides Hydrops, such as coughing, loose bowels, and similar things: then beware of treating it with iron, for there is fear about that.
If however you see a patient of exceptional vigor, nor is he troubled by any ailment except for hydrops alone: and he is neither a child nor an old man: then the manner of operation in him is, that you lift up the patient standing between your hands, and let someone else express his stomach with their hand pressing water downwards into the lower part of the breast.
Then take a thorny spoon, in this shape. Between two sharp and pointed parts, long and having an acute extremity like the thorny spoon. However, there should be something brief and gradual in him, so that you do not pass through with it into the intestine and harm it.
Then consider. For if there is a generation of hydrops from the part of the intestines, then it is necessary that you extend with the incision from the navel as much as three fingers' length, downwards straight on above the breast.
If however the generation of hydrops is due to an illness of the liver, then let your incision be on the left side from the navel, three digits.
And if the generation is due to the spleen, then let the incision be on the right side: and it is not necessary that the incision also be in a place where the patient may lie as they wish, lest excess fluids flow to that weak location.
Then pierce through with an instrument, the whole skin. Then insert into that incision and lift your hand with the thorny spoon between the skin, and scrape, as if you were removing it: and let the amount that is removed be the amount of a fingernail, or around that.
Then pierce and scrape until the thorny spoon reaches the empty place: and it is a place for water. Then withdraw it and insert into the orifice the instrument which has this shape. And it is similar to a cannula: made of silver, or copper, or bronze, thin and smooth: which has a small hole at the lower part of itself, and three holes on its sides, two on one side and one on the other: and the end of it is cut off, according to the manner of cutting a reed, as you see: at the upper end of it there is a band.
When the instrument reaches water, then it immediately falls on top of the instrument; therefore, it drains from the water a middle quantity in an hour.
Because if you drain from it more than necessary, perhaps the sick person may die within an hour due to the resolution of his animal spirit; or a syncope approaches which is close to death.
But drain from it according to the quantity of its power, and according to how the patient's dispositions signify to you through its pulse and good condition.
Then remove the instrument and retain the water.
That is because it is retained immediately due to the skin which retains the opening that is above the siphon; of which I have spoken, so that you may pierce it in that way.
Then repeat the instrument on the next day, if you see the patient can tolerate it; and drain also a small quantity from the water.
Do that for several days without fear, and keep yourself free from error: until there remains little or none of the water.
But if you fear for the patient and let out a great deal of water: then care for him with burial in hot sand, and much sweating in a bath and sun, and wait until he has an appetite: and care for him with dried medicines, until he is healed: and cauterize above the stomach, spleen, and liver, after draining the water: according to what I have said previously.
On the care of infants born with unperforated urethral openings.
Ch 55.
When someone exits from the womb of his mother and his urethral orifice is not perforated, or it is a narrow opening, or it is in an unusual place.
Therefore, one must help by perforating it immediately at birth with a very fine spatula, according to this shape.
Then place a thin metal clamp on the opening and tie it; and keep it so for three days or four.
When he wants to emit urine, let it be removed and he will urinate. Then let him be put back.
And if you do not place a lead weight, it is now possible that the urine which flows onto the area will prevent him from closing.
But he whose opening is constricted is treated with a lead weight, as we said, for many days until it becomes larger.
Those, however, who have an opening in the wrong place, are hurt. This is because the opening is at the end of the foreskin: wherefore he cannot urinate in front, unless he raises his foreskin with his hand to the top. Nor is there generation in him, because sperm cannot reach the womb according to rightness; and it is a very foul affliction.
And the method of treatment for him is, that the patient be placed on his back. Then extend his foreskin with your left hand using great force, and cut off the head of his foreskin from its previous location with a sharp point or a very fine awl, just as you would cut a reed or something similar, so that the middle part may resemble the head of his foreskin: and let the opening fall in the middle as it should.
And beware of blood flow during your operation. For indeed it often happens that way. Therefore, apply to him the substance that stops blood flow and take care of the wound until it heals.
Chapter on the matters that occur in the foreskin and head of the penis, and their corruption, blackening, and sticking together.
Chapter 56.
Such Albarths often occur on the penis, and it is a notable sign of flesh corruption.
And from these others are malignant, and others not malignant.
Therefore one should not let a non-malignant tumor hang suspended with a thin hook, and cut it off until you have cleansed the entire thing. Then place a poultice soaked in Egyptian ointment over it. Then care for the wound with diaphanous ointment until it heals.
What if it is a malignant Albugo, of foul color; then one should apply a cautery to it after making an incision and cutting off its roots.
But if the Albugo is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised captive, and it is a part of the Albugo between the foreskin and its outer part; then one should remove the Albugo that is inside first, until it consolidates, then care for the outside: because when you treat it at the same time, the foreskin does not secure itself but rather protrudes forth.
And now also it occurs in the testicles, with blackening and corruption. Therefore you should cauterize the entire thing that is already blackened, and what wants to be corrupted, or has already been corrupted.
Then apply a poultice over it afterwards with honey that has been mixed with the flour of ground almonds and the leaves of the crumble-leafed herb.
Then care for it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
But if bleeding occurs, then apply a cautery with lunar caustic, in this form.
For the cautery is beneficial in two ways at once, namely for stopping bleeding and healing a wound when it becomes corrupted.
What if the head of the penis is corrupted and destroyed entirely within an hour: then it is necessary to insert a lead tube into the urethra of the phallus so that the sick man may urinate over it.
In the case of an adhesion between the foreskin and the head of the penis, which indeed does not occur unless in one whose foreskin is healthy and no circumcision is required; and sometimes this adhesion occurs due to a wound or aposteme: therefore you should scrape it off with a blunt Spatumili until the ligament breaks and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
If it is difficult to distinguish these things precisely, then you must scrape something off the head of the whip and from the foreskin. What is this because when the foreskin is thin, it may perhaps be pierced quickly on account of its own subtlety.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the whip with a piece of fine linen cloth that has already been soaked in cold water, so that they do not stick together again.
Then treat it with wine and apply it, until it is consolidated.
Chapter 57.
On the purification of infants, and on curing any mistake that may have happened to them.
Circumcision is not a breaking of continuity, like other wounds: yet since it is from our operation, our will, and its use is proper in children, it is necessary that we mark in this operation something better, and a way leading to salvation.
I say therefore that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books: because they do not use it in their laws, and we have learned it only through experience.
This is because I have found that most practitioners and bleeding specialists use purification by circumcision with a scalpel, and with forceps: and they bind the wounded, and tie them up with thread, and make an incision with a nail.
And I myself have already tried all these methods and did not find any better purification with forceps, and tying up with thread.
Because in purification with a scalpel, the skin often escapes many times. Because the skin of the foreskin has two layers: therefore it may happen that the upper layer is cut and the lower layer remains intact: thus one is forced to make another incision, and future pain. And with the purification that is done by tying up, namely, with the finger, which surgeons use, the incision of the end of the male member is not secure: because perhaps it may enter into its opening.
In the process of cleaning with a finger, perhaps iron will escape and ruin your operation: and indeed the skin of children is brief in nature, and many times are born thus, that they do not need cleaning; and I have already seen this.
However, in the process of cleaning with forceps and tying with thread, I have found a good experiment: because the forceps are proportionate to the incision: therefore, since the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below. When therefore you press your hand, the two sharpnesses are proportioned and cut according to the operation at one time; and a compression is made similar in figure, containing the skin of the thread from every part, with which there falls no error whatsoever.
And the proper method of operation is, that you make him realize, especially a boy, if he is one of those who understands for a little while, what you do not do, unless you tie the thread to his own cord only: and leave it until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be happy in every way that is possible to you, because he receives his own understanding. Then make him stand between your prepared hands, and let him not be sitting; and hide the forceps in your sleeve or under your foot, lest the boy see them at all, nor anything from the instruments.
Then insert your hand into his cord and puff on the skin, and pull it up until the head of the cord emerges. Then clean it from any dirt that accumulates in it.
Then tie the marked place with a double thread. After that, tie below it another piece of bandage in the same way. Then hold with your index finger and thumb, and press the place where the lower bandage is tied to retain it well, and cut between the two bandages. Then lift up the skin quickly and pull out the head of the cord. Then let blood flow gradually (for it is better) and place dust on top: and above the dust a cloth which has been spread with the yolk of an egg boiled in rose water, beaten with oil of roses. To recent good flesh: and let it be on top until another day: and care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
However, the shape of the forceps for cleansing is this.
Let the two ends be blunt and let them be bent: so that no branch of a key may go out of them: and let the length of the two sharp parts be equal to the length of two equally proportioned armlets.
However, a mistake occurs in cleansing because perhaps the inner skin altogether or part of it escapes through the incision.
Therefore, you should stretch it forth from your hour with your finger before the inflammation of the place: and cut it according to equality.
What if you cannot hold it with your finger, then pull it out with a hook, and cut it.
But if three days have passed and what remains under the inflamed area is still swollen with apostema, then let that be, until the apostema cools down, and scrape it off easily, and cut it according to how it has been prepared for you: and beware of the head of the stalk. For it will not harm him.
So care for it with what consolidates the wound from the powders which we mentioned in the treatise on powders: and if it is cut above the skin's measure, and goes to the upper parts, it will not harm him either.
So care for it with what we said, until it heals.
Chapter 58.
Of the Extraction of Vryna retained in the Vesicle.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by a concretion formed from stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or new flesh, and similar things to those which we mentioned in the ways of cure in division.
And if it does not heal, and you see the obstruction to be due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary for him to be weakly bent over his knees. Then have him place his feet on his back and stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back, and let the sick person take deep breaths as much as is possible for him. Therefore, he is compelled to bend his neck of the bladder towards the expulsion of the stone to the rear, whereupon the Vrina is absolved.
And if it does not come out with him as we said, and the matter is a pressing one for the sick person: then it is necessary to administer an extraction of it with an instrument which is called a syringe, whose shape is this. It is made of silver, fine, soft, concave like the quill of a bird in subtlety of radius, long in similarity to the palm of one and a half hands: and its fine tube shall be at the head of it.
And the method of extracting Vrina through it is this. You take a double thread, and tie a good knot at its end with a piece of wool or cotton; and you insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: and if there is anything superfluous from the wool, cut it off with scissors; but then insert it gently into the tube like an arrow.
Then anoint the syringe with oil or butter, and a white egg; and make the sick person sit on a seat, and have him lean forward, and take hold of his bladder with wet oils and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the bladder with ease until it reaches the root of the bladder.
Then double it back over itself above from the navel side.
Then push the syringe inside it until it reaches the bladder, and let the sick person feel that it has reached the empty part: and this is not done in this order unless there is a winding passage through which it passes.
Then stretch the thread with wool gradually. The vein will then follow the wool.
Then draw it out and make the vein run through the path of the urine; and continue to do this, until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
On the quality of cathartic cleansing of the bladder with a Clepsydra.
Chapter 59.
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder, or blood congeals in it, or pus is compressed in it, and there is a desire to distill waters and medicines into it: then do it with the instrument which is called Clepsydra, and this is its shape.
For it is mute, that is, closed. And on this instrument there are three openings, two from one side and one from the other, as you see.
And the hollowed-out place where that which propels is situated should be according to the quantity that it needs without addition, until when something is drawn out with it, it attracts humidities: and when propelled, it pushes back far away: just as the Clepsydra does, which pours forth naphta, that is, Greek fire in the battles of Mars.
When therefore you wish to pour out humidities into the bladder, insert the extremity of the Clepsydra into the humidity, and draw it along with that which propels towards the top, for the humidity is drawn into the hollowed-out part of the Clepsydra.
Then insert its extremity into the catheter, according to what we have narrated about the syringe. Then propel the humidity with that which propels it; for indeed that humidity immediately reaches the bladder so that the patient feels it.
The form of a subtle cathartic by which the bladder is cleansed.
Make it from silver or gold alloy: whose head should be higher like a small almond, and under it a recess where a ligament will fall.
Then take the udder of a goat and put in it moisture as you wish to catheterize the udder. Then bind it between two sinewy folds with a strong thread, and warm that moisture a little above the fire.
Then insert the extremity of the catheter into the penis, afterwards bind your hand over the udder with a binding decent enough, until the patient feels that moisture has already reached the udder.
But if there is no udder present, then take a piece of parchment and make from it a circle, and pierce it through its entire roundness. Then insert a strong thread into those holes as they are turned around. Then gather the circle together like a bunch of grapes: after you put into it that which you wish from moist substances, and oils, and waters.
Then bind it into the instrument, and do with it as you did with the udder by expression with your hand, until the moisture reaches the udder.
Chapter 60.
¶ On the Extraction of a Stone.
We have already spoken about the kinds of stones and their treatment with medicines, and said what is different between a stone generated in the kidneys and one in the bladder, and the signs of all this. And we spoke about the stone in which the operation takes place with hand and cutting: and it is the stone generated in the bladder properly: and that which is lodged in the penis: and I am recounting this with manifest explanation and abridgement.
I say therefore, that a stone generated in the bladder, happens most often to boys.
And one of its signs is that urine flows from the bladder like water in its subtlety: and there appears in it white sand, and the patient scratches his penis and labors with it, and often hangs down. Then it is raised and exits with him an anus of many of them.
And the healing of children is easy as long as they follow this until they are fourteen years old. And it is difficult in old men. However, it is midway in young men, since it is between that and that which has a larger stone, healing is easier; and if small, the treatment is conversely with that.
So when we arrive at the cure, it is first necessary to cleanse the sick person with a purgative, which will remove all the feces that are in their intestines; for it sometimes prevents the discovery of the Stone during the investigation.
Then let the sick person be taken with their feet and shaken, and moved downwards to the lower part; so that the Stone may go down to the depth of the bladder or flow out from a high place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be under the tailbone of himself, so that the bladder may become entirely downward-oriented towards the lower part.
Then search for it, and touch it from outside.
If then you feel the Stone in place, then hurry immediately with an incision above it.
And if it does not fall entirely under your touch, then it is necessary that you wipe the pointing finger with oil from the left hand of yours, if the patient is a child; or the middle finger if he is a young man who has reached full growth: and insert it into his anus, and search for the Stone until it stands under your finger; and turn it gradually towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger and push it outwards against the place where you made the incision; and command your assistant to press on the bladder with his hand, and command another assistant to stretch out the testicles with his right hand upwards: and with the other hand, to remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part from where the section is.
Then insert a spathula which cuts, whose form is this. And find it in the area between the anus and testicles, not in the middle, towards the left side of the nativity: and let the incision be above a stone, and your finger be in the anus: and make the incision transverse, so that the outer cut is wide and the inner one narrow, according to the size necessary for the stone's egress from there not to be greater.
Perhaps indeed the finger which is in the anus compresses the Stone at the time of the incision, and it emerges without difficulty.
And know that from the Stone there are angles and edges, which is why its egress is difficult because of that.
And from this it is soft, like a gland, and rounded: and its egress is easy.
So to that which has angles and edges, add a fissure.
But if it does not emerge thus, then you must use force upon it: or tie a cord around it with gentle movement, whose end is like the Moon which ties around the Stone and does not slip away from it: or insert a slender instrument with a curved tip under it.
If however you cannot force it through, then enlarge the opening a little. What if something from blood overcomes you, cut it off with a saw.
If however the Stone is more than one, then push the first large one into the mouth of the bladder. Then cut above it. Then push a small one after that, and similarly do so if there are more than two.
What if the great one is very large, then it is unknown to cut above it with a great incision. Because it happens to the sick person either to die or to suffer from constant dripping of urine: therefore, because the place is not completely consolidated.
True is to administer the evacuation of it until it goes out. Or by instruments with forceps in its fracture, until you extract it piecemeal.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with gallnut, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it tightly, and place upon it a cloth steeped in oil and wine, or rose-oil, and cold water: that a hot apostema may be soothed.
Then place the patient on their back, supporting his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day. When therefore you have loosed it, apply a poultice to the place with water and much oil.
Then care for it with diaphanatic ointment and basilicon ointment, until it is healed.
But if a hot apostema is added to the wound, and it becomes corrupted, and similar things occur; just as if blood should congeal in the stomach, and be prevented from flowing out through urine: and this can be known by the egress of blood with urine. Insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood. For if it remains, it provokes to the corruption of the stomach and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, and water, and salt: and apply to it every kind of remedy that is suitable for its cure, until it is healed.
And it is necessary throughout the entire period of healing that you bind two hipbones together and compress them, because of the medicines that are placed on the place.
And if a stone is small and situated in the urethra, and is fixed there, and prevents urine from flowing out: then care for it with what I narrate before you reach the point of cutting. For many times you will be excused from cutting through this treatment, as I have already proven it.
And it is, that you take a perforator made of iron from Al-Feriq, whose form is, a three-sided extremity, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread and tie it with him to a stick under a stone so that it does not go back into the wound.
Then insert the piercing instrument into the stick with ease, until it reaches the perforator at the stone; and turn the perforator by your hand on the stone gradually: and compress its perforation until you make it penetrate from the other side.
For urine is immediately released.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outer part of the stick. For it breaks apart and emerges with urine, and the sick person is healed.
But if this treatment is not prepared for you, because of something that hinders it from happening: then tie the thread under the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then cut above the stone on the stick between the two ties. Then pull it out. Later loosen the tie and clean up the frozen blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread under the stone, unless it is so that the wound does not go back into the opening: and another tie above, unless it is so that when you loosen the thread after the stone has come out, the skin will return to its place and cover the wound: and because of this it is necessary for you to do that when you tie the thread above, so that you raise the skin upwards, so that it returns to your complement and covers the wound, as we said.
Chapter 61.
Of the Extraction of the Stone in Women.
The Stone is formed in women to a small degree.
But if it happens to any of them that the stone forms, then the cure is difficult and is hindered by many methods.
One of them is: that perhaps a woman is a virgin.
And the second reason is, because you do not find a woman who will uncover herself to a physician when she is chaste, or from those having husbands.
The third reason is, because you do not find a woman well-informed about this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth reason is, because of the distance from the stone's location; wherefore it requires a deep incision, and there is fear.
For if necessity demands that, then it is necessary to take a female physician, well-informed; and one is hardly found.
If you have these, then look for a chaste physician, subtle and present, a well-informed woman obstetrician regarding women's matters, or a woman who is familiar with this art: make her present, and especially instruct her to do everything that you order her to do from the investigation about the stone.
Firstly, that which is, to see if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary for her to insert your finger into her anus, and search for the stone.
If she finds it, then constrict it under her finger, and then instruct the obstetrician to insert her finger into the weak womb, and inquire about the stone, after she puts her left hand on the bladder and compresses it with a good compression.
If she finds the stone, then it is necessary for her to gradually move it from the opening of the bladder to the lower parts with all her strength, until she reaches its root in the hip socket.
Then cut above it at the opposite part of the womb at the root of the hip socket, from whichever side is prepared for her, and feel the stone in that part: and her finger not be removed from the stone, constricting under it: and let the incision be small at first. Then he should insert the rod above that incision.
Then he should insert the rod above that incision. So if he feels a stone, then let him add to the incision as much as is proportionate to the size of the stone that emerges from it.
And know that there are many kinds of stones. From these [kinds] is small and great, smooth and rough, long and rounded with branches.
Know therefore its kinds, so that it may be signified to you through this above what you desire.
So if blood overcomes you, then add to the place a crushed eggshell and hold it for one hour, until the bleeding subsides.
Then return to your operation, until the stone comes out; and make sure to prepare with you from the instruments I mentioned in extracting stones from men, so that you may assist through them in your operation.
What if the flow of blood overcomes you, and you know that the bleeding is from an artery that has been cut: then place powder on top, and bind it with a cloth wrapping decently tight: and do not stop this; and let the stone go, and do not pull it out. Perhaps indeed the weak woman will die. Then care for the wound.
When therefore the sharpness of blood is tempered after days, and the place has become putrid, then return to your operation, until the stone comes out.
Chapter 62.
About cutting above a hydatid water sac.
The water sac is not a thing, except an accumulation of moisture in the white scrotal sac, which is under the containing skin of the scrotum containing the ovum: and it is called hydatid.
And sometimes it is found in a sac of its own, which nature has prepared for it in the part of the ovum, until it rots away; which is another ovum, and it is the skin of the scrotum between the white sac, which we mentioned: and it does not happen unless rarely.
And indeed the generation of this root is from weakness that occurs in the testicles: wherefore it flows to them this material. And sometimes it happens through a blow struck upon the testicles.
And this moisture is having many colors. For either its color inclines towards yellowness, or it is reddish-ruby, or excrementitious-black, or watery-white, and that which is more.
And the signs by which one knows where water gathering is, are these. For if it is in the white scrotum which we mentioned, then the abscess is rounded to a length somewhat like an egg shape: and the testicle does not appear, because moisture contains it from all sides.
And if there is moisture in the scrotal sac proper to itself, then the abscess is rounded with a part like an egg, and because of this man thinks it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white scrotum, then it falls under the sense.
When therefore you wish to know the color of the moisture, then experience the color of the moisture in the abscess with a square linen cloth, whose shape has preceded. Accordingly then, judge about that which is between it, according to what emerges in the track of the linen cloth.
When therefore we come to the cure with iron, then it is necessary that you order the patient to be bled if possible for him, and that you see his body filled.
Then let it be placed on top of his back above a somewhat high surface, and place many cloths underneath it.
Then sit you on the left side of him, and order his servant to sit on the right side of him, who will stretch out his rod to one or both sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part of the navel of the belly.
Here is the translation:
Then pierce a full bladder with a wide piercing and draw out all the water.
Then separate the space between two labial sections with a hook, and stretch the bladder upwards, not touching the skin that surrounds the testicles: and cut the bladder as is possible for you to cut it, either entirely or in fragments, especially the delicate part of it. For if you do not examine it carefully, there is no security in the cut, and the water will flow back.
But if the stone has proceeded externally from its own wound during your operation hour: then when you have finished the section of the bladder, bring it back. Then gather together the two folds of skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then care for it as you would other wounds, until it heals.
But if you find a corrupted stone from other blackness, then it is necessary to bind the vessels that are the suspension, fearing blood flow.
Then cut off the testicle with the suspension and draw out the stone: afterwards care for it as we have said.
But if water is gathered in two parts, then you will know that there are two branches: therefore cut the other part equally as you did in the first.
And if it seems fair to you that it be one operation, then do so: afterwards wipe away the blood. And introduce a soaked cloth into the incisions, or in rose oil: and place another cloth which you had submerged in wine and oil on the outside, and spread it over the two testicles and the belly: and place above it double cloths, and are napkins: and bind them above with a bandage, which has six according to this form.
Then two cloths are taken and moistened, and filled with the woolen thread, according to this similarity: and they will be made into extremities which press out from the cote, or damp fleece: and they will be gathered together with a bandage in the lumbar region of the arms: and one extremity will take over above the anus up to the back, and the second will take over at the part of the chest: and two other extremities on the two lower thighs, and two other extremities on the two groin areas, and the whole bandage will be gathered together in the lumbar region.
And when the ramus is artificially treated with a cauterizer in place of sectioning with iron; and it is to take a cauterizing knife that is very fine and cut along with it the skin of the testicles: and it is ignited, according to what we have narrated: until such time as the white sifac containing water is uncovered; then take the cauterizer in this form.
Are assimilated Greek letters.
Then pierce with it that sifac, and it is ignited, until all moisture comes out.
Then stretch the sifac with a hook, and scrape off with a fine ignited cauterizer, and cut it as much as you can, until you eradicate the entire thing.
And beware of the oil, so that fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is more beneficial, and longer-lasting in preventing bleeding, and better than the operation with cutting.
If, however, something contrary to what is desired occurs in the hour of cutting or cauterizing, such as an apostema that is warm, or bleeding, or something else: then it is necessary to cure the contrary thing with a cure that is suitable for it, according to what has been previously stated.
If, however, the patient is timid and does not expect this operation because of its gruesomeness: then administer a piercing according to what I narrate it: and it is.
When you are certain of it to yourself through what we have said about the signs, that the ramus is watery: then it is necessary for you to make the patient sit on a raised seat.
Then pierce the apostema on its lower part with a broad spatula: and place the perforation according to the length of the body, and make the opening wide, until all the water flows.
Then place a dressing on the wound and bind it, and let the remainder of the water flow; then care for it until the wound is healed.
If however a contradiction occurs with the flow of water at the time you are piercing it; and this is not so except because a white cloth makes a contradiction in the wound's orifice, and prevents the exit of water: then it is necessary to insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument used for extracting water of those suffering from dropsy, whose form precedes: or add this to the operation of the wound briefly.
And know that the water returns and accumulates after six months, or around those. When it accumulates, then it is drained off in the same manner, and the patient passes his days.
Chapter 63.
On the Treatment of Fleshy Tumors.
Know that in the incision for this tumor, there is a leading fear that leads to ruin in many dispositions. Therefore it seems to me that its removal would be beneficial from it.
And I am remembering the procedure for it and the appearance of an abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses occur in bodies from which the testicles are composed; and it is caused by many reasons, namely.
Or from excessive or acute superfluity that flows to the testicles. Or from striking.
And the appearance of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and there is no pain found in it; and it is a serious abscess.
And perhaps it is a stone abscess, whose color is dark and there is no sensation to it.
And sometimes it arises from the constriction of arteries and their inflation, as has been already mentioned before: or from the inflation of veins.
What then arises from the constriction of arteries, is known by the appearance of the abscess, when you compress it with your fingers. And it is not necessary to touch it at all.
That which occurs from the inflation of veins is not scattered about during compression with fingers.
And it is also possible to make an incision above this type and above the other flesh; and it is to excise the skin of the testicles. Then stretch the scrotum upwards and extract it with a white suture; and free the suspensory ligament from the vas deferens, and tie the vas: and cut the suspensory ligament after you have freed it from every part of the scrotum.
If therefore the scrotum is constricted with those natural flesh bands, then it is necessary that you grasp the scrotum and cut it.
And if there is an adhesion between something from the peritoneum, or in that which is between the vas deferens: then it is necessary to free all that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
But if there is a birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary to cut all of that and extract the scrotum, as we said.
When therefore your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine: afterwards care for it with the remaining cure, until it heals.
Chapter 64.
About the care of Testicles which are with Vine.
Vine is a boil wrapped in some wrapping, similar to a boil, with the softening of the testicles; and it causes difficult movement and exercise, and walking.
And in the cure of this illness is by fear, on account of what was previously mentioned.
Truly it behooves us to say how one should operate in that according to how the first ones did.
I say therefore, that it is necessary for you to make the patient sit on an elevated seat. Then push the suspensory ligament of the testicles downwards. Then grasp the skin of the testicles with your fingers and the veins that are near the penis; and let another servant hold them and stretch them with a strong stretching.
Then cut with a broad and sharp spatula section across the urethra in a straight line until the veins are uncovered.
Then strip away from all parts, as we have told you to do in extracting arteries that are in limbs.
Then put a needle into them where there is a thread doubled, and tie it first at the places where the arteries are situated: and tie it again at their last. Then cut them in a straight line through the middle of the body according to its length, and extract what is gathered from corrupted moist substances.
Then care for the wound with the treatment of other wounds in which pus is to be generated, so that the veins that nourish one testicle may fall. For it is not evil through this.
But if the arteries of all veins are injured, then it is necessary to extract the testicles with the veins: so that the sperm may not be deprived of nourishment because of the incision, and waste away or dry up, and not be beneficial with them.
Note: This appears to be a chapter title or heading, specifically Chapter 65 (LXV being the Roman numeral for 65).
Note: This appears to be a paragraph title, rather than a translation of the text itself. The title is "On the Treatment of Intestinal Strangulations".
The exit of this strangulation is from a section that occurs on the expanded sigmoid colon above the belly in the groin part of the intestines.
Therefore, the intestines descend through that rupture to one testicle. And this rupture is either from the sigmoid colon or its extension.
And these two kinds of cases occur from many causes. Or from a blow. Or by falling. By shouting. Or by elevation of a heavy thing and similar ones.
And a sign that is from an extended siphac. It is something that occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not occur suddenly: it is an equal-sized abscess turning towards the depth, because the siphac compresses the intestine.
And its sign is when it occurs from the section of the siphac, because it makes a sudden and intense pain occur at the beginning of itself: and it is a different abscess, appearing near the skin: and that is due to the exit of the intestine and its course to the outside through the siphac.
And sometimes it emerges with the intestine torn: and this is called the Intestinal Ramus and Torn intestine: and sometimes it occurs with wind.
And sometimes it runs into the intestine with dung, and is retained there: and it is with that a harm to the weak: because it makes a bad pain occur, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the cure of this disease's species with iron there is danger: therefore it is necessary to beware of the cases in them.
And the method of the operation is to order the sick person to reduce their intestine by hand to the inner recesses of their own concavity, if it returns. Then he will be raised up over his own neck between your hands: and lift up his legs.
Then stretch the skin that follows the skin upwards and cauterize the skin of the testicles entirely along its length. Then insert into the two lips of the incision two hooks, according to your need to open the incision with them: and the incision should be so that it is possible for an egg to come out from it.
Then scrape away the siphac and what is under the skin of the testicles, until when the white siphac is revealed, hard on all sides: then insert your index finger into it that follows the testicle, in between the white siphac that is under the skin of the egg yolk, and also with the adhesion that is in the posterior part of the yolk.
Then move with your right hand to the inner skin of the testicles. And when this is done, stretch a white linen cloth upwards with your left hand; and raise the egg white with the cloth to the part of the section; and instruct your assistant to extend the egg white upwards: and you dissolve the adhesion that remains behind after the complete solution.
And search with your fingers to see that nothing from the intestine is wrapped around the hard white cloth. But if you find something of it, then push it towards the lower belly.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made from ten threads, and insert it into the back part of the cloth, that is, the tunica which is under the skin of the testicles that follows the section: then cut off the ends that protrude from the thread until there are four threads. Then arrange some of them above the others with a figure that resembles a cross; and tie with them the cloth, about which we have spoken, since it is under the skin of the testicles bound tightly by a ligament, until nothing from the vessels that nourish them can pass through to them: so that no hot abscess may arise from there. And place a second ligament outside the first ligament, two fingers away from it. And after these two ligaments, let go from the cloth, which is under the skin of the testicles, an amount equal in size to a finger; and cut off the remaining part entirely round and remove the yolk.
Then cut in the lower part of the skin of the testicles with a sectioning, from which blood and pus flow: as we previously narrated.
Then apply a linen cloth soaked in oil to the wound and place it there: and apply the ligament which we previously described. And sometimes the white cloth which we mentioned is cauterized after its incision, in order to prevent bleeding. Many times indeed it happens. And let go of the ligament until it falls by itself.
But if its case is delayed, then let it be anointed with hot water; and place on top of it what we said, until it falls.
Then care for the wound along with the rest of the wound treatment, until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
About broken arrows.
In this case, I did not see anyone who dared to attempt its cure with iron.
And indeed the first ones said that it happens just as we have described in the case of the arrow that is stuck with a vine. Which is to tie the bowels below after cutting above with ease; then cut in the middle, and cure finally with what opens it up, until the bowels fall: and care for the wound, as we said, until it heals.
Chapter 67.
About the disruption that occurs in the groin.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we said, and the swelling appears and does not go down to the testicles anything from the intestines: and if it does go down, it is slightly so, and returns to all its hours; but if prolonged with that time, an opening forms in the scrotum, until the intestines descend into the scrotum.
And it happens because of the stretching of the scrotum, which is in the groin, as we said. Which is because the scrotum stretches; then it becomes soft and a swelling forms and appears.
And its cure is with cautery, just as its previous narrative proceeded.
And sometimes it is cured with iron, according to this method: and it is, that the patient lies on his back between your hands. Then cut the place of the ruptured swelling and prominence, by making a section across its width, according to the size of three fingers.
Then tie the abscess and, those which are under the skin, until when the white abscess is uncovered, which is under the skin that follows it.
Then take a probe and place it on top of the prominent part from the abscess, and press it to the depth of the abdomen.
Then take two prominent parts from the abscess and connect one to another with a suture; then pull out the extremity of the probe.
And do not cut off the abscess entirely, nor stretch it out, nor anything else, as I taught you in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
Then care for that wound with a wound cure. When therefore you cut the threads, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is consolidated.
For a suture is contracted, and no additional prominence of rupture occurs.
And cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to the point of salvation.
68
¶ On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in some people, because of which the flesh between them becomes soft and its appearance is spoiled.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is asked to cure it, that he make the patient lie on his back, and cut off the entire soft skin above the natural skin.
Then gather together the two edges with a suture: and if you wish, take off the excess of the soft skin that has been softened away by three or four stitches, and make the stitch firm.
Then cut between the stitches.
Then care for the cure of the remaining wounds until it heals, and the stitches fall away.
69
¶ On Castration.
You should know that castration is excommunicated by our law: and because of this it would be allowed to me not to remember it in my book: and it is not necessary for its remembrance, except for two methods.
One of them is, that it should be in the science of medicine when one is questioned about it: and so he may know its cure, who suffers from it.
And another method is, that we often have need of castrating certain animals for our own benefit through them, such as rams, mares, and male cats, and similar beasts.
I say therefore that castration is done in two ways. Or by cauterization. Or by incision and cutting.
In the one that is done by cauterization, the method of operation is: to make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles become soft and relaxed, and then to remove them with your hand until they dissolve and do not appear under the touch.
In castration by incision and cutting, it is necessary to hold the animal and press with your left hand the skin over its testicles.
Then tie the spermatic cord and cut above all of it in one stroke, until when two testicles emerge: then cut them after you have peeled both, and do not leave anything on top of them except for a small piece of membrane that is over the vas.
And this method of castration is better than the one done by cauterization: because cauterization perhaps leaves something behind in the testicles, so that the animal desires coitus.
Then take care of the wound until it heals.
Head 70.
Chapter on the cure of a Hermaphrodite in two ways.
A hermaphrodite from males is according to two modes. One of them is, because it appears in him that follows a space, or in the skin of the testicles, in which is between two testicles, a figure like that of a woman's vulva, with hair: and sometimes urine flows from what is in the skin of the testicles.
In women, however, there is one kind, and it is the vulva of a woman above her breastbone just like the small testicles of a man, protruding to the outside: one of which is like the penis of a man, and two are like two testicles.
And the treatment of three kinds, two from men and one from women, is: because it is necessary to cut away excess flesh until the impression of these things disappears. Then the care for them should be by the same cure as for other wounds.
However, in the second kind of men's species from which urine emerges, which is on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation nor its complete cure.
Chapter 71.
On the cutting of the tentigines and the flesh protruding in the vulva of women.
A tentigo perhaps is added to the natural parts until it becomes foul and ugly to look at: and sometimes it grows so much in some women that it expands like those of men and reaches as far as copulation.
Therefore, you should grasp the excess tentigo with your hand or a forceps, and cut it away; and do not stop cutting until you reach the depth of the root, so that bleeding does not occur.
Then care for it by the same cure as for wounds, until it heals.
But the flesh that grows is the flesh that is born in the maternal orifice, until it fills it: and perhaps it emerges to the outside according to the likeness of a tail: and because of that some people call the disease "caudata". Therefore, it is necessary to cut it away like we cut away the tentigo, and care for it until it heals.
On the cure of an Alratica, which is an unbroken vulva of a woman.
Chapter 72.
An Alratica is when the vulva of a woman is not perforated or has a small opening. And it is either natural, or accidental.
Accidental is that which preceded the illness; and it indeed occurs either from a natural defect added to the flesh, or if it be subtle and fine, or thick and dense. And it occurs either in the depth of the womb, or in its sides, or on top of it, or below it; and it prevents coitus and impregnation, and childbirth, and perhaps menstruation as well.
And knowledge of that is gained through the midwife's inspection, if a bulge appears nearby.
But if it is not apparent, then search for it with your fingers or with a stick.
But if the bulge is from a subtle membranous sac and is near to both lips: then hasten and tear it apart.
And you should place two wool pads on top of the two lips.
Then place your fingers from both hands simultaneously and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread apart. Then stretch out the two lips with force until the subtle membranous sac is torn and the bulge opens up.
Then take a cloth, soak it in oil, and place it on the spot; and let the woman apply it every day so that the place does not become hardened by something else.
But if the membranous sac is thick and dense, then it is necessary to cut it with a broad, flat leaf similar to a myrtle leaf.
But if the bulge is from a natural growth of flesh, then suspend it with a hook and cut it; and have with you medicines that will stop bleeding without biting, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and the aggregation of turtle shell with egg white.
Then administer a bronze cannula, broad and wide, so that the wound does not quickly become hardened; keep it for several days and then apply linen cloth, and then complete the remaining treatment until healing occurs.
And whenever birth occurs of other flesh in the womb: it is necessary therefore that they be cut according to this manner: while there is no cancerous aposteme, for an aposteme that is cancerous in the womb should not at all be contrary to iron.
Chapter 73.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, Athenail, and red boils on women's vulvae.
Hemorrhoids indeed are the opening of venous orifices, until a great deal of blood continuously flows from them.
Therefore, when hemorrhoids become old, they become hardened: and I said earlier in the division of their kinds and signs: and I will say here which of them receive cure and which do not.
I say therefore that hemorrhoids which are in the maternal orifice and do not appear to the sense: then there is no cure for them with iron.
Those however which are in the maternal orifice and over which sensation falls, are those that can be cured.
It is necessary therefore that you should introduce a woman into a cold house. Then extend Athenail with forceps or with a rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then sprinkle powder on them at the flow of blood from one cut powder without rubbing: like acacia, and dragon's blood, and thyme, and similar things.
Then drive her feet against the wall for an hour. After that, place her in cold water.
What if the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumach, and pomegranate bark, and gall, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice with it on her back.
If therefore the blood is cut off with that, it is good; and if not, make it adhere to her back, and breasts, without scarifying.
Then take wool and immerse it in tartrate sap, or sap of the ox's tongue, or sap of the willow tree, that is, galantine, Pontic wine, and make it stick to the place.
When therefore an abscess has subsided, then care for the place with ointments until it is healed.
The albarrus however is red and resembles the heads of eelgrass, and has a rough appearance.
Therefore you should cut what appears on it, according to what I said in equal parts; and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
About the perforation of the placenta which occurs in the uterus.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the uterus, such as cancer, stony abscess, ulcers, and those that are abraded, or licked away, that is, herpes, or inflammation, or fistulas, or hemorrhoids, or excrescences, or thelids, or hot abscess.
And I have already said all these diseases and their kinds, and the signs of each, and their cures in a division; it is necessary for me to say about hot abscess which occurs in the uterus when it is from abscesses that gather pus, and I wish to know how its opening is made with iron.
Therefore you should consider. Then if the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp with percussion and heat and fever: and you see it becoming red: if sensation falls on it, then do not hurry to open it; and care for it along with it as is fitting for maturation, until the sharpness of the accident subsides.
Then it is necessary to make the woman sit on a seat that has two armrests, and recline or lean back against her back, and gather her feet to the lower part of the abdomen: and let her hips be spread apart, and place her arms under her knees, and bind each one with suitable ligaments to it.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the womb is made.
And it is necessary when you wish to administer this instrument that you place the radio with a deep probe of the woman's womb: so that what enters from the instrument will not be more than the depth of the womb and harm the patient.
But if the instrument is longer than the depth of the womb, then it is necessary to place poults on the cover of the deep part of the womb: so that the entrance of the entire instrument into the deep part of the womb may be prevented. And it is necessary to place a whirlpool which runs in the instrument above the upper side and to hold the instrument and to have the minister turn back the whirlpool, until the depth of the womb is opened.
When therefore the Exitura appears and is touched with the hand and is soft and gentle: then it is necessary to cut off that part at its head with a spatula.
When therefore the discharge of blood is stopped, then it is necessary to put a linen cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil, which has some astringent quality, into the wound and place the cloth and remove the section from the deep part of the womb.
And put something outside over the uterus and over the flank a clean wool cloth soaked in water in which mulberries have boiled.
Then it should be cared for after two days with an ointment that is suitable for this, until it heals.
And when the uterus and wound are washed, so that they are cleansed with water and honey: then with water in which the root of lily has been boiled, or Aristolochia longa: then it should return to the ointment.
Which if the wound is hidden inside the womb, then it is necessary to prevent its cure with iron, rather to treat it with what we said in the division.
Chapter 70.
Doctrines of Childbirth: how midwives should treat living embryos that have not naturally issued according to form.
It is necessary for the midwife to know first of all the natural shape of birth.
Therefore it is a sign of hers, that when you see the woman compressed downwards, and she desires to breathe in the air, and is relieved above her by what is above her in labor, and hastens the exit of the embryo: then you will know that this birth is natural, and its exit is over its head, and with it the umbilical cord is either suspended or hanging from the navel.
When therefore you see these signs, then it is necessary that her belly be compressed so that the embryo may descend quickly.
For when it descends over its head, the umbilical cord also descends with it, and is cleansed from those superfluities by a good cleansing.
But he who is outside of this birth is unnatural, unpraiseworthy.
Because sometimes the fetus emerges over its feet, and the body emerges before its head, and its feet and hands together, or one foot alone: or it emerges with its head and hands: or it emerges with the ventral part: and perhaps it turns over onto its neck, and similar things from unpraiseworthy forms.
It is necessary therefore for the midwife to be prudent, subtle in all these things, and beware of error and deception: and I am showing you every form from them, and how it is shaped in each one, and what it signifies by that, and let it stand over it.
When the fetus emerges over its head in its natural emergence, and it becomes violent over the woman, and labor is difficult for her, and you see that her strength is already weakened: then make her sit on a stool or have women hold her: and fumigate her vulva with foenugraecum decocted, and with moist oils.
Then the midwife should insert a small spoon-like instrument between her fingers and scrape with it along the second joint, and cut off what is in it by moistness; and press on the woman's womb until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be cleansed with a mixture of fenugreek and oil of sycamore.
Then instruct her to compress after cleansing; and make her sneeze when you apply it, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour. For the fetus will immediately emerge.
And if two hands of the fetus emerge first, it is necessary to reduce them with gentle ease. But if it does not obey on entering, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up; afterwards strike the chair against the ground: and the woman should be held so that she may not fall during the shock.
Therefore if the hands do not emerge and the fetus dies: then cut them off and extract any remaining part of the fetus; and bind his hand with a cloth and extract it with ease: for he will come out.
Exit of the embryo onto its feet. When the fetus emerges over its feet, then it is necessary to push them up; afterwards turn the fetus gradually; and finally straighten it.
Then take one of its feet and stretch it out gradually.
When they emerge up to the hips, then instruct her to compress and make her sneeze when you apply it: for it will come out, if God wills.
And if it does not emerge as we have described, then reduce the fetus gradually until you place it in its natural form. For it will come out then with easy delivery.
And if it is hindered with all that we have described: then take from the mixture of aloes, and oil of sycamore, and dissolved gum; and strike the whole in a mortar with good percussion: afterwards bind it to her woman's cloth, and lower part of her abdomen. Then make it sit in warm water until hypothermia occurs.
When you see that the lower parts of his body are already warmed up, then make him take myrrh: and put it on him. When he has held the myrrh for an hour, then make him sit on a stool. Then make him sneeze: and tie his mouth and nose: and press the lower part of his abdomen with easy compression. For fire will immediately come out.
The outcome is that the fetus comes out over the knee and hand. When it comes out in this way, then he should gradually put his hands in. Then the woman will be laid back on her pillow, and her feet will dangle downwards; and she herself should lie on the bed, and wrap up her hands. Then press gently upon her womb. Then remove what is under her feet from the bedclothes, until it is prepared at the lower part. If the fetus does not come out, then take her feet and move them with a violent motion. Then press gently upon what is above hypothermia, until the fetus ascends to the higher parts. Then insert her hands and equalize the fetus gradually; and instruct the woman to compress herself until the fetus comes out.
The outcome is that the fetus hangs sideways from her hands. He should assist in lowering her hands. If she cannot be lowered, then raise the woman and make her walk.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed: and strike her legs with violent shaking.
Then administer the ointment that you prepared from mucus.
If she takes a breath, then make her sit on a stool. Then strive to reduce the hand and form a swelling equal to its natural shape. And cause the woman to cough and instruct her to compress herself until it goes out.
The exit of the fetus above its mother's neck, with arms extended, and its face turned to the back of its mother. The midwife should hold the fetus's hand, then slowly turn it around and equalize it with ease.
When it is equalized, then place over its mouth what we mentioned earlier made from oil and slimy substances.
Then instruct her to move slowly. When you do that, then make her sit on a seat and instruct her to lean towards the right side. Then instruct her to compress herself; and cause her to cough with condensation.
The exit of the prepared fetus onto the side. When it descends to the mother's opening in this way with a cord, then cut the cord with your own nail until it is drained of moisture.
If it is suspended above the face and neck of the fetus, then cut it from the navel, so that it will not remain and die.
Then push the fetus towards the inside until you place it as needed; and instruct the woman to compress herself several times: for it will emerge with a light exit.
The exit of twins, or multiple fetuses. You should know that twins are often born; and sometimes three, and four, are born. However, that is an abnormal case, and it rarely occurs.
Five is a thing outside nature, and they do not live at all; and it contains them, although they multiply, with one cord: and they are separated by the si-fac, distinguishing between them, tied to each of their navels.
And sometimes they go out as one fetus goes out naturally and easily; and they go out in an unworthy manner, just as we have narrated.
But if some of them are difficult during birth and reach what we mentioned in unnatural shapes, then care for them as we have narrated: and let there be a skilled accoucheuse, and do what she does with ease and slowness, and shape him according to every figure with that which is prepared for him from the guiding ingenuity leading to salvation.
A reminder of what forms in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Sometimes one forms in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and many ten: and now it has been verified with me, that a woman aborting has emitted seven, and fifteen others, all formed.
What was done by the measurement of a glorious sage.
Therefore, this whole thing is necessary to be in the knowledge of an obstetrician. Perhaps it will come to resemble that one: let him then compare it with that which is fitting.
Chapter 76.
A treatise on the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you care for a dead fetus as I said in the division of medicine, and it does not go out, and you are forced to use an operation with your hand, then it is necessary that you take into account.
If then the woman is of sound virtue and is not affected by any of the accidents from which one fears destruction over her: then it is necessary that the woman be placed on a bed, upon her back, and let her head be inclined downward, and her legs be raised; and a servant should hold her from both sides, or tie her to the bed, so that her body may not be pulled apart during the extraction of the fetus.
Then the mouth of the uterus should be moistened with oily liquids mixed with high-quality mucus, and fenugreek, and linseed.
Then the midwife should grease her hand with these oils and mucilages; then she should insert it into the womb with ease. Then she should search for a place where she can grasp the hooked part of the fetus and suitable places to it.
Therefore consider then whether the fetus is prepared to descend on its head: then grasp the hooked part with the eyes, or throat, or mouth, or palate of the fetus, or beneath the chin, or at the fork of the neck, or in nearby places of the ribs, and under the hyoid bones.
But if the descent is on its feet, then grasp the sternum and middle ribs.
And it is necessary that she hold the hooked part with her right hand; and place the curvature of it between the fingers of her left hand: and insert it with ease, and grasp the hooked part in one of those places which we mentioned, until it reaches the empty space.
Then she should grasp another hooked part, or a third one if necessary, so that there is equal contraction and it does not incline to the side.
Then it should be extended with equal extension and not only straight ahead, but rather moved to all sides, so that the exit is facilitated: just as happens when a tooth is being extracted.
And it should be softened in the middle of it. And if a part remains caught, then the midwife should grease some fingers with oil and insert them there to release what is caught.
And if a part of the fetus emerges, then the hooked parts should be moved to another higher place; do this until the entire fetus has emerged.
And if a hand emerges before the others and it is not possible to reduce it due to its contraction: then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped over it. Then pull out the ligament until it is completely loose, cut it either at the joint of the foot or at the elbow; and so you should do on the other hand, and on both feet.
But if the head of the foetus is large, or there is a constriction at the exit, or water has collected on its head: then it will be necessary to insert a thorny spatula between the fingers and cut off the head with it, and remove the water; or burst it open with an instrument called Almisdac, whose shape comes with the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter that follows.
Similarly do this if the foetus has a large head by nature, then it will be necessary to cut off the afterbirth; or remove it with Almisdac, as we said. Then take out the bones with forceps.
But if the head emerges and is constricted at the fork; then cut it, until the moisture that is in the chest is drained out.
But if it does not complicate and will not obey at the exit; then cut off the head in pieces, as much as you can.
But if the lower part of the intestines is inflamed or there is dropsy in it; then it will be necessary to perforate it until the moisture flows out of it.
But if the foetus is above its feet, then its extraction is easy and its direction towards the mother's mouth is light.
But if it is constricted at the abdomen or chest; then it will be necessary to pull it out with the cloth you wrapped around your hand: and cut open the abdomen or chest until what is inside them comes out.
But if the remaining limbs are removed and the head returns; then the midwife should insert her left hand. If then the mother's mouth is open, then insert your hand into the depth of the womb and search with it for the head, and pull it out with your fingers up to the mother's mouth: then insert one or two hooks into it, and pull it out with them.
If the womb is constricted due to a hot abscess that has occurred in it; then one should not trouble oneself over it, but rather it is necessary at that time to administer a flow of moist and fatty substances: and apply poultices: and sit in waters that soften and moisten.
If the fetus is lying on its side; then it is possible to equalize it; then what we said should be administered to a living fetus.
If that is not possible, then cut it into pieces and extract it.
And one must not leave anything of the residue entirely within.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what we said for hot abscesses that occur in wombs.
If bleeding occurs, then let it flow into cooling waters, and administer the remaining treatment.
And I myself have already seen a woman whose womb contained a dead fetus; then she became pregnant again with another child in its place, and the other fetus also died. Apostema then occurred to her after a long time in her navel, and it became inflamed until it was opened; and it began to discharge pus.
I was therefore called to her cure, and I treated her for a long time; and the wound did not consolidate.
So I placed over it some poultices of strong attraction, and it came out from its place, that is, the bone. Then a few days passed for her, and another bone came out. So I was amazed on this account, since there is no bone in the womb.
I thought therefore that they were from the bones of a dead fetus.
I therefore examined the wound and extracted many bones from the woman, who was in good physical condition; and now she has lived in this way for a long time, and is discharging pus little by little.
And I did not strengthen this external thing here, except that there is knowledge and aid in it for the skillful healer to use his hand in the cure.
Chapter 77.
Of the shapes of necessary instruments in extracting a fetus.
The shape of the Handle by which the womb is opened.
Here is the form of the Strictor, by which books are equalized; it has two handles at both ends of two wooden bars. However, this handle should be more slender than the Strictor; and in order that it may be so, it is to be made either of ebony or of boxwood.
And the width of each wooden bar should be almost two fingers; and the edge of each of them is almost one finger, and its length is a palm and a half: and in the middle of the two wooden bars are two additions made of the same kind of wood, which have already been firmly attached to both, whose length is a little more than half a palm, and width almost two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are introduced into the maternal opening, so that it may be opened when you revolve both Handles.
Another form similar to that one, more slender and lighter.
It is to be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of forceps. However, at its end it should have two additions, as you see here above; and the length of each addition is almost a palm: and the width of each is two fingers.
When therefore you wish to open the womb with this, then make the woman sit on a bed, with her feet hanging down, and the opening that is between her thighs. Then introduce these two additions joined together into the womb: and you are holding the end of the instrument below between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with forceps, equally according to the quantity which you wish from the opening of the maternal mouth, until it makes what the midwife wills.
The shape of one vertigo is other than that which the ancients said was the driving shape by which the fetus is driven.
The form of Almisdac, whereby the great head is crushed: and it resembles a forceps with teeth at the extremity, as you see.
And sometimes it is made oblong, like a forceps according to this shape, as you see, with teeth like the teeth of a saw, whereby it is cut and crushed.
The shape of a clasp having one spike.
The shape of a clasp having two spikes.
The shape of a spatula having two extremities for cutting off the head.
The shape of two broad spatulas.
These instruments are all exercised and the more their kinds multiply, and they are prepared with an artist, it is quicker for its own operation, and higher among humans, due to its quantity.
Therefore do not despise any of these instruments, but let it be prepared with you. For indeed there is an inexcusable necessity for them.
Chapter 78.
Paragraph: On the Extraction of the Secondines.
When the secondines are retained during childbirth, then it is necessary to hasten the weak one, so that it retains its breathing. Then make her sneeze with a gentle blow: and hold your hand over her mouth, and nostrils. If it comes out through this, it is good.
If not: then take a vessel and perforate a hole in the cover; and place inside it opening herbs of the mother's mouth, such as calamentum, ruta, anethum, camomilla, sseham, cassis lignea, and centaurea. Take all these herbs or some of them and submerge them with water, and put them on fire.
Then place the reed's pith on top of the hole in the vessel's cover, and put another end into the mother's mouth; and let it be until the steam reaches the mother's mouth's dryness.
Then make her cough as we said. For then the Secundina will come out with ease.
But if it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then instruct the midwife to dip her hand in sesame oil or with a high-quality mucilage. Then insert her hand into the womb, and search for the Secundina with it. When she has found it, then take it and pull it out gradually.
But if it is attached deep within the womb, then insert your hand, as we have described, until you find the Secundina, and pull it out gradually according to its straightness, so that the matrix does not fall due to strong attraction. Rather, it should be adjusted with ease to the right and left sides: afterwards add to the amount of attraction. Then it will obey, and be saved, and escape from its attachment.
But if the mother's mouth is constricted, as we have already described: cure it with coughing and by medication of the vessel with herbs.
But if it does not come out with all that we have described, then beware of exhausting yourself over it in the repetition of extractions.
Indeed, it is necessary to tie what comes out towards the mother's mouth from her to the woman's hip. Then poultice her with the balm of four drugs. For it will rot and dissolve that thing after a day, and will come out.
However, when it rots, a bad smell is raised from it to the stomach and head, and harms that sick person. Therefore, suitable fumigations must be administered for it.
However, some ancient people have already experienced the fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated in the case of retained menses and Second-day bleeding.
Let it be made from a glass like alcama, or from zircon: and let the broad end be placed over the fire: and the fumigation be situated above the embers: hold it until that fumigation is consumed: and then repeat another.
Chapter 79.
On the cure of an unperforated hernia.
Many boys are born and their hernias are not perforated, which have already been bandaged by a fine silk cloth. Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that bandage with her finger: and if not, to pierce it with a sharp spatula: and beware the arm, lest she touch him.
Then place over it a woolen cloth soaked in wine and oil. Then cure it with ointments until it heals.
But if you fear that it will swell, then place a leaden cannula in the opening for many days, and remove it when the boy wants to urinate.
And indeed it happens that an obstruction of the hernia also occurs from the consolidation of a wound or aposteme. Therefore, it is necessary to cut open that consolidation, then it should be cured with what we said about the cure and lead.
Here is the translation:
On the cure of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower region are called Nodation and Swelling which occur near the external opening of the anus or in a space of one part, and it is a single fistula or multiple.
When therefore that Nodation becomes old, it opens up, and watery white fluid or subtle pus flows out of it.
And sometimes they are penetrating from these fistulas. Therefore they are known by what comes out from the evacuation and windiness when an infirm person uses evacuation, and perhaps a worm comes out of them.
And they are fistulas from these when they penetrate into space up to the bladder and up to the meatus of the male organ. And they are penetrating from these up to the joint of the hip and up to the knot of the tail.
From this however by which one knows that the fistula is penetrating up to the anus, whether it does or does not penetrate, is to insert your index finger into the anus and to insert a thin thread made of air or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
But if there is twisting in it, then insert into it a thin thread made of lead or a hair from the mane of horses until you feel the thread or hair on your finger.
But if you don't feel it all the way and nothing comes out from the opening through evacuation or windiness or worm as I said: then you will know that it is not penetrating; therefore hasten to the cure.
And when a fistula is penetrating up to the bladder or to the urinary meatus: then its significance is the flow of urine from it and prohibition of this in order that the place may be consolidated with medicines.
If however it is penetrating up to the joint of the hip or to the socket of the pelvis: then its sign is that the thread reaches that far if there is no twisting until the opening; and finding pain in the surrounding part, and that pus always comes out from it, and that medicine does not work in it nor is consolidated with ointment.
And in these fistulas that penetrate everywhere there is no cure at all; and the cure of them is toil and futility for foolish doctors, who are brought low.
But in those that do not penetrate and are not old, there is hope for healing with a probe; as I shall tell you, and I have already tried it: and it is, that the patient lies between your hands on his back: and raise his legs up to above his hips, and his hips should be inclined towards his belly. Then introduce a lead or air probe into the fistula, if there is tortuosity, until you know where it reaches.
But if the patient feels the probe near the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your index finger into the anus.
So if you feel with your finger that the probe has already pierced through on its own and detected, besides what you feel between your finger and the skin or flesh: then you are certain to know that it is penetrating; therefore do not trouble yourself about it, since there is no cure for it, as we have said.
They say, however, that the flesh is healed in some people through medication and that the benefit expected from it comes from this: that you should apply a thin cauterizing iron according to the width of the fistula, as before, and insert the burning iron into the fistula until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat this process twice or three times until you know that all those added and filtered skin tissues are now burnt like the feathers of a bird's wing.
Then treat the area with bandages wrapped in butter until those burnt skin tissues emerge; then treat it with ointments that promote flesh growth and consolidation.
If it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it will never be healed with any other treatment.
And if the abscess breaks and does not reach as far as your finger which is in the anus, and is between it and the abscess a thick membrane of flesh or skin: and you see a fistula on what follows the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you go cutting with the tent [or probe] that is in the fistula, until the incision reaches where the end of the tent comes out, and the tent is released and falls.
Then cleanse those filtered meats which are similar to the bird's wing feathers, so that nothing remains of them.
But if blood overcomes you and separates between you and your surgical procedure so that you must cut away those meats; then what is done is better, and provides quicker relief, either by burning it with fire or by using a sharp medicine.
Because the cautery with fire brings together good conditions, adding to the burning of those added flesh parts, and the drying up of blood, and the desiccation of moisture.
Then take care to wrap it with linen cloths soaked in butter or crushed calves, until the place discharges pus, and those burned flesh parts emerge into the pus.
Then take care to dress the wound with consolidated ointments that generate hard flesh, and there are medicines that have astringency and desiccation.
For when it is restored, then it is already healed: and you do not fear further recurrence.
But if the fistula has reached the depth of the anus and is separated from the surplus of the body: then insert your finger into the anus and explore with it.
So if you feel the probe and between it and that is a membrane of skin or flesh, and it is close to penetration: then there is no operation necessary unless according to the way of faith and hope.
Which is because it is administered according to one of three methods: or as we said, you burn it with a cautery; or you cut it away until you achieve its concavity, so that it may be possible for you to insert linen and effect cure from nearby. And do not proceed much with cutting, lest you cut off a vein containing an artery, and there be on the weak a departure from waste without will. Then care for that which we mentioned.
Perhaps it will heal: or you may stretch it out and cleanse it after you have cut it close to the artery, as we said, with a sponge or with another sharp instrument. Then clean those filtered fleshings that are in the cut, until you can with probing.
Then strive for the restoration of the wound as a whole with the cut, and at the upper opening where it is consolidated: and there will remain an open fistula in the inner part of the anus, and it will be easier on the weak.
And sometimes the fistula suits according to this mode: and it is when you introduce a sponge into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus, about the surface of the body with the skin and the margin of the anus: then take the perforated extremity of the sponge which is like an awl, that is, preparing skins, according to this form. And introduce into it a thread wrapped around five threads, and about the same size. Then introduce the sponge with the thread into the fistula, until you reach its concavity.
If then it is penetrating inside the margin of the anus near by, then withdraw the thread from that opening: thus insert your finger into the anus and withdraw the end of the thread, and gather both ends together: and tie both tightly, and leave it for one or two days: and as much as the thread goes into the flesh, tie it well, until the flesh between the two ends of the thread becomes inflamed and falls off: then care for the wound until it consolidates and heals.
If however the opening of the fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate in whatever way is prepared for you, unless it be very deep. You are not capable of doing that because of your arm, so you should not cut it.
Then do with her as we said, until she is healed.
The shape of the hollow reed-like instrument for cutting a boil, which has an acute curvature very much, and one half is not acute, so that you do not cut what is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter 81.
On the stitching of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows after an incision in them: and on the treatment of their fissures.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways. Either they are inside the anus, similar to carbon soot or prunes, or as if they were grape seeds. And from them are small ones and large ones; and blood flows from them always, and it is one, and there are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are for the most part few in moisture, from which flows yellow water, or a little blood with an uninterrupted flow; and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is, to cause the patient to sit down and strain, until it comes out of the anus, and appears clearly to you. Therefore, hang them up with a hook; or hold them with your own fingernail. Then cut them at their roots.
But if they are not retained by hooks, due to their moisture and softness: then take them with a rough cloth, or with a comb made from doubled wool, and pull them out with your own fingers. Then cut them, and powder some hot powders over them after the cutting, so that they may take the place of a cauterization. Or cauterize them according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterizing. Then take care of them with the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
But if the anus does not obey the urge to evacuate, then fumigate the patient with a poultice that has a small amount of biting quality, so that he may be cleansed by what is in his rectum and quickly obey the urge when he expresses himself.
But if they are external hemorrhoids around the anus, then their case is light and easy; it is as if you were to grasp them with your finger, or grasp them with a forceps, and cut them. Then take care of them with what we said, until they are healed.
And whoever shudders at the cutting with iron, then it is necessary to apply their stitches in this way. Take a wrapped thread and insert it into the needle. Then pull the thread out to the top, and make it pass through the needle into the root of the other side; and wrap the two ends of the thread around the lower part of the needle, so that they are parallel; and tie off the hemorrhoids tightly with a strong twist. Then knot the thread and pull out the needle.
Do this with all the hemorrhoids, except for one; do not tie it off, so that excess blood may flow out from it.
Then place a cloth dipped in rose oil or safflower oil over the anus and apply it to the anus; and instruct the patient to rest. Then let him go, until he passes.
When the hemorrhoids fall out, take care of them with ointments and the rest of the treatment, until they are healed.
About the Treatment of Fissures. For indeed many times fissures occur as a result of constipation and natural constriction.
When they become old and medicine is of no use in them: then it is necessary to rasp with the point of a spathula or with your finger until they are moist and the upper crust that prevents their consolidation is removed. Then take care of them until they are consoled according to what is necessary.
But if they do not congeal: then take them with a more severe reasoning than the first, until they are drained of much blood, and thereafter take care of them until they heal.
Of the cure of those with inverted limbs, and not inverted; and of scrofulous things, and ants.
Chapter 82.
Know that Almirmar is nothing but a round knot according to the color of the body, similar to the head of a hinge; and it occurs throughout the whole body, particularly in the lower parts of the feet and toes: and it happens with pain at walking.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut what is around the head of the hinge, and hold with forceps or a hook, and tear out from its root.
Then take care of that thing; and if you wish, cauterize it as was preceded in its own chapter.
From scrofulous things dried up, there is one small, rough, filtered, rounded prominence above the surface of the body. And it often occurs on the hands of boys.
And its cure is that you stretch out the scrofulous thing, and cut it off: or tie it with a silk thread: or with a hair, until it falls. And if you wish, cauterize it as was mentioned before with fire or with sharp medicine: and now the scrofulous things will be eradicated, both inverted and not inverted, with the instrument that I shall say.
Ants are also a small, filtered, coarse prominence above the surface of the body, going deep into it very much: and when cold finds it, one feels a sensation similar to ant bites, and it occurs throughout the whole body: and most of it occurs in the hands.
And its cure is that you take a reed from a goose's feather, or a strong hawk's feather: and place that reed above the Ants, until it holds a circle of the reed parts. Then revolve your hand with a catheter until you cut out what is in the circumference of a formica; and place it in the deep flesh, and root out the formica from its root.
And if you wish, do that with a bronze or iron catheter, according to this shape.
Sit the catheter above, drawing out the swollen swelling, so that it may be eased over the grasped finger and its own revolution.
And if you wish, cauterize the formica according to what was said previously in the cauterization of Athelil in the chapter on cauterizing.
Chapter 83.
¶ On the forms of instruments which are administered for enemas in illnesses of the anus, and for dissolution of the bowels, and for colic.
Sometimes an enema is made from silver, or from golden brass, or from woven air, or hammered metal.
And sometimes it is made from these instruments, small and great, according to those in which they are administered.
Therefore what is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and for those whose anus is weak or painful, so should their enemas.
Large Enema.
The tube of it, that is, the upper part where the womb is tied, should be broad according to this form; and there should be a distinction so that the womb may be tied as you see, and the lower extremity which is inserted into the anus, should be mute, that is, not open, gentle, very, drawing towards subtlety: and on one side of it should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays, and a little thick, and it should be so that the womb in which medicines are placed from animal bladder or from sheep's parchment, which is according to the form of a small asphodel: whose root is one palm.
And it will be perforated with many holes as it is turned over, and let there be space which is between every hole the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes a strong thread of raw thread, which is made from ten threads, or roughly that, and tie it with him like an asafetida. When it is placed in the uterus, let it be tied at the head of the catheter with two distinguishing constrictions by a strong constriction. Then cleanse with him.
And this is the form of the catheter depicted here, and of the holes.
However, the quality of cleansing with it is: that you fill the uterus or bladder from medicine, which is warmed according to the tolerance of the patient; and beware lest it be very hot or very cold.
Then the patient will be raised up over his own back, and lift his legs to the upper parts: and place beneath him an inthan, that is, a skin or linen cloth, on which men lie.
Then grease the extremity of the catheter with oil, or with the white of an egg, or with fenugreek mucilage, or similar things. Then insert it into the anus with ease. Then let the attendant take hold of the catheter with both his hands simultaneously, and express it with vehemence, until all that is in the catheter is evacuated into the intestine.
Then draw out the catheter, and let the patient lift his legs to the wall.
Which if medicine urges him towards departure, then hold on as long as possible. And if he sleeps with it all night, it is more a final aid in helping.
But if you cleanse him with dysenteric troubles and his departure is hastened: then repeat the catheter until he is healed.
Which if there are hemorrhoids or painful ulcers in the anus: then let the catheter be very fine, soft, from those catheters with which children are cleansed.
And this is the shape of a subtle enema above which is tight skin.
Chapter 44 of the Head.
Now I have spoken in the division of wound treatment, as it was fitting for the book, and I will speak here about the treatment of these wounds with hand and with medicines according to what is needed.
I say that wounds are differentiated according to the cause by which they are made and according to the place upon which the wound falls.
Therefore, the things by which wounds are made many times are like a thrown stone: or cutting with a sword, or knife; or striking with a lance, or wood, or arrow; and similar to these from many other things.
However, wounds that are made according to the places of the body are like a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the belly, or the hip: and similar from these members.
And I am recounting the treatments of some wounds, in order to place a reason and rule over the remaining wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, since the recollection of compositors will come at the beginning of chapter three.
I say therefore. I say therefore. When a simple wound occurs in the head and there is no bone fracture: consider then if it was caused by a thrown stone or similar thing, and only broke the skin: and it is a big wound, and you fear a bad outcome from hot apostemes: then hurry and perform phlebotomy of the cephalic vein immediately: and do not delay it: and take out some blood from him according to the quantity of his virtues: if nothing prevents phlebotomy, especially if the blood that exits from the wound is little. And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded area.
And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded area. And let the sick person beware of filling, and wine, and coarse foods.
But if something prevents digestion, then let it be reduced from food, and not approach flesh or wine.
And place over the wound if a warm abscess occurs to him, one infused in rose oil alone, or with wine that has purgative properties.
But if you are sure of the warm abscess, then place over the wound, if it is fresh with its own blood, and has not changed air, the powder that I will tell you shortly: and if it has already changed air, then place over it certain ointments until it heals.
But if the wound is large, or it is from a cut with a sword, and similar: and its lips do not stick together with flies, then gather them up with stitching, according to what I will tell you about the stitches of abdominal wounds.
But if the wound is already detected by bone and hangs down, and there is no holding it back except with a small suspensory: then cut into it. Then care for the wound with medicines and restore hard flesh to its place under the cut skin. And instruct the sick person to eat foods that are nourishing, such as heads and cooked wheat, until their pulse is normal; and similar things.
And if you find putrefaction in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut out the entire putrefaction and throw it away. Then care for it afterwards.
But if there is an artery or vein in these wounds from which blood flows and it does not cease through medications, then probe the artery. So if you find it unbroken, then cut it with a saw or tie it. And if necessity demands when what we said does not help, then cauterize it until the blood is cut off.
If these wounds are small and simple, then the remedy for them is easy and light: thus you should cover them with this powder, because it consolidates them before air changes them.
The Method of the Powder of Flesh. Recipe one part of galangal, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished lime: grind the whole well, and sift it: and fill the wound with this powder, and bind it tightly until it adheres well on top, and coagulates with blood.
Then bind the wound above with linen, and leave it, nor loosen it until it remains so, lest it become inflamed. For the medicine is not removed from it until it is healed.
And sometimes the lime alone accomplishes this, when you do not have galangal and dragon's blood available; and dragon's blood also performs the same operation in many large wounds, when it is put on top of them and bound, and they are recent with their own blood, which has not been changed by air.
But if the air has already altered them in some way, especially when it is summer time, then there is no intention of using this powder: therefore care for it with what we have said, so that you put some digested ointments on top of them: or put on top of them poultices made from barley flour mixed with water and honey, until they discharge pus. Then care for the rest of the cure, until they are healed.
But if a fracture occurs with the wound in bone and it is small, then remove that with Gestes: and I will now say the cure for head fractures in what is to come.
The Wounds of the Neck.
If a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference between it and a head wound in terms of treatment, when it is simple.
If however the nerve of the neck has already been cut or the artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no skill in treating it except by means of a strong poultice, such as that made with zinar, and zegi, and similar things. Because nerves are hurtful and contract them.
And you should not place anything cold whatsoever over the wound: because the substance of nerves is cold and its continuity is with the brain, which is higher than the limbs. And that which cures it should be gentle medicines, such as lime washed with sweet water infused with oil, or with rose oil, and tuthia, when it is also washed with sweet water; and other mineral stones, according to this method, and moist ointments.
If however the wound is great, then apply a suture; or bind its lips with lint. Then care for it until it heals.
If the wound has a deepness or happens to have a cavity on the lower part of it, in which pus has already accumulated, then make an incision in it in a more depressed location.
But if the artery has already been cut in the wound and its flow of blood has followed; then stop it, or cut it off, and tie it up: or cauterize it, if necessity demands it.
But if the vertebra of the throat has already been split, or all of it, and the ligaments are saved: then bring together the edges of the skin with a suture over the reed of the throat, and do not touch the throat itself, but rather level it out and restore it to its natural shape. Then bind it with a bandage fittingly and leave it for several days. Then care for it with ointments that have astringency and drying properties until it heals.
But if the wound has already made an impression in the bone; then explore it. Then, if there are fragments of bone within it, remove all of them, or as many as you can: and what is not prepared, leave it until the wound putrefies and the discharge separates and ceases.
If the wound is recent, then apply powdered alum on top of it, which I have mentioned. But if a bone seems to be showing in the wound and a fistula forms; then treat it with what I have mentioned in its own chapter.
About a wound on the spatulas.
If there is a piercing by a lance or knife: and you see its depth; then consider it. So if a discharge of pus comes out from the wound, when the sick person pants weakly because of it; then you will know that the wound is mortal.
But if it's not deep and is recent with its own blood: then don't put powder on it at the first hour nor bind it, so that the blood isn't retained in its depth and returns to the heart and kills the sick person; but put a attracting ointment on it and dissolve it twice a day.
But if you don't have ointment, then put an old linen cloth into the opening of the wound and let it suck up what comes out of it from moistures: and make the sick person sleep on top of the wound, so that what accumulates in it may flow away.
But if already three days or more have passed since the wound and the sick person does not experience convulsion, nor bad palpitations of the heart, nor constriction in their breathing, and you see his remaining conditions are good: then you will know that the wound is sound. So therefore treat it with lyciums and other remedies until he is healed.
But if his healing is delayed and an opening always appears, then you will know that already a fistula has formed. So therefore treat it as mentioned in its own chapter.
And if the wound is from an incision by a sword or knife and is simple on the surface of the chest or back; then treat it with what preceded for suturing, if it's great: or with powder, if it's small.
If however he has already made an impression on a bone and pieces have fallen off from it: then examine the wound and hasten to remove those pieces if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them alone until the wound putsrefies, for an extraction would only make things worse.
However, as for the remaining accidents of wounds on other limbs, the judgment in their treatment is that which we mentioned.
¶ On Wounds of the Belly and Exit of Intestines and Their Issues.
The disruption that occurs in the belly is great, moderate, and small.
Therefore, from a great disruption, sometimes the intestine issues forth or multiple intestines issue forth.
Therefore, their introduction and subsequent stitching are more violent and difficult.
And a small disruption also becomes difficult in another way. Therefore, it follows that their reduction becomes more difficult if you do not hasten to introduce them into their place immediately, since they are inflated, opened up, and enlarged; therefore, their entrance becomes difficult.
Therefore, for this reason, a moderate disruption is better than a great one: because when it occurs, the reduction of the intestine does not become difficult, as it does in these two forms.
Know that the stitching of the belly is done in four ways.
Two common stitches meet in the stitching of the belly and in the stitching of other wounds of the body; and two other stitches specifically communicate with each other in relation to other wounds. However, they are more proper for the stitching of the belly; and I will tell you each one with its explanation and declaration.
I say therefore, because when the wound is small and something from the intestine issues forth from it, and it becomes difficult to reduce it; then that is due to one of two methods. Because of the shortage of disruption, as we said. Or because there is inflation in the intestine due to cold air.
So when this is the case, then you should heat it so that you would immerse a sponge or a wet cloth in warm water only. Or you should boil the following in water: squinat, and cyperus, and asafoetida, and cypress with it, until the inflation is resolved.
Sometimes that wine does which has bitterness: and it is better than water alone for resolving an inflation.
When therefore you see the inflation already resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which has been cooked asafoetida or mulberry. For through that it is alleviated its entry with a small amount.
But if its return is hindered after this treatment, then find a little disruption with the instrument with which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first cure is better when prepared than cutting: and there is no constraint to cut after necessity and deficiency of the instrument.
Be one part of it which is twisted, sharp, and the other part not sharp, and its tip should not be as fine as a sputum, but rather blunt for a little while; and that is what resembles a caul, just as you see.
So when the wound is enlarged and enters the intestine, then it is necessary that it be reduced to its natural shape in its own place, if possible above it; for it is better.
When however the disruption is wide in the lower part of the belly: then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back and place their legs higher than their head. And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place their head and chest higher than their lower parts.
And similarly if there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the belly, then place your intention and consideration always so that the part where the wound is will be higher than the other part.
And thus it is necessary to administer that in large wounds and in middle-sized wounds.
However, in small wounds, place it according to how it is prepared for you.
Then have a pious servant present between your hands, who holds the entire wound with his hand and gathers up its lips. Then scrape out from it something for the one who is to follow with a suture, and this is the common method of a single suture.
And it is, that you take an awl or the number of awls according to the size of the wound's width. Then release a quantity of the awl from the outer edge of the wound, namely, the width of the ring finger, that is, the doctor's; and fix one awl on one side, except you insert it into the skin on both sides with two threads that are under the skin from within, until you make it penetrate from the other part, and now you have gathered together the two ends of the skin and the two ends of the sifac, and there are four orders.
Then tie with double thread around the awl several times from both sides simultaneously, until the two lips of the wound are gathered together in a decent gathering.
Then release the thickness of the finger as well, and fix another awl in them; afterwards tie it with thread, just as you did with the first awl. Therefore do not cease to do that with him who supplies your needs from the awls, until you complete the constriction of the entire wound.
And the awls should be of medium size between thickness and thinness: because very fine awls quickly pierce flesh: and thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin: therefore they must be of medium thickness and coarseness.
And it is not necessary for the awl to be placed in the two ends of the skin that are very close: lest the flesh be quickly pierced and the wound be opened before its own consolidation, and also lengthen with the suture, so that the wound may not be prevented from consolidating.
Then cut off the ends of the stitches, so that they do not hurt the patient while he is sleeping: and place on them poultices from cloths on every side, which hold the ends of the stitches: and let them be, until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this kind of stitching with pins is indeed more suitable for small wounds. Because one, or two, or about that many needles suffice for their stitches.
But the second stitch is common, that you gather with the first stitch four ends: two of skin and two of silk in one place, with a needle where there is a thread wrapped evenly in subtlety and thickness.
Then, when you have penetrated with the needle these four ends, draw back the needle from the part where you began, so that the thread falls back from the upper part of the wound: so that it is a stitch, like a stitch in cloth which binds cloth together, and place between every stitch the thickness of a small finger.
People know this kind of stitch.
And with this stitch I treated the wound that had happened to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife and had a disruption of the wound larger than one hand: and something had come out from the intestines about two hands' breadth from the middle of the intestine, and there was a disruption in the middle of the belly.
So I reduced it after his intestine had protruded outside the wound for 24 hours.
And therefore the wound was consolidated after about 15 days' time; and I cared for it, and he recovered; and he lived afterwards many years, living according to his habits.
And the doctors had judged that it would not heal.
And it was by a miracle, since I did not treat it with an ointment. Because I was in a place where I could not find any ointment, nor anything from medicines. I place therefore a old bandage twice a day upon the wound and make frequent washing of it with honeyed water until it is healed.
However, I will describe two proper kinds of suturing according to the narrative of speech.
And it is, that you should begin with acute suturing: and insert the needle from the outside to the inside part.
When therefore the needle enters the skin and goes through the limb according to its length and width throughout the body: let go the extremity where you inserted the needle, and make it pass through another extremity from the inside part to the outside on the other side.
When therefore you make it penetrate, then make it penetrate so in the same extremity on the other side from outside to inside: and let go the extremity which is in this part, and make the needle enter into another extremity from the inside part to the outside: and make it penetrate with your penetration as you make it penetrate in the suture of the extremity on the other side, which is in its part, until it penetrates into the whole.
Then begin also from this same side, and tie the knot with the extremity which is on the other side, and pull out the needle from the skin which it has penetrated.
Then bring it back into that skin and tie the extremity of the suture which is on the other side with this extremity on the other side: and pull out the needle from the skin which is on its part, and do it once and twice and three times: and do it again in turn, until you have secured the outside completely according to that example.
And the sum of this suturing is that you should suture like the pellipariorum who sew pelts: so that you tie the sifac once from one part of the skin and then let it go on another part, until you are finished.
The second kind of proper suture which Galeonus said.
This is what he said, namely that he compares it to the way certain physicians tie them together in such a manner that they bring all parts to a corresponding part according to nature: and he applies one end of the suture to the other end, and the end of the mirocha to the other end of the same. And this is done just as I am telling you.
You must fix the needle point in the end of the mirocha nearest to you from the outer part, and make it pierce into the inner one only; and let go the two ends of the sifac. Then turn back the needle and make it pierce from the outer part into the inner one at both ends of the sifac, that is, on both sides.
Then turn back both [ends] and also make them pierce from the inner one to the outer one at both ends of the other mirocha on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is a better and more common suture, and it is the suture which was previously described.
This then is also the speech of Galen.
And certain people said. The suture of the belly is rectified with two needles. That is, to introduce one thread into both of them: and begin with the introduction of the needle from that which is at your side, and make it pierce until the other side, according to the suture of those who equalize skins.
And know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the belly: then its suture is more difficult than those of other places in the belly.
The judgment of wound treatment is the judgment of other wounds.
That is, because when you follow a recent wound with its blood before it changes due to air; and reduce the intestine, and apply it, and prepare it: then put it on top of a poultice.
If the air has already changed the wound: then place on top of it some ointments that are present to you, until they produce pus; and let the fibers fall, and let them consolidate with ifac and mirach. Then take care of it just as is the care for other wounds, until it heals.
But if you do not have medicines present to you, then place on top of it at once, from which it begins to emit pus, old gauze: and change it twice a day, as I taught you, until it heals.
For you do not need other medicines in many dispositions when wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound will spread to the principal members with an injury, then it is necessary to immerse a piece of wool cloth in oil tempered by warmth, or in rose oil: and place it in the area between the groin and underarms.
If it feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in its bowels (for this often happens) then purge it with a stiptic wine, black and warm: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and made an exit that penetrates to its concavity.
And know that what comes from the large intestine is easier to heal; and what comes from those of finer substance is more difficult to heal.
However, the intestine that is called Ieiunum does not accept healing from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is because of its multitude, which is from veins, and their magnitude, and because of the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the wound is phlegm, and you follow it immediately: reduce it according to your own reduction, by which you reduce the intestines evenly.
But if it has passed by and already turned green or black: then it is necessary to tie it with a thread above the place that was discolored from it, so that bleeding may not occur. In the groin there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is on the other side of that ligament, and place two ends of a thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that its attraction to you may be alleviated, and the extraction of the same thing at the case of the groin, and the emission of pus from the wound.
Remembering the wound which occurs in the intestine.
When a disruption occurs in the intestine and is small: then it is possible for some people to be restored: therefore, because I have seen one who was wounded in his stomach with a blow from a lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the old wound had become corrupted: and a fistula was formed, and a discharge and windiness resulted.
Therefore I applied treatment until I was not confident about his recovery: nor did I cease to dress him, until he was healed and the location consolidated.
After I saw the place was consolidated, I feared for the weak one, that another misfortune might occur to him in his stomach: and no misfortune occurred to him from then on. And he remained in better bodily conditions, eating and drinking, and copulating, and entered the bath, and exercised himself in his habits.
And some experimenters have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and is small: then it should be bound according to this method. And it is as if you were taking ants of great heads. Then gather two edges of the wound and place one ant on top of them that has an open mouth over the two edges of the wound. When therefore it takes hold of them and closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it sticks and does not come loose.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not cease to do that with each ant after the second one according to the size of the entire wound.
Then reduce it [the limb] and bind the wound. For indeed those heads remain attached to the intestine until it is fed to the intestine and healed, and no harm occurs to the injured person entirely.
And now it is also possible to suture the intestine with a fine thread: which has been cleared from an animal's intestine and attached to it after being inserted into the needle.
And you should take the end of this thread from the intestine and scrape off a great deal. Then tie the fine linen thread at its end. Then insert that thread into the needle and tie it to the intestine. Then reduce it [the intestine] back into its place.
And this method of suturing with ants and intestine is not other than according to the way of trust and hope.
Know that a wound which is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then there is no skill but to make it finer, nor is its healing entirely.
About the care of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that every wound or apostema when it becomes old and withered, and forms a sore, and does not consolidate, and always discharges pus, and is not excised: then it is called universally in whatever member it may be Fistula, and we call it Zuchemen.
And Fistula indeed is a true fleshy fistula, hard, white, and smooth: with which there is no pain, like the concavity of a bird's feather; and for that reason some people call it Risati, that is, the feather.
And it is humid in certain hours, which discharges pus. And perhaps the humidity breaks open in certain hours. And sometimes this moisture is much, and sometimes it is little; and it is thick, and it is thin.
And I have already spoken of division, then when I said wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal nor is born from it flesh, is not that except for one reason of nine causes.
One of them is because there is too little blood in the body; or because of its evil nature; or because between it and the surrounding flesh is hard flesh that prevents the birth of new flesh; or because there are many impurities and filth; or because the wound itself is putrid, and the material sent to it has bad quality; or because the medicine used is unsuitable for curing it; or because a corruption falling in the region is a kind of pestilence, or due to the property of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta, where digestion of diseases is difficult and healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone, or a certain number of bones.
And I have now shown all these causes and signs of them, and their cures with medicines in division; and it is necessary here for me to make you know the cure of fistula and zuken, which is done through the way of operation with one's hand.
You should therefore know that a fistula occurs in all members of the body. For some of them are fistulas that reach the major veins and arteries, or nerves, or sifac, or to the intestines, or bladder, or to one of the ribs: or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to a joint composed of several parts: such as hands and feet; and some of them go to the proximity of the principal member and similar ones.
What then of these fistulas is difficult to heal according to this method, does not receive its cure, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
That if there is some fistula whose depth does not reach to the places I said: and you hope and trust in its cure, and wish to reach understanding of it, then take a test from air or iron, if the fistula tends straightly, and explore it with itself.
If however there is tortuousness in a fistula, then investigate it with a thin leaden probe. Because lead is tempered by its own softness and curves around the tortuousness.
For if a fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to signify over it with a probe. Therefore, cleanse one of its openings from among its own openings.
For the moisture with which you cleanse it flows towards other openings and runs out from them.
Then carefully inquire about the matter in accordance with what is possible for you: to know whether it is a mouth, or nerve, and whether the fistula is distant or near; or if there is only one fistula with many openings, and it lies above all that, with your utmost strength, along with questioning the patient, and finding pain when compressing with your hand on the spot, and similar signs and causes of abscesses.
When therefore you have arrived at a true understanding of all these things, then proceed to the cure according to your confidence; and consider this now, whether the fistula appears near or in a safe location far from the junction, or from a nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places I told you: then cut the fistula according to what has been said in my narration, and remove what is inside it from filtration, and corrupted flesh, which arises in its opening from the flesh, or fat, and similar things: and cure it until it heals.
If however the fistula is of great depth and is straight, then it is necessary for you to cut it as deep as possible. Then cleanse it from all the corrupted flesh of its own.
Then administer linen wrapped in sharp medicines and insert it into the depth of the fistula as far as you were able to reach with a iron; do that several times, until the sharp medicine eats away all that remained in the depth of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that produce healthy flesh, until it is healed.
But if it does not heal through that, then cauterize it according to what we have narrated.
So if the cause of the fistula is a bone, and you are certain about it in your own judgment: then examine it, and cut it off according to what I told you; unless something prevents you from doing so, such as a vein, nerve, or main limb, just as we said.
So if you uncover a bone and there is something in it that is decayed and discolored: then scrape it off until the entire decay is removed. Then care for it with whatever closes it up, until it heals.
What if it does not heal and discharges pus as before: then you will know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption.
Therefore, uncover it again, and thoroughly make an incision in it, and purify it with your utmost strength.
Then restore it. So if it heals, that is good; and if not, then you will know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you did not reach. You do not have the skill for it unless you leave it to nature.
What if the small bone is corrupted and it's possible for you, then draw it out with fine forceps that are suitable for it.
But if there are many bones, then thoroughly make an attempt to draw out all of them, and do not leave anything behind with your strength.
But if something from the humors causes opposition to you, and there is no fear or error in making an incision into them: then cut through those humors and flesh, if it's present, and free the bones.
But if you do not have the preparation to remove the bones from your own hour, then place over the wound that would cause it to decay: and leave it until it decays what is in the surrounding flesh and humors.
And guard the wound so that it may not consolidate. And be tightened the incision which you made in your operation. Then place over it, if you fear, a poultice submerged in bruised sulphur with oil; or a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment, or some green ointments.
For when those humors decay, and the bones are separated from them, the removal of these things is alleviated and their attraction.
But if it is a large bone, such as the tibia or hip bone, and what has decayed from it is a great part; then scrape away its last layer until that blackness and corruption are removed. Then repair the wound.
But if what is corrupted in it is a great part, and corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to cut away the whole thing up to the point where the corruption has reached: then care for it until it consolidates.
And I narrate to you a story about what happened to a man in his leg: that you may put it as an example and aid for your operation.
There was a young man of around thirty years old who suffered from pain in his leg, caused by something that had moved within him, that is, from the inside, until it reached his leg and became a large abscess; and he did not have an external cause.
Therefore, with him, a long time passed with the mistake of doctors, until the abscess was opened and many materials converged on it. And his treatment was delayed until his leg became ulcerated and many openings were made; which all discharged pus and bodily humors.
So a multitude of doctors treated him for about two years, and there was no one skilled in the art with him, until I was called, and I saw his leg and the materials flowing from those openings in a great current; also his whole body had already become emaciated, and his color was yellow.
I therefore inserted a probe into one of the openings of the place, and the probe reached the mouth.
Then I examined all the openings: and I found them to reach each other from all parts of the leg.
I therefore proceeded and cut above one of those openings until I exposed a part of the bone: and I found it to be corrupted: which was already gnawed away, and denigrated, and putrid, and perforated until it had penetrated as far as the marrow.
I therefore sawed what was discovered to me and prepared from the corrupted bone.
And I cut off that which was not in the bone except for that corruption, which I excised and sawed. And I had already removed it.
Then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicines over a long space. And it is not consolidated.
Then I probed and exposed above the bone a second time after the first discovery: and I found continuous corruption with the bone: and I sawed what appeared to me even from that corruption.
Then I tried to restore it. And it is not restored.
I therefore exposed it again on top and did not cease to cut the bone bit by bit, and tried to restore it: and it is not restored until I cut away about a palm's width of bone, and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicines and it was consolidated quickly and healed: and this iteration was not necessary for the operation and section of it, except on account of the debilitation of the sick person, and his lack of tolerance, and my fear for him in regard to death: because he was threatened by a bad syncopes at every hour from excessive evacuation.
He was therefore restored by complete healing: and a hard, good flesh grew in the place of the bone, and a good arrangement was made in his body, and his strength returned: and he regained his normal disposition: and there was no harm to him at all in his walking.
If however the prominent bone is already broken in the body's location: then it is necessary to stitch it up, in this way: and this is: take a bandage, and tie it at the end of the prominent bone: and appoint someone to stretch it upwards: and place another bandage of coarse wool over the first bandage. Then bind the bandage over the flesh that is near the bone: and stretch out its end so as to pull the flesh down towards the lower part: and you shall uncover the flesh above the place which you wish to suture, so that the suture does not harm the flesh.
Place a stick or board under the bone below decently: because when you do that, it is not prevented from cutting corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the suture be placed above the corrupted area for a little while, so that there is not corruption of the bone in its concavity: and does not appear to the sense, and causes another suture to take its place.
What if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, but is continuous with another part of it; and the corruption is in its middle or in one of its parts: then remove the flesh from all its parts altogether. Then place a stick below.
Afterwards, cut that from the first part where there is corruption, until the suture is continuous from the other side; and let the suture be according to the length, a little bit away from the corruption, as we said.
What if the corruption is at the joint, cut out the corrupted joint and then cut the bone where it continues on the other side.
If however the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no skill needed except for scraping away.
What if the corruption is in the breastbone of the hand or in the breastbone of the foot: then there is great difficulty in it. But it is necessary that you investigate how the corruption appears to you. And scrape it clean, and purify it according to any arrangement possible for you, and with whatever skill is available to you; when it does not make a contradiction in the Vein, or Nerve.
And know that incisors and saws for cutting those bones are many, according to the location of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and subtlety, and magnitude, and smallness, and hardness, and rarity. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare the suitable instrument for every kind of operation.
And know that these operations signify to you according to the type of instrument which you need, when with you is a long study. And the knowledge of the methods of this art is a testimony to the methods of diseases: then indeed you will find within yourself what suits each infirmity from the instruments.
And I am setting forth for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will put examples on to cut into, and a proof by which you will test other things.
Form of another saw.
Razor form for joints. Let the head of this razor be shaped like the head of a star-shaped awl; and let its points be shaped like those of an engraver's tool.
And it is not suitable, unless the heads of joints are rubbed with it when they are corrupted, or a large and great bone.
Greater Razor form.
The form of the broad razor.
The form of the razor in which there is concavity.
The form of the other subtle razor.
The form of the other curved extremity razor.
The form of the small subtle probe.
This resembles a saw, and its extremity is like a file: it is shown in many places for the removal of bones.
The form of the razor which is suitable for the removal of that which has been perforated from bones.
Its extremity is triangular, and sharp at its edges.
It comes from India. And similarly all the things we have said should be made of Razors, and Knives, and Files.
On the cutting off of extremities, and on the sawing of bones.
They putrefy due to an external or internal cause.
Therefore, when you have treated the corruption with medical remedies and the cure does not take effect: and you see the corruption occurring in a member which does not respond to anything; then it is necessary that you cut off that member as far as the corruption extends, so that the sick person may escape through that member from death or from a greater defect of the member.
And the sign that this happens is that the member becomes blackened until it rots: or if fire has consumed it, or it has putrefied after blackening: until the putridity reaches as far as the following bone and spreads throughout the entire body.
Therefore, proceed with the incision of it, and similarly if the cause of corruption is due to the striking of certain veneneous things, such as the sea scorpion, viper, adder, and similar.
If therefore a corruption or percussion is at the end of the finger, then cut off the finger and do not leave space for the corruption to spread, until it reaches the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it off from the wrist and do not leave space for the corruption, until it reaches the armpit of the arm.
And if it spreads into that, then cut off the arm at the elbow joint.
But if corruption passes through and you see him about the elbow: then it is the death of the infirm person. And to apply something beyond that from a cure, is a quantity of power.
And similarly do the same for the foot, when corruption spreads into a toe, then cut it off at one of the joints; and if it reaches to the shinbone, then cut off the whole foot. But if it ascends to the knee, then cut off the leg at the knee joint.
What if corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no remedy for it except death, and to leave the sick person to die.
And the method of cutting off a limb or sawing it is to tie the ligament at the lower part which you wish to cut off: and tie another ligament above that place. And have one assistant stretch out a ligament down below: and have another assistant stretch out the other ligament up above. And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments, with a broad spatula, until the whole flesh is uncovered. Then it should be cut or sawed.
And it is necessary to place a linen cloth around all parts, and not have the saw touch a healthy area; lest an additional injury befall the sick person, and a hot abscess occur.
But if bleeding occurs internally while you are operating, then cauterize the area quickly or place some powder above it that absorbs blood. Then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded member with a suitable bandage and care for it until it heals.
And I will tell you what happened to a man on his foot, the same thing that is happening to him.
What is this? Because a blackening occurred on his foot, with a burning that resembles the combustion of fire: and that corruption first occurred on his toe, until it spread to his entire foot.
Therefore the man took care of himself after he saw corruption spreading on his member with its swelling, which he found to be caused by pain and burning; and it happened that he was healed at the joint.
And after a long time had passed, the same corruption occurred on his index finger of his hand.
So he came to me and I tried to remove the excess with him after applying medicines on his body once it was cleansed; and the excess did not recur, but began to spread to another finger, until corruption began to spread throughout his hand.
So he called on me to cut open his hand: and I refused, hoping that the excess would recur spontaneously; and I was also afraid of death at the point of incision in his hand. Because the man's strength was greater than the accident.
Afterward, since he had given up on me, he returned to his land and came back to me about it, because he was in a hurry and cut open his entire hand; and he was healed.
And I did not narrate this story, unless it is to be a help for that which falls under the category of this illness; and to signify what should be signified, and according to how one should act.
Of the treatment of wounds, and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
Here is the translation:
And the treatment for this is to cut off that skin entirely as it has rolled back: and especially when it has been thinned out and become like a cloth: and you can trust that it will not reunite with its location due to its own corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will stick together and it does not result from that last corruption; and if there is a thickness of flesh under the skin, then treat it with a poultice and is, to consider the navel.
Then if it is large and the pus that is discharged from it has a foul odor: then treat it with a poultice made of Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, and zinar, taking equal parts, mixed together in a vessel: and let them simmer over fire until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
Then take from it what is necessary for you: and dissolve it with water and honey, and treat the navel with it: and close up its opening, and leave the medicine in it for a period of two hours.
Then draw out what remains with expression: make this happen every day until the navel is purified and the foul odor is removed.
And sometimes treat it with ash water when this medicine is not available to you: and take the ash of vine wood or ash from ilex trees: and pour water over it. Then soak it in that, and treat with it, until you are confident that the navel is already cleansed.
And if the patient is not tolerant of Egyptian medicine or ash water, then treat it with water and honey to which something from crushed zinar has been mixed. Or treat it with honey and wine mixed together, because of the property of honey that it cleanses and washes: and wine makes the navel stick together, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
When you do that thing many times and trust that corruption of the sinus is now removed: then cleanse it with what makes flesh grow in it.
And it is, that you take from diaphrenic plaster: and dissolve it with rose oil, and astringent wine: or cleanse it with certain medicines, and other ointments, the properties of which I wrote in the treatise on ointments.
But if the orifice of the sinus is narrow, into which the cannula of the cleanse does not fit: then dilate it with a small iron instrument: or put a linen cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment, or Basilikon ointment, until it is dilated.
And similarly if the orifice is also wide, then bring together its lips with a suture: and let it be free from that amount which the cleanse can enter without addition.
And similarly if the orifice from which pus runs is elevated to above: then cut it in a lower place that is in it, so that pus may flow out of it downwards: for pus when constricted in the depth of the sinus prevents flesh from being generated in it.
And if it is not possible for you to cut the sinus around its lower part as you wish: then try to prepare the member with a preparation by which pus may flow out of it easily as it is prepared for you. Try to make sure that nothing at all of the pus is retained in it: and take consolidating medicines which are placed on a sign, corresponding to what you wish. And spread them over a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such a size that it may be in contact with the whole sinus. Then cut with forceps into the straight orifice of the sinus, making the opening a little wider than the orifice of the sinus. Then spread a layer of soft ointment over another cloth, according to the size of the opening; and place it on top in a distant position from the orifice of the sinus, so that the exit of pus may be eased out: and do not remove the cloth until several days have passed.
He who is above the opening of the sinus, is he whom you remove every hour, so that what gathers in it from pus may go out: and to know whether that which flows out of it is much or little, or digested or undigested.
And when you have considered this again, look at the place of the sinus itself: whether its lord feels pain in it or does not feel pain in it; and whether there is an apostema in it or not.
So when your treatment is proceeding thus and you see the matter that flows out above the opening of the sinus, then you will know that the sinus has already adhered or approaches adhesion: then therefore dissolve it in the morning or on the third day; and when you dissolve the wound, then change the cloth for another one, and renew the ointment.
But if there flows from the sinus after a long time a subtle pus, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, because among men are those who slow down the formation of flesh in their wounds and among them are those who act contrary to it.
But if there flows from the sinus after many days an undigested pus, then you will know that the sinus is not adhering.
So if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its process prolonged: then add to the drying remedy, let the physicians truly do so, that the medicine be in its substance humid and in its virtue dry: just as diaphrenic ointment, when something in excess is added to it from zegi.
And from the last remedy used for healing, it is to take diaphrenic ointment and dissolve it with rose oil, and sprinkle over it ancient wine equal in its substance.
Then compress it with that, and use it.
And now it does the same thing when you do not have diaphrenic ointment available, use honey instead, when you cook it until it thickens, and use it. Take myrrh, and aloes, and frankincense: grind the whole, and powderize that over honey while it is above the fire. Then pour the mixture over the cloth, and bind it on the breast; and pour with honey that you have cooked, until it has thickened; and powderize over the surface, and put it on the cloth, and bind it.
And sometimes it is administered with Aristolochia longa, and roots of the heavenly lily, which is lily; and farina of herbs, and Centaurea. Use them in simples or compound remedies, grind those, and sift them out; and powderize over the honey that I mentioned, and use it.
But if the breast abscess prolongs and is not healed by this treatment: then you will know that there is corruption deep within it; or it is already making an impression on the bones, or in other hard parts of the body, or ligaments; then treat it with the cure for fistulas, as was previously mentioned.
Of the treatment of paronychia and the attrition of the nail, with addition of finger incision and section.
Paronychia is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb or foot, or perhaps in other fingers.
When therefore the abscess prolongs and is neglected and not cured, and becomes a hot apostema: or it corrupts and discharges pus, until it eats away the root of the nail; and perhaps it corrupts the whole of it, and perhaps corruption reaches to the bone, until it has a foul odor: and the end of the finger becomes wide, and its color becomes dark.
When therefore you cure it with what we said in the division, and your treatment does not help: then it is necessary that you cut off the whole excess that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. A cauterizing instrument is very helpful.
If the bone is sound and the nail also sound, and the additions of the nail are pressing upon the flesh to the inside, and begin to pierce it, and hurt it: then you must place a thin Radiatum under the angle of the nail that is piercing the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut through the flesh with ease, and place above what remains of the flesh from medicines burning, corrosive, until all is removed. Then care for that wound with ointments, until it heals.
But if corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then it is necessary to cut out that bone and remove it: for it will never heal as long as the corrupted bone remains.
If you see corrosion and corruption spreading in a finger, then cut it off at one of the joints, according to what has been previously mentioned about its recollection. Then care for that part, until it heals.
If however a finger is bruised or struck: and there occurs in it a vehement pain, then it is necessary to bleed the patient first. Then cut off the finger with a sharp razor blade, making a transverse incision from above to below.
And take care not to cut through the flesh that is under the nail, for you will bring about a severe pain upon the patient, and it will be a cause of added flesh growth in that place.
Then care for the place with what soothes pains.
The added finger that grows on some people's hands is perhaps entirely fleshy: and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps there is a nail in it: and some of them grow from the root of the joint or at one of the finger joints. Therefore, that which grows from some of the finger joints does not move: and that which grows at the joint of the finger, perhaps moves.
Therefore, the one who is fleshy among them has an easy incision. What there is to cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
However, the one whose birth is in the joint's union is difficult to cure. So then abstain from cutting it.
In that one who is born on the finger at the last joints, then it is necessary to cut through its first flesh with a round incision up to the bone. Then file the bone with one of those files that are suitable for it. Then take care of it until it heals.
However, the consolidation that occurs on fingers one by one often happens either because of a person's birth, that is, it is born with him, or from the consolidation of a wound, or burning by fire, and similar things.
It is necessary then to cut off that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural shape. Then place between them linen or cloth soaked in rose oil: so that they do not consolidate quickly, and separate between them: or place between them a thin lead plate, until the location consolidates as it should.
And similarly if a consolidation occurs on some fingers with the palm, then cut off that consolidation according to how it is prepared and fits the figure of the member.
De incisione Vitium.
There are veins that are twisted, thick, and full of superfluous melancholic substances which occur in many parts of the body: and most of them happen in legs, particularly in legs of travelers and workers, and those who carry loads.
Therefore it is necessary to apply a purgation of the body with black cholera several times using strong cleansing.
Then perform venesection on the patient's basilica vein.
The cure of those things with iron is according to two methods. One of them is that they are cauterized and black blood is removed. And the other method is that a vein is raised up and all [of it] is removed.
The section of it is according to this method. He binds the leg first with hot water a great deal, until the thick, bloody pus is dissolved. Then bind the weak leg from the upper part of his hip down to the lower part of the knee with a bandage. Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, making a wide incision.
Then lift it, that is, remove the blood from your hand from the lower part of the leg up to above, and you should bleed the patient first. Then cut the fingernail down to the bottom: until a quantity of blood emerges that you see is sufficient and which the patient's strength can tolerate.
Afterwards bind it up and tell him to refrain from foods that cause black bile: and repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full and it causes harm to the patient.
The elevation of it is according to this method. Shave the weak leg, if there are many hairs on it. Then introduce him into a bath or bind him with warm water on his leg until it becomes red and the veins swell: or exercise himself vigorously if there is no bath available, until the member warms up.
Then cut the skin along the direction of the vein's incision by its length: or at the end of it near the knee, or at the lower part of it near the heel.
Then open the cut with a hook and remove the vein from every part until it appears to the sense: and it is at its appearance when you see it turn red to black. When therefore it goes out from the skin, you see it as white as if it were a string.
Then insert under it the needle until it is elevated and goes out of the skin: suspend it with a blind hook, gently.
Then cut off another section near that section, three fingers away. Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears. Then lift it up with the needle as you did, and suspend it with another hook, just as you did at first.
Then cut off another section, or several sections if needed. Then lift it up and cut the last section at the heelbone.
Then pull it out to the section that is above it.
And do that until you pull it out from the upper or higher sections, until when it is entirely gone; then cut it.
But if it does not comply with you to pull out and lift up: then insert a strong double thread needle into it, and tie it, and pull it out; or insert under it the needle, and turn your hand around all sides until it comes out. And beware, lest it be cut. For if it is cut, it becomes difficult for you to lift it up very much, and harm comes from it to the patient.
When therefore you have pulled it out entirely: then place over the wound a soaked cloth in wine and rose oil, or oil: and care for it until it is healed.
If the vein is contracted and twisted, having a curvature that wraps around to the parts, and it is not as we said according to straightness: then you must cut above it on all sides of its twisting and wrapping.
Then suspend it with hooks, until you lift it up entirely: and beware at your section above it not to cut the vein or wound; for it will be difficult for you to lift or pull it out. Therefore preserve your prudence.
The manner in which a wound is healed.
The form of binding the blind eye.
There is no curvature to it like the other bandages, nor is it sharp-edged so as not to wound the vein; and it has a thickened flexuousness, gentle. For if it were thin, it would cut through the vein because of its own subtlety. Indeed, there is excessive thickness to it, as we have said.
On the removal of the vein in the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs on hot earth, such as in Alysus and Arabian land, and in dry, hot lands of little fertility, that is to say, where no herb nor tree grows.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation indeed is from the putrefaction that occurs beneath the skin, just as it happens within the bodies of serpents and ascarid worms, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of its beginning is that which occurs in the leg, namely a violent inflammation. Then the place is swollen. Then the vein begins to emerge from that swollen place, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When then the end of it appears from that vein, then you must wrap a piece of lead around it, weighing one and a half drachmas keil, up to two and a half drachmas, and suspend the lead from the leg.
Whenever then something emerges from it into the outside, wrap that thing in lead and bind it. If it is prolonged too much, then cut off a part of it and wrap up the remainder. And do not cut it at its root until it has emerged entirely. Since it is cut, it constricts and enters into flesh: and makes a pustule to occur, and putridity in the place, and an evil ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary that it be treated gently and drawn out gradually, until it emerges from the last part of itself and nothing remains from it in the body: and from this very vein, in some people, there emerges something which is five palms long and ten in length. And now it has reached me, because it emerged from a man who was twenty palms tall.
But if it happens to you during the time of your medication: then insert a thread into its opening and pierce it with a long drill, along with the body, until what is inside it is emptied out from the material: and administer putrefaction to the place with medicines for several days. Then care for it by treating pustules.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot itself: and openings occur many times, and a branch emerges from every opening.
So cure it as we said in the division, and along with what was previously mentioned.
Chapter on cutting off worms generated under the skin, and is called Bovine Distress.
This Distress is called Bovine Distress in a certain land among us, because it often happens to oxen, and there is one small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it moves through the entire body, ascending and descending: and is shown to the sense by its walking from member to member, until it bursts wherever it bursts through the skin at a place, and emerges.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors. Just as worms and serpents, that is, lice and ascarids, occur in the belly.
And beware of his wickedness. Because when he goes into the body and is elevated to the head and reaches a place; then perhaps he opens up in it, and emerges, and destroys the eye: and that happens many times.
So when you wish to cure him and extract it, then that is not done except by his movement and appearance to the sense.
Therefore, you must tighten what is above him, and what is below him with a strong binding ligament. Then cut above him, and extract him.
And if it penetrates into the flesh and you do not find it: then place a cautery with fire above the spot until it dies.
And even greater than that which is to be feared, is its corruption, by which it corrupts the eye, as we said.
But if you see him having reached the head near the eye, then bind the eyebrow above it with a good tightening. Then cut above him, and extract him.
And it is necessary for the patient to use a purification of his body with medicines that dissolve bad, putrid humors.
And beware of foods that cause putrefaction.
About the section for Nakir's sickness.
This sickness is called Nakir on our earth, and it is a pain that occurs in certain members, then changes from member to member.
And I myself have already seen him, according to what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman in some villages. And she showed me her arm and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
And after I stayed for one hour, I saw one swelling walking with a pustule, like a worm, ascending to her shoulder faster than it can be, so that it is like quicksilver when it runs from place to place.
Therefore the pain departed from that place and was fixed on the shoulder.
Then one hour passed and it ran through the rest of the body until it reached another arm.
Then he told me that his whole body was revolving according to what I saw.
I therefore gazed in amazement at the speed of its change from member to member. And I myself had not seen this illness with my own eyes in such a manner before that. But I have seen many others who find pain being transferred from member to member; and I did not see him with my own eyes as I saw him in the woman.
And I do not think it is otherwise, except that the woman was one of those who are found to be from dry bodies detected through veins; therefore this apparent windiness appears to sense as having been changed.
And it is necessary that they do not appear according to this reason in those who are luxurious and have bodies that are moist with hidden veins.
When therefore you wish to cure him and the patient feels that pain: then if it appears to your eye as we said, then tie above him quickly and below him quickly: and cut above him until that windiness is choked out: and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes: then cure him by excision of the body and with that which drives out windiness, and purge them with pungent pills and pills of asarum and similar things.
Of the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows are differentiated according to their own kinds and according to the places where they fall from the body.
And their variety is this: because some of them have large points and small ones: and concave and convex ones. And among them are those that have three angles. And among them are tongues. And among them are stars.
However, those that fall according to limbs are two ways. For either limbs are from primary concave members, such as the brain, and heart, and liver, and lung, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and like things. So when it falls into one of these limbs and signs of death appear to you, which I will tell you after, then it is necessary to remove the arrow from them, for death follows that in which it is, in many dispositions. And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of a member, then remove it and care for the wound.
From the signs of the brain when an arrow falls into it and penetrates to the skull and exits above the brain, there are: a swelling or inflammation, blindness, vertigo, redness in the eyes, puffing up, redness of the tongue, spasms, and confusion of intellect, and vomiting with cholera. And perhaps blood will exit through the nose or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off, and the voice is destroyed. And a white liquid similar to pus exits from the wound location. And it exits like a fluid of flesh.
If then these signs appear to you, then refrain from treatment and remove the arrow if it does not exit.
The signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left breast; and one feels with it as if it were fixed in a hard substance, not in an empty space. And perhaps the arrow's motion is similar to the pulse's motion: and blood flows black from the wound. And it follows coldness of extremities, and cold sweat, and congestion. You should therefore know that death certainly approaches.
And the sign of an arrow wound that wounds the lung is when bloody frothy discharge flows from the wound. And the veins which follow the neck become inflamed and change the complexion of the patient. And he breathes out a great, high-sounding sigh: and seeks to draw in cold air.
For if the arrow falls into the vellum that is in the chest: then it is near to small ribs: and a great panting occurs with severe pain, with sighing: and all the limbs of the shoulders are moved.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested from food will come out of the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the belly and sticks in it: something of dung will come out of the wound, or pus, or an intestine that is already broken. Therefore there is no hope for his cure, nor for extracting the arrow.
For if the arrow falls into the bladder and urine flows out: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is much greater over the patient: then you should know that it is mortal.
The remaining limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, palate, and shoulder-girdle, and similar parts of the members, are saluted according to many dispositions when the arrow does not find an artery or nerve, and the arrow is not poisonous.
And I tell you what I have seen to be of these arrows, so that you may signify through it above your own cure.
Which is this: for to a certain man an arrow fell into the tear duct of his eye, at the root of his nose. So I extracted it from the other side, under the fat of his ear; and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the Jew, which had fallen upon his eyelid under the lower eyelid; and the arrow was already hidden, and I could not obtain more than its small tip with which it adhered to the wood: and it was a large arrow of the Turkish bows, with a soft iron point, without ears.
The Jew was therefore healed, and the evil occurrence did not happen to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arab arrow, and it is that one which has ears. I then fastened a cloth over her between two strips of linen: and now she had already sunk into his throat. I therefore carefully pulled on it until I extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man which had fallen into his belly: and we thought that he would die from it.
Afterwards, then, thirty days had passed over him and nothing in his condition had changed, I covered the arrow with a cloth; and I pulled on it, and extracted it: and he was healed, and no evil occurrence happened to him.
And I saw a man upon whom an arrow had fallen on his back, and the wound was set over it. Afterwards, then, seven years had passed, the arrow came out through the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman upon whom an arrow had fallen into her womb, and the wound was set over it, and the arrow remained within her: and nothing in her condition changed, and the woman did not find any harm from her natural bodily functions.
And I saw another man upon whom an arrow had fallen on his face: and the wound was set, and remained, not finding much pain for him: and similar things to these many.
And I extracted an arrow from the king's most trusted servants, which had fallen into his nose and was now leaning slightly to the right side; and the arrow was entirely hidden.
I was called therefore to cure him after the fall of the arrow for three days. I found then the wound from the arrow to be very tightly constricted.
I then probed it with a fine probe and did not find it; but he himself found the puncture and pain under his ear on the right side. I therefore expected that the puncture was from the end of the arrow.
I then applied a poultice to the place with a poultice that had attractive and digestive power, trusting in myself, since I believed the spot would suppurate and a sign of the arrow would appear for me to cut above it: and no accident occurred in the place indicating that the arrow had reached the location.
I therefore applied the poultice to him daily for many days: and no accident occurred, and the wound was consolidated in the meantime: and he remained weak from its removal until he felt the arrow on a certain day inside his nose. And he told me that.
And he told me that. I then applied sharp and corroding medicine to that wound daily for many days, until it was opened: and when I probed him with a probe, I felt the subtle end of the arrow which adhered to the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound through that sharp medicine until the end of the arrow appeared visibly before us; and after it had passed with him, a period of about four months elapsed.
Then after the wound had been enlarged and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it, and move it, but it did not yield to exit: then I did not cease to file and shape it above it with various techniques, until on a certain day I began to work on it with well-made forceps, according to the form they would take at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And indeed doctors judge that the nasal cartilage is not restored. I therefore restored it and the wound was consolidated and the patient was healed with a complete and unbroken recovery; nor did anything harm him at all.
And I will tell you the quality of extracting certain arrows: so that you put it to the rule and significance over what I did not say.
Because the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended with narration: nor does that book comprehend it; a wise craftsman compares what is little to much: and with what is present, over what is absent: and he finds a new operation and a new instrument among external events of this art when they happen.
I say, that arrows do not emerge from the members to which they are fixed, unless according to two modes. Or through attraction from the place from which it entered. Or contrary to the other part of the opposite side.
And that which emerges from where it entered is either an arrow proceeding into a fleshy place and is attracted and emerges.
What if it does not obey the exit from the hour when it falls: then you must let it go for some days until the flesh that is around it putrefies: and its attraction and emergence will be alleviated.
And similarly if it is fixed in bone and does not obey you to exit, then let it go again for some days: and bring it back with attraction and motion every day until it emerges.
What if it does not obey you to exit after days, then it is necessary that you pierce the surrounding area of the arrow in the bone from all sides with a fine chisel until the arrows are widened. Then attract it and pull it out.
But if the arrow is already concealed in the body and hidden from sense: then seek it out with probes. But if you feel it, then draw it out with some instruments that are suitable for its extraction.
But if you are unable to draw it out because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow in deep tissue, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein: then find a way to enlarge the wound until it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
But if there are ears which hold it fast: then free the fixed flesh from all parts, by any means you can, and use instruments, if it cannot be removed by cutting through the ears, or by their fracture and twisting, until it comes out.
And when you are administering the extraction of the arrow, wherever it is, then use the twisting motion of your hand, with forceps on all parts, until you make it come out: and with the finest subtlety, so that the arrow does not break and its extraction becomes difficult for you.
But if you are unable to extract it at one hour, then leave it for several days, until the things that surround it have putrified. Then retry to extract it: for it will be eased. If however, opposition is made by a flow of blood, then administer what we said in its own chapter on cure: and take care to preserve your strength from cutting the vein, or nerve, or cord.
And administer the skill of surgery in every way possible to you, with ease, and calmness, or slowness, and firmness, just as I told you.
And it is necessary that you do so when pulling out the arrow, making the patient conform to the shape as he was in the case of being shot with the arrow itself. Because it is more beneficial. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible to you from the shapes.
But the arrow that comes out from the opposite part of another, or has already proceeded something to the exterior from it; or makes a swelling at the tip of the arrow by sensation from above on the neighboring skin, and you see it protruding: therefore cut above it, and let the incision be according to the size that forceps can take in it.
Then draw it out: for it is easy to come out by itself.
But if it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness, until the arrow stamps itself in the bone and makes room for itself: then draw it out.
And if not: let it be for a few days: then try to pull it out until it comes out.
Which if the wood of the arrow is stuck in it, then push it with that.
But if the wood has fallen and you wish to administer a push: then introduce into it an instrument with a concave shape, so that its concavity enters the tail of the arrow: then push it with it.
But if the arrow is hollow, then push it with the instrument entering into it. For the arrow is eased by that.
Which if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to cut open all the flesh where the venom is, if that is possible for you. Then take care of it with what is fitting for that.
If an arrow is fallen in the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side: and it is near what you touch with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and beware of cutting into a vein, or nerve, and take it out.
Then wash the wound, if you see one, and care for it until it heals.
And this is the form of forceps with which arrowheads are extracted.
Let the ends be like a bird's beak, which were made of iron: when they take hold above an arrow, they do not let go of it.
And many kinds are made from these, great and small and middle-sized, according to the quantity of the arrow's magnitude, its smallness, and the width of the wound and its constricting nature.
The form of a concave scoop.
And the form of a deaf scoop.
This is the shape of a deaf end like a radius, so that its entrance may be eased into an arrowhead and pushed with it.
De phlebotomia Venarum.
The veins that are habitually cut in the body are thirty.
Of which there are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins that are behind the ears and are called the Two Herbs: and two arteries that are seen in two temporal regions: and two veins that are in the two lacrymal ducts of both eyes, which are called the Lookers: and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead: and a vein that is at the end of the nose. And two Guidegi, which are in the neck. And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins that are in the lower lip. And these are the veins which are called Algecherich. And two veins that are under the tongue.
However, the veins which are bled on the arms are five veins in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalica, and it is from the outer side: and the people call it the vein of the head. And the Fusca. And it is the Median vein, and it is composed of a branch of the Basilica and a branch of the Cephalica: and the people call it the vein of the body. And the Basilica, and it is located on the medial side: and it is also called Titillicaris. And the people call it the vein of the stomach. And the Arm-string, and it is located above the elbow: and it is that one which is bled from, and it is that one which appears clearly above the thumb.
And the Saluatella: and it is a vein that is between the annular and the smallest: and it has two branches.
And on the leg and on the foot there are three veins. One of them is that which is under the curvature of the thumb from the outer side. And the second one is the Saphena: and its location is at the heel from the medial side. And the vein Ness: and its location is at the heel from the lateral side.
And on the other leg there are three veins similar to those.
Of bloodletting from two veins after the Ears.
The benefit of bloodletting from two veins that are after the Ears is for old catarrhs, and hemigraneam, and sahafati, and bad old wounds on the head.
And the quality of bleeding is according to what I narrate. And it is, that the head of the sick person is shaved: and his occiput is rubbed with a rough cloth in the place of two veins with good friction. Then the sick person should tie their neck with a cord until two veins appear. And those places are behind the ears on two depressed areas of the head. Therefore search for them with your finger, and where you feel a pulse under your finger, mark it with enamel.
Then take the bleeding knife, and that one is called "Incidens". Then insert it under the vein into the skin, until the bleeder reaches the mouth. Then lift your hand with the vein and skin to the top, and cut the vein with a cutting incision, cutting into it. And let the length of the incision be the amount of two joined fingers, or about that: and make come out from blood as much as you wish.
Then tie it with lint, and let it go, until it heals.
And now it has been mentioned at the beginning of the book, that those veins are cut into, and also their cauterization.
The benefit of bleeding from the two arteries that are in two temporal regions is for an old headache; and a bad habit, and a persistent eye disease; and to remove excesses that flow out quickly to the eyes.
And the quality of bleeding them is according to what I tell you. The sick person should tie their neck tightly, until two veins appear to the sense in a manifest way: and show themselves by pulse under your finger. Then mark with enamel.
Then lift up the skin above and with your index finger guide it to the upper part. Insert the phlebotomy instrument below and lift up the skin to the upper part. And cut it as you did with the other two veins; and make it flow from the blood according to the amount of your necessity.
Then loosen the constriction of the patient and place your finger on top of the vein for one hour. Afterwards, place a cloth and bandages on top of it and bind it with a strong constriction from above; and let it be until it heals.
And now recall the previous mention of those things, and their incision and extraction at the beginning of the book.
The remedy for bleeding the forehead vein is after cephalic bleeding, for old facial afflictions; and for headache, and redness of the face; and foul ulcers.
And the quality of this bleeding is, according to what I tell you. The patient constricts his neck with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take the instrument which is called the Fossorium.
Place the prominent point that is at the head of the Fossorium on top of the vein, and strike it above with a hammer, or with another thing in its manner; and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish. Then loosen the constriction of the patient, and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a wide bleeding instrument. However, it should not be a sharp-edged bleeding instrument, like the others, but rather one with a broad edge. And let it bleed according to the flow, since it is nearby; and perhaps the bleeding instrument may break when it is thin.
The application of two veins which are in the tear ducts of two eyes, is for an eye with inflammation and redness; and swelling in the eye, and afflictions of the face.
And the quality of bloodletting from them is that the patient should tighten his neck with a cord. Then perform the bloodletting, and stand above his head.
And let the bloodletting be done across to the length a little bit, with a small, wide instrument, for there is no flesh in that place. For if the bloodletting instrument is delicate at the tip, it may break.
Then let the blood flow from the wound as much as you need. And put a linen cloth on top of them and bind them tightly at night for one day, and then release them.
The veins of the nose are for bloodletting when one has an acute fever, and intense swelling, and afflictions of the face, such as headache and redness that occurs on the face: especially when it is old.
And the quality of bloodletting from them is that the patient should tighten his neck with a cord. Then hold the nose of that person with your left hand and take a slender, long bloodletting instrument, and insert it into the middle of his septum, between what separates the nose according to its straightness. Because the vein is not apparent to the sense there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you hold your hand with the bloodletting instrument a little while and let the blood flow as much as you need. Then bind it tightly at night for one day. For that very thing is restored quickly.
The benefit of the two Guides' phlebotomy is for constriction of breath, and onset of leprosy, and melancholic diseases, and impetigo and bad ulcers, and corroding sores, that is, herpes-like lesions.
And the quality of their phlebotomy is that it causes the patient to be bound beneath both of them on his neck with a bandage: and let the surgeon stand above the head of the patient, and let the patient sit upon a seat.
Then make the incision on the vein to the length of the wide phlebotomy for a little while. Then take out from the blood a measured quantity, or according to what you see as necessary for that purpose. Then do the same thing to another vein.
Afterwards untie the bandage and bind the two veins tightly with a middle constriction: so that the patient does not become overheated. And let it be until morning. For the wound is healing.
On the phlebotomy of veins by Albucasis. The veins of Algeberich's phlebotomy are beneficial because they promote a flow to the mouth, and corruption of the gum: and bad ulcers: and cracks in the lips, and bad ulcers also, which are in the nose, and around it.
And the quality of their phlebotomy is that you make the patient sit before you: and bind his neck with a cord. Then turn his lip back and look at the two veins: one of which is on the right side of the lip, and the second on the left side of it: and the indication of each is by the blackness of both. And that is true: because around them are small, dark veins. Therefore cut both with a cutting incision.
But if there is doubt on you, and you do not know which one it is: then look to the larger of them, and the more obvious one.
And similarly do with the two veins that are on the upper lip: and a great custom indeed runs along with it: and cut open the two veins that are on the lower lip.
On vein lancing under the tongue after cephalic venesection. The benefit of lancing the two veins that are under the tongue is this: that cephalic venesection is useful for preternatural constrictions in the throat, and affliction of the uvula, and afflictions of the mouth.
And the quality of lancing them is this: that you sit the patient between your hands in front of the sun; and lift up his tongue, and look beneath his tongue on one side a vein, and on the other side a vein: and the color of each declineth to blackness.
Therefore lance both of them; and take care not to touch with your hand when lancing them. For under these are arteries, and perhaps a flow of blood will occur from those arteries.
The three veins which are lanced on the elbow, are those in which venesection is customary for all people.
And venesection of these is done in two ways. Either by pricking with a myrtle-wood lancet: or to incline towards subtlety with olive oil; or by cutting with a surgical knife, and this is called Alnesil. And this is its form.
And from these there are broad and subtle kinds according to the breadth of the veins and their constriction. The form of the myrtle lancet is broad, as you see. And it is suitable for opening up concave veins that are full, proceeding, appearing, thick, and those which contain thick, turbid blood.
And this bloodletting is of lesser width and subtler extremities.
And it is suitable for bloodletting from small veins that contain subtle, citrine blood.
But Basilica is one of the three veins that benefits from bloodletting. Because it draws out blood from afflictions that are under the throat and neck, following the chest and belly. And it is suitable for a bloodletting physician to take caution with it, since there is an artery beneath it. So if he makes a mistake and adds to the incision of bloodletting, he will cut into that artery and there will be a flow of blood. Therefore it is necessary for the bloodletting to be done not with a piercing instrument but rather with an Alnesil, that is, a cutting instrument.
But if the Basilica does not appear with a clear manifestation, then it is necessary to find another one, or search for a branch of it, or perform bloodletting on the arm instead. For it itself is clear and should be cut with an Alnesil instrument, as we said.
But if you wish to perform bloodletting on it itself, then it is necessary to touch the place before the arm's constriction, until you know the place of the pulse. Then mark the place with encaustic, afterwards the arm, and cut the vein with a concave incision using an Alnesil instrument, as we said. And beware lest the blow falls through the space to the location of the artery.
And when you see that as you tighten the bandage, there is swelling at the place you marked with encaustic, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery: therefore avoid it.
What if you see blood rising at the bloodletting, like a child's urine, and it is subtle, red blood: then you will know that it is from the artery's blood. Then accordingly, hasten and place your finger on top of it over a long space, then remove your finger. If then the blood is cut off (for it is often cut off) then bind the arm and let it be, and beware that the patient avoid movement of it: and let him be in fear of it.
And do not move it for several days until it heals.
But if the blood is not cut off and overpowers you: and medicine is not present to you at the moment, then cut the artery if it appears to you. For its extremities contract, and the blood is cut off.
Or take the bark of a sycamore, and find it: take one middle part, and bind it over the tight place of the vein with a ligament and wool until another day.
Then if the blood is cut off, it is good. And if not: then treat it with the one whose previous account precedes from the place of powder used for stopping blood flow: and the cutting off of his blood is not difficult in many dispositions, because of the small wound's location and the possibility of a ligament from the arm.
The Black Vein is beneficial for phlebotomy because it draws blood from the upper part of the head and lower part of the body: therefore, since it is composed of a branch of the Basilic and a branch of the Cephalic, as we said.
And it is fitting for the phlebotomist to approach it with caution, since a nerve is located beneath it. If therefore the phlebotomist adds to the puncture and finds a nerve, it happens that there is numbness, and healing becomes difficult, and perhaps it does not heal at all.
And this nerve often appears to the sense. If however it is hidden in some people and is subtle, and does not appear: then you must put your bloodletting technique to use where you can remove the bloodletting, section with Alnesil, and extract the nerve with your own strength.
If a vein is between two nerves, then find the vein along its length.
About the Cephalic Vein. The benefit of the cephalic veins in bloodletting is that they attract blood from the head and bring relief to eye diseases.
And it is proper to make a small incision in this vein, if you wish, with an olive-wood phlebotomizer or a myrtle-wood one: because it is the most healthy of all veins, since there is no artery underneath nor nerve.
However, it is suitable for you to use a phlebotomy instrument at the wrist, just enough to open up the skin, and search for a softer spot: and it will not harm him if he does not yield immediately with the first percussion, but rather let it be done repeatedly with phlebotomy.
However, perhaps an abscess may form in some people if it is not bloodletted immediately, but it will not harm him by that.
About the utility of Bloodletting and the cautions to be observed in it. The quality and accidents of bloodletting, and in whose correction you should reflect.
Firstly, you should know that bloodletting is not administered except for the preservation of health, and the perseverance of it, and caution against the advent of diseases.
And so that bloodletting is done on one of the three veins at the elbow, namely the Cephalic, the Fleshy, and the Basilic. And so that bloodletting is done at the beginning of spring after a fast, in truth and summer: and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of repletion appear.
And let a bloodletting be done on the first day, or on the third, after they have passed three hours.
But bloodletting which is administered for illnesses does not have a fixed hour: rather, when necessity and suitability dictate it, it should be done at night or day, and at any hour and at any time.
And it is not fitting that boys are bled until they have reached the age of fourteen years. Nor should a pregnant woman be bled except from the fourth month to the seventh. Nor should old men who have passed sixty years be bled.
Therefore, when someone wants to be bled for any reason whatsoever, it is necessary that he cleanse his bowels beforehand with a gentle enema if there is much retained feces in them: so that the veins are not attracted at the time of bloodletting by superfluous putrid things from the intestines which are harmful to the principal members.
Nor should a patient who is thirsty, that is, one who has satisfied their nausea; nor one who is drunk or recovering from drunkenness, until that is removed from them. Nor should an invalid with dropsy.
And bloodletting should be avoided again after the experience of colic, vomiting, and diarrhea, and after excessive copulation, labor, exercise, watchfulness, fasting, and all that dissipates the power from bodily or animal substance.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors beforehand, if the blood is thick due to food and drink and medicines: if it's possible for him.
Then let him enter the bath, unless something prevents it: or let him exercise some kind of exercise to subtletize the blood.
And let his bloodletting be done in the chest area, around the third day, as we said; and try to purge his chest that day of all animal evils: such as anxiety, anger, fear; and of all bodily evils: such as labor, punishment, superfluity, and similar things.
And let it make present those things which are of its own kind with the customary use of men from aromatics, and odors, and music, and similar things in proportion to their possibility.
Then let the bloodletter sit on a cushion which is higher than the cushion of bloodletting. Afterwards, he should draw out his own arm and rub it with his hand twice or three times as the bloodletter. Then let him tie the bandage with a strap, and wrap it around twice.
And let it be tempered with a knot, because when the string is unequal, or through excess in the string, then it hinders the flow of blood: or if it is too loose, then also it hinders the flow of blood.
Then after tying the knot, it is necessary for the bloodletter to rub his hands together simultaneously until the veins are inflated and declared to the sense.
Then let the bloodletter clean the bloodletting instrument with a little old oil properly.
Then let him place his index finger of the left hand on top of the vein at the place where he wants to make the bloodletting, a little bit away: so that the vein does not flee and the stroke may be made. For from veins there is one that flees like an escaped string at bloodletting: and among them there is one that is full of windiness. And when you place the bloodletting instrument on it, it contracts under the bloodletter, and the bloodletter is deceived, and the incision does not open the vein: and if it does open it, it is constricted. Therefore, it is necessary for the bloodletter to be firm and vigilant in all these matters.
Then let him put down the bloodletting instrument. If then the vein opens on one side, then it is good. And if not, then do that same thing on the other side a little bit away or above it with haste: if the place does not become inflamed.
If he swells up or grows inflamed, then let him rest a day or two; and do not tighten the bandage. Perhaps indeed it will draw forth the abscess' heat. Nor should he enter a bath.
Then let him undergo bloodletting, if he likes it.
What if the opening is small or the blood flows thinly: and you fear that not as much blood will flow out as you wish: then perform the bloodletting at the very same spot in accordance with the right path, and add a little to the procedure.
And do it quickly before the abscess forms, for many people experience an abscess during a minor operation.
So if you see that it has already become an abscess, then do not bleed into it at all, for nothing excuses it in your presence. And put something from oil and dung on top of it, because it will ease the flow of blood. And it is better for this place than oil itself, and than other oils.
And similarly administer oil and dung in every bloodletting of yours, by which you perform phlebotomy at the prohibition of the flow of blood: and they do that with tyriaca alfarach, and sagzenea, when one of them is put on top of the place.
For blood becomes thinner and dissolves when it is thick.
What if a great abscess should occur at the site of bloodletting, for it often happens, especially to those who are not bled except by that method, or when the opening of the vein is small: then hurry and place a sponge soaked in water and salt, warmed up slightly, on top of the spot; tie it there for one hour: because it will dissolve.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has finished flowing out of the same vein, or from another vein.
If something remains in the place after days with a blackening or yellowing, it does not harm; and if you wish, place something of aloe, or myrrh solvent, or something from the juice of mint, that is, of chamomile or similar.
And many times indeed happen ulcers and swellings at bloodletting in the basilica.
So place your hand on it, then if you find softness under your pressure on it, then that swelling is bad. Be careful then, so as to put something on it from what we have said. For perhaps blood will flow from there of the artery.
But make a poultice for it with something that has astringent properties, so that the place may be hardened. Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
And it is necessary to take away all blood from each person according to the quantity of their virtue. And what appears in color victorious above the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it go until it turns red; and similarly if you see it thick, then let it go until it becomes thin: and similarly if it is sharp, then let its sharpness be removed.
And it is necessary for one who is full, strong, and needs bloodletting once to amplify the bloodletting of a vein and make it lateral; and in one who is weak, to be the opposite of that.
And it is necessary to take it away in veins and to make a narrow opening; and better than what is administered in bloodletting of a vein is that there be a crosswise incision, not a puncture.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from bleeding and from cutting the nerve; and it is more praiseworthy and healthful than bloodletting by width and length.
And to whoever is accustomed to arrive at bleeding with syncopes, it is necessary that he eats before bleeding a moderate amount of bread soaked in pomegranate juice: or a secamiba leaf, if he is warmed up; and take from his blood in three or four turns.
And if it is an infrigidated complexion, then he shall take before bleeding bread soaked in honey syrup, or in honey syrup flavored with spices, or in aromatic syrup that smells good.
If syncope occurs during bleeding and the cause of it is the flowing out of much blood: then it is necessary that he takes a drink of meat broth, and a subtle aromatic syrup; and anoints his chest with it along with those things which we mentioned in the chapter on syncope from evacuation.
But whoever wants to succeed in releasing his arm and letting out his blood a second time: it is necessary that he who has bleeding for the sake of evacuation due to much blood and whose strength is weak, releases the blood little by little according to the amount of strength he has, day after day.
But whoever wants to succeed in releasing his arm and letting out his blood a second time, and whose body is strong: then let him do it after seven hours or nine from his first bleeding.
But whoever wants to draw blood from his body to the opposite side which it declines towards: it is necessary that this happens to him on the second day or third.
In whose body is much blood already warmed up and sharpened, and makes a fever occur: it is necessary that the blood goes out from him in one direction, and a large quantity is taken out: and the opening should be widened until syncope occurs: after which you will have preserved all the conditions of bleeding; and then place your hand on his pulse at the course of the blood, so that death does not occur instead of syncope. It often happens that a bloodletter is unaware of this, and neglect occurs as a result.
And it's not necessary when you want to release an arm and release blood secondarily, if the vein opening is already closed, and a difficult exit of blood occurs, so that you press upon it with force and stretch it quickly. For that is very bad indeed; rather, let him be left until the second bloodletting.
Or remove with sharp bloodletting what has coagulated from the blood in the vein opening, and place something dissolved salt on top of it in water. And place something from terebinthina or saffron on top of it, and apply gentle compression to it until the blood goes out.
If the vein is already inflamed, then let it be left alone and not be bound until the inflammation subsides.
But if necessity demands that blood be let secondarily and there is no excuse, then either let it above that place or in another arm through another vein.
A cord of the arm is bloodletted at the places of the Black and Basilica veins when these are not found and are hidden, since it is composed of them.
And the quality of this bloodletting is that the sick person should put their hand into hot water until it becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
Then a strap should be wrapped around it with a slight constriction in the middle. Then bloodletting should be done gradually across the transverse direction, not latitudinally or longitudinally: and make a wide opening and make your bloodletting so that you cut it over the joint of the hand for a little while.
But if the flow of blood is impeded, then repeat with your hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
If however you are during the days of summer, then excuse yourself from repeated washing of hands in hot water. And indeed a great deal is placed on the course of bloodletting with hot water during winter time.
And phlebotomy of this vein is more beneficial to all veins, because there is no pulsating artery nor nerve under it.
The phlebotomy of the Saluatella vein of the right hand is indeed beneficial for diseases of the liver.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that you tie a string or cloth around the arm with a ligature, or use your own hand, after you have inserted it into hot water, until the vein inflates and becomes apparent to the sense. Then perform the phlebotomy by crossing over. And if you cut it completely, that will not harm him in any way.
And be careful not to stain your hand with the phlebotomy. Under it indeed are the nerves of the bare fingers exposed from the flesh.
Then put your hand into hot water and let blood flow freely in it. For if you do not wash it with hot water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein and be prevented from flowing.
When therefore you have extracted the necessary quantity of blood, then place oil and salt on top of the vein, so that it will not congeal quickly.
And similarly, you should do this with every tightened branch.
The application of the phlebotomy from the left hand is: because it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen: and similarly do this in its phlebotomy, as you did in the second one equally.
The application of the phlebotomy on the saphenous vein is beneficial for diseases that are located in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the womb, retention of menses, weaknesses of the kidneys, and old wounds of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient should put their foot into warm water and make a friction on it until the veins swell; and bind above the ankle with a bandage. And indeed the location of the veins is at the heel, appearing towards the thumb; and they branch out from there into the face of the foot, with many branches.
Therefore, phlebotomy should be done on a larger branch of it, or at the heel in its gathering; since it is better and more wholesome.
For if you perform phlebotomy on the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are under it above the surface of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy so that it is cut across, as if you want to cut through it; and make the incision Nesil.
But if the flow of blood is hindered, then take his foot and put it into warm water; and let the blood flow into it until it is drained.
For if the phlebotomist erred in the first attempt, then he should move with the phlebotomy to higher places for a little bit, since the place is safe and you do not fear harm when you beware of the nerves, as we said.
And similarly with the saphenous vein of the other foot, equally.
The location of the sciatic veins is, as we said, at the heel on the outer side of the hollow.
And the benefit of this phlebotomy is to relieve the pain of gout when it occurs due to hot blood.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that the patient should enter the bath and hurry; and bind their leg on the side of the ankle up to the heel with a thin, long strap: for it does not appear except because of that.
When it appears, then make the phlebotomy as is possible for you, either according to cutting across or according to a cut; and it is better to make an incision or a section. The location of it is more healing, and itself is very hidden in many people.
The location of it is more healing, and itself is very hidden in many people. If you do not find it and it does not appear to the senses at all: then let blood from some branch of it, and that one which appears on the back of the foot, and turns towards the ear; and beware of the nerves, and make a flow of blood in the quantity you desire.
Then loosen the constriction, and place skin over the site of the bleeding, and tie the place. For it heals very quickly.
About Pneumatization, and the quality of its use.
They are made from horns, and air, and glass.
And pneumatization is done in two ways. One is with scarification and the extraction of blood, and the other is without scarification.
And this pneumatization which is done without scarification is in two ways. Or it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the pneumatisms that are administered with scarification and bloodletting are fourteen places of the body. One of which is Ventosatio Alnocrati, and it is the back of the head; and Alkehel, and it is the middle of the neck; and pneumatisms Alhagdahim, and they are two plates of the neck from both sides at once; and pneumatisms of the mind, and it is under the jawbone in the lower part of the face; and pneumatisms of the two spatulas; and pneumatisms of Alachosos above the end of the tail; and pneumatisms of the two fireplaces, and they are the middle of the two arms; and pneumatisms of the two legs; and pneumatisms of the two caudals.
And pneumatization indeed does not extract blood from small scattered veins in the flesh, and because of that it does not fall into power from them, as is the case with bloodletting. Nor should it be necessary to apply suction, whether with fire or without fire, in any disease that occurs from fullness, until the entire body is evacuated.
For if necessity prompts to suction from disease or because of habit, we shall administer it every hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle thereof, and at whatever time it may be.
Which is because there are people who when blood multiplies in them, until they need its removal through suction, find heaviness and swelling in their head.
And from these are people who find fullness and redness on their face, head, and neck. And from these are people who find itching on their face and forehead, and darkness, and dullness in their eyes.
And from these is someone who scrapes at the site of his own suction. And from these is someone whose laughter multiplies. And from these is someone who finds the taste of blood in his mouth: or his tongue will become inflamed and spit out blood. And from these is someone whose sleep multiplies. And from these is someone who sees in his sleep blood and redness, and corpses, and wounds, and things similar to those.
When therefore we see something from those things, and properly if it is on the 15th day of the month: we then order suction to be done after two hours have passed, or three.
The benefit of suction on the back of the head is: because it brings relief to heaviness there, and what flows down to the eyes. But it is necessary for that to be done after evacuation of the entire body.
And this indeed is a suction in place of cephalic bloodletting.
And it is not allowed for one who has a cold complexions, or who has a catarrh. For it causes him great harm.
And because of this, it is not fitting that the elderly use them, and those who are afflicted with cold complaints.
But he who becomes accustomed to it will forgetfulness befall him over himself.
And because of this, it is necessary to warn the Ventilator to put down his hand for a little while on the lower part, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Ventosation or Alkehel is a place for black bloodletting and basilic vein bloodletting, and because of this, it brings together the hiccups, constriction of respiration, rupture of breathing instrument, coughing, and repletion.
And it is necessary to apply the Alkehel Ventosation for a little while, because if it is placed below, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
Ventosation indeed is the relief for accidents of pain in the head, and for eyes, and for migraines, and for perforation, and for tooth root pain; and it is a place for basilic vein bloodletting.
And it is necessary to warn the Ventilator not to press his hand with scarification: so that he does not hit the artery and a flow of blood occurs.
Ventosation indeed under the chin brings forth abscesses in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar things from mouth afflictions: and it is located at the place of bloodletting alieherich, which are on both lips.
Ventosation indeed of spathulas brings forth alchafacham, which arises from relaxation and heat.
Ventosation indeed of the interior parts of two fireboxes brings forth benefit for bloodletting of three veins, Basilic, Black, and Cephalic: because it draws blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh; and those small veins draw from other larger veins until the attraction reaches to the three veins.
And it is necessary that you precede the Ventosator, lest he proceed too far in scarification: for the location has been stripped of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
But the Ventosa which is fumigated over old ulcers, applies to hemorrhoids of the anus, and lower ulcers.
And it is necessary that you precede the Ventosator, so that there may be a great Ventosa and one made of air: because the location needs strong suction, and perhaps the subtle Ventosae are broken: and it should be scarified with a great scarification.
But the Ventosae of the legs diminish with a manifest decrease: because they draw blood from the entire body, and apply to pains old in the kidneys, and wombs, and bladder: they provoke menstruation, and apply to boils, and adema: and stand in place of phlebotomy of both saphena veins, and alopecic.
However, they greatly weaken the body, and cause syncope to occur in many people.
And the benefit of Alopecic Ventosas is similar to the benefit of two leg Ventosas.
The quality of the Ventosas' position is that you place the Ventosa first in a vacuum, and suck with tempered suction: and do not prolong the position of the Ventosas, but put them quickly, and remove them quickly, so that the humors may come to the location with equal approach: and do not cease to repeat and continue that until you see the location already reddening and inflaming, and appears redness of blood: then therefore scarify, and iterate suction slowly. Then consider the disposition of bodies.
For those who are among men with thin flesh, rare pores, it is necessary to scarify him once only, not more: so that the location may not become ulcerated.
And instruct the Ventosator to amplify the scarification and deepen it slightly: and temper the suction with ease, swiftness, and gentle motion.
If there is coagulation in the blood, then it is necessary to lance it twice. Indeed, the first opening is for the subtlety of blood and its clarity: and the second, for a thorough search and extraction of thick blood.
If however the blood is very foul, then let there be a third lancing, in order to achieve the ultimate result.
And finally, when we wish to withdraw blood little by little or a bit at a time, one lancing is sufficient for us. For if we wish to extract much blood, we lance multiple times.
And if we measure it, and find that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to lance deeply; and the equal term in lancing is the depth of the skin.
What should be administered with oils at the wound site of Ventsors, and what a windsor should beware.
In that person whose skin is thick, hard, dark-colored, and whose pores are tight, it is necessary to anoint the areas around the wound with open, soothing, resolving oils; if it is during the time of summer, such as alkeiri oil, or violet oil, or oil from sweet almonds, or oil from cucumber seeds.
And if it is during the time of winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or sabine: and similar things.
If there is excessive thickened blood, cold; then the oil should be bitter, such as oil of myrrh, or oil of balsam, or white oil, or oil of anetis: and similar things.
If the windsor has large pores and tender flesh; then it is necessary to prohibit him from using oil, and it is necessary for those places to be washed after lancing with rose water, or cold water, or sorrel water, or cucumber water, or portulaca water: and similar things.
He, however, whose blood is of much moisture, should wash his sores with vinegar, or with water of myrtle, and sumach: and similar things.
He, however, whose excessences are coarse, should wash his sores with old wine, or with water of sambucus, or the decoction of anise, or chamomile: and similar things.
And it is necessary that the washing of sores should be done in a bath, or in a place where bathing takes place; nay, it is even necessary that it should be administered after coming out of the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And it is not necessary that someone should sleep after washing his sores.
What is the thing by which one ought to regulate Venous-and or Blood-letting before washing.
AND after that, one ought first to consider this: then if the Venous-and or Blood-letting is choleric, and prevails over his blood with sharpness and inflammation: then it is necessary that he take refrigerants, such as pomegranate juice; and also endive with vinegar and lettuce, and sabine, and jujube: and similar things.
And give him foods of eggs, and old goat meat, and cooked food with wild herbs: and similar things.
And whoever has a cold complexion ought to take in drink the syrup made from honey, or from almond, or from sabine seed; and he should take wine of medium odor, which is between old and new; and it is necessary that he abstain from eating much. And give him food of eggs, and beets; and pigeons, that is, small birds; and eggs of doves should be allowed.
And it is necessary that the drink on the day of washing and blood-letting be more than food; and it is necessary that some people should take in drink certain herbs, such as alfera or muscata, or alesselith before washing; or before or after blood-letting, to strengthen the principal limbs and thin the blood. And it is not necessary for them to take it in a warmed vessel.
On Hiccups without Scarification. But the hiccups that are without scarification are those which are placed above the liver, and spleen, and foot joint, and above the belly, navel, and places of the kidneys, and near the anus: because these members do not tolerate scarification upon themselves.
And it is not sought through them, except by the attraction of blood from member to member: as we place Hiccups on the breasts in illness of bloody discharge of the nose. And we use them to release a cold and congealed hiccup from a member into another member: as we place Hiccups on the belly and navel. For it itself rarefies the member, and warms it, and removes the pain because it resolves that hiccup.
And also it is placed on the kidneys when there occurs a blockage or stone. For the virtue of its own attraction may perhaps open up the blockage, or eradicate the stone from its place.
And similarly it does when placed on the liver and spleen to treat a hiccup that is lingering there in both.
And these Hiccups are administered empty with only an incision. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered with a full warm water bath in illnesses of pleurisy: and that is, so that the Ventosa may be filled and become large, with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs that are suitable have been decocted.
Form of Hiccups administered with fire.
Let the width of its opening be two open fingers, according to what we have formed: and let its quantity in depth be half a palm: and let there be a small hole on its side, about halfway down, proportionate to the size that the needle will enter it: make it simultaneously from air or citron, smooth, equal, and polished edges so that it does not harm the member at the position where it is placed upon it: and let there be a crosswise stick in the middle of it, either made of air or iron, where the candle with fire is placed.
And now this abscess is large and great, greater than what we have narrated, and slightly smaller, according to the illnesses and age of the person who uses it.
For abscesses of children and thin-bodied people are different from those of men and stout-bodied individuals.
However, the quality of applying this abscess with fire on a member is that you light a linen wick or a small candle made of tallow and place it over the middle of the transverse rod which is in the midst of the abscess: so that the burning flame may be about the lower part of the abscess, lest the sick body be burned.
Then it should be placed on the member, and a finger should be placed above the opening which I mentioned, until we hold the abscess; while we need it, we will remove the finger, and moisture will issue forth over that opening, and the abscess will dissolve immediately.
Then you should fumigate with a linen wick in its own way, and repeat it if needed.
But in the abscess which is administered in the case of pleurisy with water, there is no transverse rod nor opening; and it is not administered unless it is filled with water and placed only on the member.
And this is its form.
And this abscess, to the extent that it is larger and can hold much water, is better.
Of the Suspension of Bloodlettings.
Bloodletting instruments are not used on many people unless it is in those members where the position of abscesses is impossible due to their smallness, such as the lips and gums and similar things. Or on an uncovered member deprived of flesh, such as a finger, nose, and similar things.
And the quality of using them is that you should take from bloodletting instruments that are in sweet and pure waters, free from putrefactions.
Then they are left for a day and night in sweet water until they are hungry, and nothing remains in their belly. Then the body should be cleansed primarily by bloodletting and purging. Then wash the afflicted member until it turns red. Afterwards place them on top of it.
When they are filled and fall, and it is possible to suck the place with a purging agent, then it is more effective for healing; and if not, then wash the area with vinegar. Then with much water, rub it and express it.
But if the flow of blood is prolonged after a wound from Sanguisuga, and it is that which drips away; then dip a linen cloth in cold water, place it on top, until the dripping ceases.
But if the blood multiplies, then powderize superfine salt or gallstones, and similar substances from stiptics: until the blood ceases.
Or place on top of the area the middles of peeled broad beans: and leave them until they stick to the spot, for the blood is being stopped.
And it is necessary if the situation requires it, to change the Sanguisuga when possible.
But if the Sanguisuga are prevented from hanging, then clean the area with fresh blood. Or insert a probe into the area until something comes out of the blood. Then place them, for they themselves immediately stick when they feel something coming from the blood.
When you want them to fall, powderize something from ground aloe, or salt, or ashes: and they will fall immediately.
This chapter is also very necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a restoration of fractures and dislocations of accidents in bones.
Know ye, sons, that foolish doctors and the common crowd boast about this chapter, and those who have never looked at an ancient book nor read a letter from it.
And because of this reason, the method based on knowledge is deprived in our land. And I did not find in it anything good at all, and I was not able to obtain from it what I obtained except through the length of reading ancient books and study over their understanding, until I extracted the knowledge of that from them.
Then I adhered to experimentation and lengthy study throughout my lifetime.
And now I have described to you from that very thing in this chapter all that contains my knowledge: and beyond what went before, after having abbreviated it for you, and freed it from the occupation of elongation, and abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation, and shown it at the end of declination: and I formed many forms in it from the forms of instruments that are used in it, with is by addition of declination, just as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter II.
It is necessary that we say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries and headings, by whose understanding the artist is compelled to take his stand above their truth: namely, that you and those who are prompt may know or learn this noble art from us.
I say therefore, that when it happens to someone a fracture, or dislocation, or twisting, or accident: then it is necessary that you hasten first to bleed him, and release him, or both at once: if nothing prevents, such as weakness of the virtue: or if he is a child who has fallen ill from one of those things, or an elderly decrepit person: or if the time is very hot with fever, or very cold indeed.
Then let him be content with his food, cold vegetables and bird meats, and the flesh of hares. And let him abstain from wine, and thick meats, and refrain from eating too much or any food that fills the veins with blood. Until you are free from a hot abscess and do not fear the discharge of matter onto the member; then the patient returns to his original regime with which he was accustomed.
When the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary for the patient to be fed nourishing foods in abundance, thick, heavy, and gelatinous: such as food made from cooked wheat with water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and intestines of calves, and eggs, and fresh fish, and thick wine, and similar things. For with this regime, the coagulation of the fracture occurs more quickly and better.
And know that when bones are fractured in old men who are in the first stage of old age and decrepitude, it is not possible for them to be held together and consolidated according to their natural state always, because of the drying up of their limbs: and they are consolidated and continued what remains of them at the end of their softening, like the bones of young children.
However, nature attaches something similar to glue on both sides of the fractured bone, which has thickness and sticks together until they are glued and tied tightly, until it reaches the end of its strength and firmness, like in the beginning, until nothing prevents it from performing its functions: and because of this reason, it is necessary to place nourishment for the patient with foods that have weight, gelatinousness, and thickness, as we said.
And know that there are different kinds of fractures, according to the diversity of members: for a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the skull; and a fracture of the breastbone is different from a fracture of the backbone; and similarly all other members are different one from another until the end: and I come with the remembrance of every kind of fracture exposed in its own chapter, distinct from others. And the types of bone fractures are differentiated even within themselves.
Because it happens that a fracture is curved, besides which stars appear in it. And sometimes a fracture occurs along the length of the bone; and there are fractures that are so called "satagiae", that is, stars, and additions proceeding, as are in a reed when it is adapted to writing with a pen. And not proceeding; and there is a fracture with a wound and disruption at the head, and there is a fracture, a small cleft.
And every species has its own genius or proper instrument for restoration, according to the recollection of it, distinguished in its own places.
And since a bone fracture is known, its twistiness and prominence are apparent; and it appears to the sense, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
When therefore there is no apparent twistiness in the location, nor sound when you touch it with your hand after applying pressure, nor does an injured person find great pain; then there is no fracture there, nay, it may be that there is a twistiness or small cleft: therefore do not move it with your hand and compression entirely, but place on top of it medicines whose recollection comes, after the suitable moment in the location; then let it be tightened with a subtle string.
And know that the location when it is curved and split into two, besides which stars appear in it, yet all parts are removed from their companion: then it behooves you to begin at your hour for its correction, equalizing it before a warm aposteme occurs.
But if a warm aposteme occurs, then let it be for several days until the aposteme quiets down. Then equalize it in whatever way possible with gentleness and ingenuity.
And know that the restoration of it and its equalization is easier than for bones where stars appear.
Then tie it in place according to how its memory comes back to you.
If there are splinters in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, if it be a hand or foot: or with your own hand, if the member be small; or with two ropes, or with a rope and your hand.
And be in the position you are placing the member on an equal place, according to its natural shape, until when the parts of the broken member are extended: then try to make those additions come back with all your skill and in any way you can in their places: and beware, according to your strength, lest there occur excessive pain or injury through your operation; and try, according to your strength, to join one bone to its fellow, according to the better forms.
And it is necessary at that hour for you to test and feel it with your own hand. If then you see something different there, correct it, and make it equal according to the quantity of your strength.
And beware of excessive extension and strong compression, as many foolish people do. For indeed they often cause an abscess to form hotly or a contraction in the member through their own operation, just as we have already seen from their many operations.
Then connect it after the adjustment and gentle operation, and the binding of that member, and rest, and calmness: and caution the sick person over it. And make it so that it does not move during its own vigil and sleep, and during its own rotation, agitation, and evacuation, and all its movements with its utmost strength. And let him beware that the position of the member is not such as would lead to pain following it. Because when he feels pain or injury in the setting of the member's position, then it is necessary for him to change it into another setting in which he does not feel pain.
And beware that his position be equal and straight, so that there is not tortuosity in the member when restored.
And the quality of a broken limb's fracture is, according to what I narrate.
Know that fractured limbs are distinguished by their smallness, and by their magnitude, and by their form.
What then are small among them, such as an arm, and a finger, and a toe, and similar to these, then it is necessary that there be wrapping with soft, thin cloth. But what are large among them, such as the hip and the thigh, it is necessary that there be wrapping with a wide, hard cloth.
For the broad band connects the large limb and tightens it equally from every part of the fracture, so that no stain enters.
Then after your own evacuation from equality, begin to put the suitable liniment on it, in a gentle poultice over the place of the fracture itself. Then begin to wrap the bandage over the place of the fracture itself with three or four wrappings, according as the limb deserves it; and tighten your hand a little with the bandage.
Then go with him to the upper part above the place of the fracture, and tighten less than your original tightening, which you tightened over the broken place. Then stretch yourself with the wrapping away from the place of the fracture a little, and gradually loosen the tightness until you reach a healthy part.
Then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken place with wrappings. Then go with the wrapping to the lower part below the fracture. And let your operation be in the tightness of wrapping and loosening it, according to what we said in the first wrapping above.
Then put a thin poultice or cloth between the wrappings to equalize any tortuosity of the fracture if there is one; and if not, do not put anything in it.
Then wrap another vine around it. Next, place stars of equal number on top of these wrappings, made in thirty days' time, unless there is no swelling or warm abscess.
But if there is swelling or abscess in it: then place on top of it what lies beneath the abscess, and remove the swelling; and let it be for a few days. Then tie another vine on top of those stars.
And the stars should be made from the middle part of a broad cane, smooth and well-shaped; or they can be made from wood, such as pines, or geraid, that is, palm branches, or calingi: and the width of each star should be according to this shape and same figure.
However, it is necessary that the star placed on top of the wrapping be a little thicker and wider than the other stars: and the length of the star should be according to what is fitting for each member in size and smallness.
Then tie another vine on top of the stars with a binding similar to the first one. Then bind above with threads in thirty days, according to what we said about binding: and it is, that your binding should be tighter over the place of the fracture, and as you move further away from the fracture, the binding should be looser.
And it is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and subtlety, and they should be made of soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen from the operations of foolish people who use twisted linen strings for their bindings, it is a great mistake: because the binding falls short of its quality.
And thin threads again do not agree: for you do not achieve through binding with them what you want.
And it is not necessary that there be less than a finger's width between the stars.
If the injured person is hurt through the extremities of the star-shaped wounds after suturing in healthy places: then place under them a piece of soft cloth or knitted wool, until nothing is hurt from that.
But when there is a fracture with an injury and disruption occurs on the skin, I come back to it with a recollection of it in the second chapter by way of singularity.
And know that not every fractured member needs to be stitched with star-shaped sutures from the first day. Because the member is large, it does not need to be covered with star-shaped sutures above it, unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your own security from the risk of hot abscesses.
And this is the method of plasters by which the ancients restored what is placed over fractures and dislocations.
The common plaster method of abbreviation, restoring a fracture, suitable for many complexions, especially women and children: because it is above what heat does not conquer nor cold.
And it is that you take from the flour mill dust, and it is the bran that hangs on the walls of the mill when the millstone is in motion: and you make it as it is, except for removing any husks with a layer of sheep's milk fat: and put the confection together not thick nor thin. Then use it.
Another plaster method for restoring a fracture, and dislocation, and twisting. Recipe of almaces, and ladanum, and acacia, and enula, and mugwort: and the juice of all equal to 10 parts of myrrh, and aloe of both equal to 5 parts, and alethi equal to 20 times: pound all together, sift them, and mix with water of alethi: or with sheep's milk fat, if the patient has a warm complexion. Then use this poultice. For it is of good composition, quickly heals broken bones, and benefits many people.
Another method of making a poultice that also helps with fractures and sprains. Recipe of myrrh, and mastich, and white aloes, each equal to 10 parts; of both kinds of aloe, each equal to 5 parts; and armenian balsam, equal to 20 parts. All are to be pounded many times, and sifted, and mixed with water or egg-white: and it is to be administered.
Another method of making a poultice for joints and separated bones from their places; and it calms the pain that has occurred to them, and splits in the bone, and fractures. Take well-greased wool and immerse it in vinegar and oil that has been decocted; and place it on the spot.
And in this poultice there is no power of restoration, but it is good for calming hot abscesses and expelling pains properly.
Another method of making a poultice that restores a broken bone. Take leaves of mulberry and leaves of opopanax: and grind all into a powder, and make a poultice from both.
Another method of making a poultice for shortening the administration in restoring a broken bone; and when you wish to bring about the resolution of any remaining abscess. Recipe of roots of white aloes, and camomile, and flowers of violet, and seeds of a herb, each one part: all are to be pounded and mixed with wine, unless the member is already warm.
If it is already warm, then mix it with the moist water of coriander, or with water, and use it.
Another method of making a poultice that is stronger for resolving than the first one, when there occurs a hard abscess during the restoration of a member. Here is the translation: Everything concerning that is according to the warmth of the member and the calmness of its heat.
But Hippocrates did not say in his book that something should be placed on a fractured member at the time of its restoration, except a poultice made from caera and oil: nothing else. He narrated that it should be midway between thickness and subtlety.
But Galen seems to have thought that things should be placed on a fractured member at the time of its restoration, which have an extinguishing quality of heat, such as myrrh, and aloes, and olibanum, and similar things to those we have mentioned.
The Method of Plastering which Relates to Injury and Pain. Recipe equal parts of mugwort, cypress, and human hair clippings from the incisors or bird's feathers, and altoside: grind them, sift them, and mix them together. And make a plaster out of it.
However, the quantity needed is such that the bandage remains in place and then dissolves, which you should consider as follows: if the patient does not experience pain, itching, or movement of the fractured bone from its original position; then do not dissolve it for many days. If it happens to him that there is intense itching or disturbing pain or swelling in the place; then hasten and dissolve it within an hour, and remove the plaster from him: and take a soft cloth or a marine sponge, moistened; and immerse it in warm water, and bathe with it until the itching subsides and the pain is assuaged.
If it happens to him that there is intense itching or disturbing pain or swelling in the place; then hasten and dissolve it within an hour, and remove the plaster from him: and take a soft cloth or a marine sponge, moistened; and immerse it in warm water, and bathe with it until the itching subsides and the pain is assuaged. Then let the member rest for one hour. Then place over it a scalded wool, submerged in vinegar and oil, or rose oil; and bind over it for one night, until you are secure from the risk of warm aposteme, and the swelling of the member subsides, and the pain is removed.
Then lead him to a subtle constriction, and prepare a small plaster; and do not tighten the constriction with your first compression, nor with a subtlety with it, until he is healed.
If you see that the apostema, redness, pain, swelling, and all the other accidents have entirely gone away, and you still need to apply an ointment and constriction, then lead him through it just as you did at first equally.
If nothing of what we said happens to the member, then do not release it until after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is released after twenty days, altogether according to what appears to you from the dissolution of the member, just as we said, until the fracture adjoins and the coagulation of flesh is close: add also then in constriction more than your first constriction all; and add also then to the patient's diet in proportion to his previous remembrance.
But if you see the place of the fracture to be dried up and wasted more than is proper: then you will know that nourishment is being prevented from reaching it. Therefore apply it with warm water everywhere as you release it, and let that be for three days, and then slightly loosen the constriction.
Through this operation, nourishment is brought to the member, and it is healed quickly.
But what those foolish restorers do to a broken member by another way, when it is not restored first as it should be, and restored according to the twisting, is an error from their operation, and a great fear: and if they were right, they would have said that in their ancient books, and worked with it.
And I did not see anywhere among them any trace of this altogether, and it is better that it not be done.
¶ About making an incision on the head.
The species of fracture are diverse, and its forms many; and its causes are different.
For there is a fracture that occurs through percussion with a sword: and the percussion takes away the whole bone as far as it reaches to the siphac, which is under the bone, just as an axle does in wood: and because of this, this type of fracture is called Axialis.
Or the sword falls upon some bone and cuts its surface, and does not penetrate as far as to the end of it: and this type of fracture is called Kalaan, that is, Simple Cleavage.
And it is a wound of two fractures, or great, or small.
And there is a fracture that occurs through crushing or grinding: and the cause of it is percussion with a stone, or falling on a stone, or similar cases.
And this fracture is also either piercing, which already approaches the peritoneum, which is under the bone: or it is on the surface of the bone; and it is a wound of these two fractures, whether small or great.
And there is a fracture that occurs hidden within the bone in subtlety like a hair: and it is a small crack, and because of this, this type of fracture is called Capillaris.
And from these is a fracture that occurs through falling or percussion by a stone and similar causes, which cause the bone plate to advance into the interior, and it becomes hollowed out: just as happens in the blowing of bellows when they are struck, and a part of them advances into the interior.
And indeed most of it occurs in the heads of hollow bones, such as those of children.
And all these types of fractures are separate and distinct, and I will come with the recollection of that whole in its place.
And we know all these types of fractures by examination on them, and inquiry into those with probes, and removal of corrupted flesh that is above them.
The species of Capillus is known by this, that it is removed from above the bone, and wiped clean, and smoothed over with wax: for a fracture appears black.
In the care of a fracture, consider first the accidents of the patient: then if you see that from the accidents there appears a clear indication of fear, such as vomiting of choler, and distension, and loss of intellect, and cutting off of speech, and syncope, and acute fever, and departure of the eyes, and redness of them, and similar things from accidents in many dispositions; without doubt it does not heal: and if you see that the accidents do not terrify you, and you hope for recovery; then begin its treatment.
What if the wounded person comes to you first when they are wounded, and it is during winter days; then you should strive in removing the bone before the fourteenth day according to every disposition.
And if it is during summer days, then you should hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest what is underneath the bone be corrupted by linen and those accidents which we have described occur.
What if the fracture of the bone has already reached the linen touching the brain and is with minute particles and attraction; then you should cut off the broken and bruised part according to what I tell you.
And it is that you should shave the head of the wounded person; and wipe over the bone in whatever way is possible to you; and according to the shape of the wound, and what is light on the patient.
What if it happens to you while detecting the bone that there is bleeding or a warm abscess; then apply to him what is needed. And it is that you should fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil; and make the wound quiet, until the abscess settles, and be secure from bleeding. Then begin the treatment of the bone and its removal.
And this is done according to one or two methods.
One method indeed is to cut the bone with a sharp-edged chisel; and this is its shape.
Then take another chisel, one that is broader than the first one by a bit, and this is its shape.
Then take also another chisel, one that is even broader than the second one.
And the second method is that you should have a variety of chisels at your disposal: some should be broader than others, and some should be shorter than others; and they should be in the last degree of sharpness on their edges, and made of iron or steel; and use them with ease to strike the chisel, so as not to shake the head and hurt it.
But if the bone is hard and tough: then it is necessary to perforate around its circumference before you administer chisels, with drills that are called non-penetrating drills; and they are not so named unless because they do not pass beyond the end of the bony part behind it. Because the drill has a rounded tip above what is under its sharp head, similar to an edge, and a small circle prevents it from sinking in and piercing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is fitting for you to take a great many of these drills, each one corresponding to the thickness of the bone, until you have with you a drill suitable for every kind of skull. And the length and shortness of the sharp end of this drill should correspond to the thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three kinds of drills, or trephines.
The quality of drilling around the broken bone is: to place the drill on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then move the reamer to another place and put what is between all the openings of the radius's thickness or around that.
Then cut with the resectors what is between all openings of the bone: and make it thinner than you can above that from the end of levity, as we said, until you eradicate the bone, or by your hand, or with some other instrument which you prepared for this purpose, such as tenaculae and subtle forceps.
And it is necessary that you beware of all caution lest the reamer or resector touch anything from the siphon.
When therefore you have circumcised the bone by perforating and it has been separated from the siphon, if it was continuous with it and you have extracted it, it is necessary that you rasp and equalize the extremity of what remains in the bone with another similar resector. However, it is necessary that it be thin and subtle more than other resectors.
And if anything remains of small bones and fragments: then take them up with ease with the instrument that is among those which are with you. Then care for the wound after that with lint and ointments which we said.
And another mode of the operation is easy, absolutely far from fear: which Galen said and praised it with great praise: and this is his saying. It is necessary for you first to begin to uncover the part of the bone from the place where the fracture is more violent and manifest: until when you have uncovered that part and placed the end of this lens-shaped resector underneath it, which has this shape.
And the lens-shaped part does not cut anything: and the sharp part of it goes into two sides of it along its length, as you see: so that the lens-shaped part is attached to the siphon, with its acute face cutting into the bone.
Then strike above the Incisor bone on one side with a small mallet, until you cut through the whole bone easily, as it turns over; and be sure with a cloth, lest anything happen to you that you would fear entirely.
And if the physician were not more foolish than men and more ignorant of it, nor sleeping, then if anything remained attached to the bone from a cloth in certain places, he would cut off that part with the end of the incisor's lens itself, and free it with ease. It is freed from him without harm, and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the cloth, and what is being cut off from the bone is its face, and there remain on it roughness and subtle ridges: then you must take away that roughness, and remove those ridges with fine rasors which you prepared in different quantities, so that it will be possible for you to apply them in any suitable place of their own, and straighten up those things, according to what the operation leads you to, and the fractured bone, and its shape. And it is necessary for you to apply yourself with your own reason, by which you first roughen the bone, and more widely than those fine rasors. Then use it after that one, finer.
And it is necessary for you to apply yourself with your own reason, by which you first roughen the bone, and more widely than those fine rasors. Then use it after that one, finer. And do not cease to do that in succession, until you reach the point of administering it more thinly and subtly than all of them.
In each of the remaining small cracks and fractures, it is necessary to apply care, according to what leads to its correction.
And it is a thing that is not hidden from anyone, to whom every pursuit is dedicated in this art, and stands over what we have written, and shown in great fractures.
If however the cloth is detected and retained when you remove the bone: then it is necessary for you to take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth, doubled or tripled, and immerse it in wine and rose oil. Place it on the first cloth, and do that as easily as you can over it, so that it is not made too tight.
Then apply the broad ligament above it: and do not draw it tight except for as much as will hold the wound; and leave it with this care for one day or two days, until you are sure against a hot abscess. Then loosen it and apply medicines to what is excessive dryness, such as lily roots, and herb flour, and frankincense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things: and do this by making a powder from these medicines which will be scattered over the wound like dry things.
And universally apply to it all medicine that has a property of cleansing and not biting. And beware according to your ability, so that the wound is clean in your treatment: nor be it dirty with ointment, nor fouled.
And beware according to your ability, so that the wound is clean in your treatment: nor be it dirty with ointment, nor fouled. Nor should you allow the discharge to accumulate completely: for when the discharge accumulates on the brain cloth, it corrupts it and putrefies it, and a great evil occurs afterwards on the sick person, especially when the surface is not cleaned, particularly when its care is neglected, blackness forms on its surface.
Therefore consider then, if accidents befall the sick person as we have said, you will know that it is undoubtedly pernicious.
And if blackness does not occur except from the medicine that is placed on it, and it is in the power of that medicine to cause that blackness: then you should take one part from honey, three parts from rose oil, and mix with them a cloth. Then place it on the wound: afterwards care for it with remedies that are suitable, until it is healed.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the upper two parts of the nose are not broken at the same time, nor one of them, because they consist of two bones. The lower part is cartilaginous and does not break, but rather suffers from abrasion, twisting, and curvature.
If one of the two parts of the nose is broken, then you should insert a small finger into the nasal cavity and use your index finger and thumb to equalize the fracture until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this skillfully with ease. And beware that the patient does not experience excessive pain during your operation.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and cannot be reached by your finger, then you should use the end of a radius bone with a small knob on it.
If the fracture is in both parts of the nose, then do the same thing; and if possible, hasten with its restoration on the first day after the fracture. And if not, then afterwards, after seven or ten days in a state of calm and free from suppuration.
Then insert a linen cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part; or insert two cloths if the fracture is in both parts. And let the thickness of the cloth be such that it fills up the nasal cavity.
And certain old restorers said to immerse the cloths in butter and change them every day. But I do not see it that way, rather it should be soaked with egg white, mixed with flour mill powder. Then leave the cloth until the bone is solid and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes a goose feather is inserted into the nose in place of the cloth, after it has been wrapped with a soft cloth; and it happens that it holds the nasal fracture more firmly, so that the patient may not be hindered from breathing.
And this is not necessary. If you wish, do that; and if you wish, make an incision.
But if an apostema warm should occur on the nose while you are operating again, plaster the nose with cerate, or with cotton steeped in rose oil, or a little from dyaquilon.
But if a warm apostema does not occur, then it is necessary to plaster it with sesame flour and incense powder made from the whites of eggs. Then place a soft cloth over it, and do not bind the nose with anything at all.
If the bones of the nose are broken into small pieces or fragmented, then it is necessary to split them apart and remove them with instruments that fit. Then sew it up and care for it with what enfles it, and consolidate it with suitable plasters or ointments.
But if a wound occurs between the nose and upper lip, then it is necessary to care for it with licinia and administer a lead cannula until it heals.
Of the restoration of the lower jaw when it is dislocated.
When the lower jaw is dislocated and there is no fracture with a wound: then look to see if it is fractured only on the outside and not broken into two parts, and bent towards the inside: then its recognition is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is in the right part of the jawbone, you should insert your left index finger into the weak bone: similarly, if the fracture is on the left side of the mandible, then insert the index finger of your right hand: and push with it the curvature of the fracture inward from behind with your other hand, and make it equal.
But if the fracture of the jawbone is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer extension from both sides, according to straightness: until it is possible to make it equal.
If however a commotion or disruption has already occurred in the teeth: then bind them with the remaining ones using a gold wire, silver wire, or silk. Then place a splint above the fractured jawbone. Then place a doubled cloth on top of it and place a large, well-made asterisk or a piece of sole skin the same length as the jawbone.
Then bind it above with the binding you have prepared for it, and apply it as suits its application, until it is not destroyed; and instruct the patient to use quiet and calmness: and give them gentle sips of food.
If however you think that something is altering its shape in some way: then hurry and release it on the third day. Then straighten out what has been altered from that and apply a poultice to it using mill dust with egg white or sesame flour after you have removed the splint: and place a soft wool cloth on top of the poultice.
While that poultice remains attached to it and the bone arrangement does not change, release it without breaking, until it is healed: or bind the fracture. For this fracture is often bound for three weeks.
And if a warm abscess should occur in the meantime, then administer what we have said many times for soothing it, until that abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with an wound, take notice. But if the fragment has separated from the bone or the socket: then be subtle about this and remove those fragments with what suits you for their removal using instruments.
If the wound's opening is tight, then enlarge it with a phlebotomizer according to the necessity of your own.
Then when you have removed those socket fragments and nothing remains, or if the wound's opening is large; and if not, place a poultice on top that suits it to heal and cover it until it is healed.
On the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Indeed, the clavicle is often broken at its anterior part from the shoulder, and the fracture occurs according to one of three modes.
Or it is broken and separated into two parts, apart from the difficulties that occur in it; and this is easier to restore.
Or so that there are difficulties in the bone itself; and this is more difficult to restore.
Or thus, with a fracture accompanied by a wound.
And the operation in this case when there is no wound is to have two attendants, so that one of them supports the fractured clavicle with the aid that follows it, and the other stretches out the neck towards the affected side.
Then equalize the fracture with your fingers until its form is restored, as it should be; and that there may not be any prominence or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then it is necessary to place under the patient's tittilico a ball made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to the quantity of your need: and stretch out and elevate the clavicle, and bind the ball with your hand until the fracture is equalized, as it should be.
And if you are unable to pull the end of the clavicle outward because it has gone too far: then it is necessary to have the patient rest on his back over his own chest; and place a medium-sized pillow under his shoulder, and have the attendant press down on his shoulder until the bone of the clavicle that is deep is lifted up towards the top: and then correct the fracture and equalize it with your fingers.
If however you feel a swelling from the clavicle and it moves: then it is necessary to bind it above, and remove the swelling with ease.
If it is retained in bone, then apply your skills to the incision of it with one of the Incisors that you prepared for that purpose, after you have placed under the Furcula instrument which saves the sifach: and this instrument is made of wood or iron. And this is its shape.
It resembles a snail shell which has no hollow part.
And let its width be according to that which you desire in it, depending on the size of the bone and its shape. But its length also according to what is possible for you to do in the operation.
And let it have two ends, as you see: and one end be broad, and the other narrow.
If however the disruption of the wound that you cut when you removed the broken bone is wide, and you secure it from hot apostema: then gather together the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear hot apostema: then fill the wound with cloth and flax according to the size of the cut in the wound.
Which if hot apostema happens, then pour a cloth into rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and place it on top.
The binding of the bone when it is without a wound and without cutting is, as you place an ointment made from wheat flour with egg white on the bone. And put a smooth bandage on top. Then place a ball underneath the splint of it, if you need it. Then take a himemat, that is, a wheel which the Saracens hold, which is very long: and let its width be the breadth of one hand, or about that. Then place a doubled flax on top of the bandage and ointment. Then take a needle made from fine board, whose width is three fingers, and similarly in length. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap the cloth around with a small piece of linen in that place where the inflammation falls on the fracture and the wound. Then place the inflammation over the fracture as it revolutes, and wrap it around his neck, and under his chin sound, and under his chin weak: and bring it over all parts, and see how the constriction holds the fracture in its constriction: and that is what does not conceal itself from you, and all so that the linen thread does not come off above the broken bone. And therefore it is necessary for you to look at the weak person every day. Whenever then the bond becomes relaxed and you see the linen thread has already come off: then straighten it out and tighten the bond.
Then place the patient's sleep on his back and place a small pillow under his chin while he is sleeping at night, so that with him may be lifted up to him his aid from the side of himself. The fracture of the wing is therefore elevated by the elevation of the shoulder.
Or bind his arm to his neck: and do not loosen the bandage unless something happens by chance from itching or an abscess up to twelve days.
Then renew the poultice if you see his face is towards it. And add to the constriction, and let him go, until he is restored and has formed a scab.
And the fracture of the wing is indeed tightened and strengthened according to many people in twenty-eight days: and sometimes it happens in some people in a shorter time.
Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Wing.
The wing rarely breaks and is broken only in a wide place: and it does not break except at its edges.
When then the break occurs from that place and it is broken in the middle of it, and it is not known except by touch: then according to what the figure of the fracture is, strive for its preparation. And bring it back to its natural shape by all means of intelligence, as much as is possible for you.
Then place a dusting of miller's powder with egg white and sweet pitch, and put a small cloth wrapped double over it. Then place on top of that a wide plate from fine glass, according to the size of the spatula as a whole, or slightly larger.
If there is a concavity under the plate in some part of the spatula, then fill that concavity with sweet pitch until the plate descends to an equal height.
Then bind it on top with a piece of linen cloth, tightening in a gentle constriction and with the firmness of the plate, until it does not move from its place.
And check the bandage every day. Whenever the bandage becomes loosened, tighten it, and if the plate moves from its place, let the patient lie on his healthy side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
When this number is complete, then loosen the bandage: and you will be in safety. For it is from bones whose connection is not to be feared, nor their separation.
If however a bone fragment proceeds and pierces beneath the skin: then cut above it, and remove it. And do as we said for a fracture of the wing-like bone from sedation of an inflamed apostema, if anything happens to it.
About the restoration of a fractured breastbone.
The breastbone is sometimes broken in its middle part, and this rarely occurs. Its extremities indeed are mostly broken and shattered from accidents that occur to it.
When it is broken in its middle part, which declines towards the lower parts, and a sharp pain occurs to him, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing; and perhaps he vomits blood, and a hollow appears on the fractured bone, and it does not conceal itself from sense. The restoration of it is, that the patient should be placed upon his back: and put between two spatulas a poultice.
Then compress his shoulders and gather the ribs from both sides with your hands: and make it equal in proportion, as much as possible and fitting, until the bone figure returns, as it should.
Then place a poultice and a plaster on him, and put a splint made of willow or hazel wood, or similar materials, lightly on top, after you have wrapped it in cloth. Then make it secure by binding it over the broken bone, so that it is not dislodged; and go along with the bandaging in a circular motion to the back several times, and tighten it as is proper.
Then check the bandage at every hour, and whenever it becomes slack, tighten it; and if necessity demands that you remove it due to itching, corrosion occurring in the place, or pain, or abscess: then hurry and release it, and remove the poultice, and correct what has happened with its usual treatment.
Then return to the poultice if you see it is needed again; and attach a strapping to it until it heals.
About the restoration of Ribs when they are broken.
Know that the fracture of Ribs does not occur except in thick places that follow the back, and from the extremities of these from the anterior part. And it does not happen to them that they are worn away, except because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of this is not hidden from sense during an examination with fingers.
And its restoration is done in such a way that you equal the fracture with your fingers as much as possible, until the figure becomes equal, as it should be. Then apply poultices and bind the broken bone with a splint, if it needs one.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the interior: then it happens to the patient a severe pain, and a puncture, like that which occurs in one who has pleurisy: because the bone pierces the membrane, and also he suffers difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood profusely: and this is difficult to cure.
And now the ancients have contrived many devices for it: and among them are those who say that you should give food to the patient which generates inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly may be inflamed, and distended, and forced outwards to bring the fracture towards the exterior.
But we detest giving cause for a rapid formation of a hot abscess unless it happens by chance. If it has already happened, then you add to it.
And some of them said: Let a poultice be placed over the place, then let it be sucked with strength, and it is similar to this reasoning. However, one fears that the poultice may attract superfluidities to the place because of the condition of weakness.
And some of them said: It is necessary to cover the place with wool that has already been soaked in hot oil, and to put small feathers between the ribs, until it is filled: so that there may be a binding that is equal when you wrap it around according to the roundness.
Then the patient should be cured of pleurisy with food and medicine.
But if the patient's strength is strained, which they cannot tolerate, and the bone pierces the membrane with a puncturing wound that causes injury, and we fear for the patient: then it is necessary to split open over the place, and to lay bare the fractured rib. Then we should place over it an instrument that conserves the suture, whose previous description preceded: and we should cut open the bone with ease, and cut into it.
Then let us bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large with a suture; and heal it with plasters until it is healed.
But if an abscess should occur in the meantime, then hasten and pour poultices into rose oil, and place it over the spot; and let the patient be cured with that which is suitable for the abscess.
Meanwhile, also a poultice should be placed on top of the side where they sleep, until it heals.
Of the restoration of fractures of the spine of the back and neck.
Indeed, fractures of the vertebrae of the neck sometimes occur and rarely is abrasion caused to them; similarly with those of the back. When therefore it happens to anyone, and you wish to know whether it will heal or not: then examine him. For if you see his hands already softened, and numb, and dead; and he is unable to move them, nor stretch them, nor constrict them; and when you constrict them with your fingers, and prick them with a needle, he does not feel it, and does not feel pain in them: then you will know that it is not healing, and in many cases it is mortal.
But if he moves them and feels constriction and pricking sensation with your fingers and needle: then you will know that the bone is not broken, and that the patient will be cured with treatment.
But if it happens to the vertebrae of the back in a similar way, and you wish to know whether it will heal or not: then look at his feet; then if you see that they are softened, and that the same thing occurs as in his hands: afterwards when he lies on his back, flatulence and evacuation occur without his consent; and when he is rolled onto his stomach, evacuation occurs without his consent; and when he is rolled onto his back, and he wants to urinate, but cannot: then you will know that it is mortal. Therefore he does not labor in its cure.
But if nothing of that kind happens to him, the case is easier.
And the cure of what happens to him because of that is to apply a poultice for apostumes hot: thus, you will place upon Spongia worn-out rose oil alone: or with egg yolks well-cooked.
Place it on top of her several times a day, until the hot apostume is calmed down: then place one of the soothing, drying plasters over the spot, and tie it with a bandage; and instruct the patient to use quietness and tranquility. He should not sleep on the part where he finds pain until he is healed.
But if it happens with the abrasion of a shattered bone, or something that has already separated from it: then you should remove the flaps on the skin and take away what is left. Then gather two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture. Then care for it with some ointment, from unguents, until he heals.
But if the last bone of the backbone is broken and it is the end of the spine: then you should put your left thumb into the anus, and adjust the fractured bone with your other hand, as much as possible, and secondly.
Then place something over it, and take it away; and care for the wound with the treatment that preceded, until he heals.
About the restoration of an anus.
Chapter 11.
The bones of the anus are rarely broken. For if they are broken, then the fracture of them is not unless there is comminution at their ends: and they split along their length, and bend inwardly: and it happens to the patient that he experiences pain in the place, and a puncture: and his leg becomes numb which is broken.
And the restoration of it is, that you stretch forth your hand over it until you steady yourself above the fracture in its own shape.
But if the fracture is only in its extremities, then equalize that fracture, according to how it prepares itself for you in equality, until it resembles its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in length, or already inclines towards its inward parts: then make the patient lie down on his stomach, until you are prepared to restore that fracture. When therefore you have equalized it, place a poultice over it: then place a wooden or leather splint over it; and bind tightly over what you are not afraid to change the fracture nor remove the splint.
And equalize the concavity of those with him as it fills it, until it is bound tightly according to equality; and instruct the patient to sleep on his back or on his healthy side.
But if a hot abscess occurs to him: then cease from stretching and restoring it, until the hot abscess subsides; and place over it what settles on it, according as preceded, and then return to restoring it: and bind it as necessary.
But if it happens that the bone is shattered or crushed, remove it.
Of the Restoration of a Fracture Assistive Device.
The Assisting device is that which is between the elbow and the head of a spatula.
If it breaks, then its restoration is according to one or two methods.
One of which is: that you take a piece of flat wood of middle thickness, according to this shape, which follows.
And it is tied at both ends with two straps.
Then it is suspended from a raised place; and the patient sits on a chair. Then he should place his broken arm on top of wood until it reaches the elbow joint, where a curved piece of wood is attached.
Then he should hang something heavy above it, so that the assistant can stretch it down to the lower parts. Then the doctor should equalize the fracture with his own hands at the same time, until the fracture returns to what is necessary.
And another method is, that the patient be laid on their back: and suspend his hand from his neck with a bandage. Then instruct two assistants to have one of them hold that which is above the fracture with their hands: and to have the other hold below it, and each stretch out to their own side.
And if you wish for a stronger extension, then bind below the fracture with one bandage, and above it with another bandage; and each of the two assistants should stretch out to their own two sides.
If then the fracture is near the extremity of the shoulder, it is necessary that one bandage be placed below the elbow joint, and another below the fracture towards the forearm.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow: then it is necessary that a bandage be placed above that place, and above the elbow itself.
Then equalize the fracture with ease without labor, until the fracture is equalized as it should be, and a good application is applied; then bind it, if there is no occurrence of hot abscess.
If indeed a hot abscess occurs, then leave the bandage off until the seventh day. And place a compress of sheep's wool that has been soaked in vinegar and rose oil over it, until the abscess subsides; then bind it: and the way to bind it is, by placing an application over the fracture.
Then place a poultice made from new cloth over the application. Then gather the arm above the assisting hand, and place his open hand on his shoulder.
And place a cloth and tie it above the assisting hand, so that the arm may stand in the position of the shoulder blades: if nothing hinders you from him or something is altered on you by a broken bone.
But if you fear that something may be altered on you by a broken bone, then use the shoulder blades: and it is, to place over the fracture itself the shoulder blade which is wider and stronger than the other shoulder blades. And place between all the width of a finger: and let the length of the shoulder blades be according to the fracture with an addition of three finger-breadths from every part.
Then tie above the shoulder blades with a binding which I said at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is, that your binding should be tighter over the place of the fracture. And to the extent that the fracture is more elongated, the binding should be looser.
So if you see the position of the shoulder blades and the binding, as we said, at the hour when you restore the member immediately, then do so; and if you fear a hot abscess, then release the binding and the shoulder blades until the seventh day, as we said.
Then consider the swelling in all three days, so that no itching, or inflammation, or impediment of food may reach the member, due to the excessiveness of the binding. Therefore correct everything according to what we said.
If indeed you are confident that nothing will happen from it: then do not loosen the binding, unless after three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on his back, and his hand on his stomach; and place under the assisting bolster a full wool blanket evenly.
And consider at every hour of night or day, so that the figure of the broken member does not become loose, or the binding becomes relaxed. Therefore correct that whole thing with your skill.
And give the patient food according to the order we have set forth, so that the food is fine at first, until the mouth begins to open; then it is necessary to thicken his food.
For it is a custom of assistance and the leg is that it should be stretched over forty days; then therefore it is necessary to release it, and administer bathing, and treat with ointments which correct that.
But if the fracture is foul and bruised: then do not release from it a ligament and keep an eye on it until fifty days, and even until two months.
On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two elbow-bones.
Of which one is small and it is that which follows the thumb. And the other is large, and it is that which is placed below the small one from the lower part.
Perhaps therefore the larger elbow-bone alone breaks, or the smaller one; and perhaps they both break together.
When therefore the small upper elbow-bone is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower elbow-bone is broken, it is a bad fracture, and its healing is difficult.
And worse still is that, when both bones break at the same time.
If therefore the bone that is broken is the small upper elbow-bone, then it is fitting for a doctor to apply in its restoration an extension with ease, until it becomes equal.
If however the large elbow-bone is that which is broken: then it is necessary to apply a stronger tightening very much.
And it is necessary to place the shape of a hand in its restoration, and its extended extension above the elbow. And let the thumb be higher than all other fingers on the hand, and let it be articular at the lower joint of all fingers or others. And let the weak one sit square above itself, and let the poultice be before him, or directly opposite, in height, so that the weak one does not incur labor.
Then the attendant should stretch out his arm from below, either with his own hand or with a strap. And another attendant should stretch out similarly from above.
Then the doctor should adjust the jaw until it is reduced to its better shape as much as possible.
But if there are fragments of bone in the fracture, then try to reduce each fragment to its place with your force.
But if it appears that a splinter is separated and is poking the skin, and you do not have hope of restoring it; then find it above and remove it according to the method we mentioned earlier in what has been said before.
But if there is a fracture with an open wound, I have already treated that separately in a special chapter; therefore, receive its treatment from there.
And if a warm abscess occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then make a poultice with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be in the middle between thickness and thinness; and tie the poultice over it tightly, until the abscess subsides: then remove the cerate and apply a prepared plaster made from flour from the mill with egg white. Then place splints, and let the splint placed over the fracture be a little wider and stronger.
And know that the number of splints for an arm is six in various arrangements: whether the fracture is in one or two joints at the same time.
Then place your bandage over the site of the fracture stronger and more vigorously, and a little bit tighter above or below the fracture, or put a softer bandage on top of it for a short while, according to what was remembered earlier at the beginning of this chapter.
And there are cloths which are wrapped around a fracture, soft cloths, moist ones: and they should not be hard, rough. And let there be a thread of flax properly twisted, medium between fine and thick, just as we have narrated.
And consider the member and ligament after days. And if something happens that requires correction, such as itching on a member: then it is necessary to wrap the member with warm water-soaked cloths until the itching ceases, and do not constrict the member until it has ceased, then iterate the constriction.
And if the constriction has already been softened and the bone has already been moved away, and similar things: then correct that whole thing with your skill, and consider again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the member due to excess constriction, then it is necessary to soften it slightly and let it be for a few days until it reaches the member, and then bind it.
But if nothing of what we said happens to the patient, then it is not necessary to release it until after twenty days or around that.
Then suspend the patient's hand at his neck. And let his neck be level, and be guarded with his own strength against agitated movements. And make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or in thirty-two days: and perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days. The whole thing is according to the dispositions of humors and the dispositions of virtues.
Book of the Restoration of Fractures Hands.
Know that fracture rarely occurs in the palm of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers. And it does not occur unless there is repeated rubbing.
When therefore a fracture or attrition of the foot occurs: then it is necessary that the patient sits square: and before him is a seat according to equality. Then place his hand over it extended.
Then the assistant should stretch out the broken bones and the doctor should adjust them until they are well joined together.
Then it is necessary that he puts on a poultice and bandage, unless a hot abscess should occur. Then place a cloth above it according to the size of the place: and you have already wrapped it in a linen cloth.
But if the fracture is near the lower part of the foot around the belly of the plantar area, then make a similar sphere out of cloth and instruct the patient to bend over it with his fractured foot: then tie it with a long bandage.
And let the gauze be made of leather, with a softness to it, so that it may be applied to the skin of the foot and tied according to what is necessary.
But if the fracture is on the outside, then it is necessary that you place a gauze above and another below on the plantar area: and let his hand be straight open. Then place a strapping, as if it were revolved around the hand: and extend between the fingers with a bandage.
What if there is a fracture of some joint of the fingers? Then if it is the thumb, it should be adjusted as necessary. Then let it be tied with the foot: and if it is pleasing, place a small straight gauze on him, so that the fracture may be elevated and not moved.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the middle finger, ring finger, or pinky, then it should be adjusted and bound with the healthy finger that follows it: or all should be bound according to succession: and this is better. Or place a small gauze on top of it, as we said with the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after that arrangement of hot boils: and apply to it what is necessary, whenever something occurs from it, according to how its narration proceeds.
Of the Restoration of a Fractured Hip.
The hip bone is often broken and becomes evident to the sense: because it turns towards the inner and posterior part.
And its restoration is done thus: by tightening a ligament above the fracture, and another ligament below the fracture. And the patient should be stretched out on their face.
Then the assistant should stretch out all the ligaments to his own side according to proportion: and this when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
But if there is a fracture near the root of the hip, then let there be a ligament to the side of the groin, so that the extension falls upwards: and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if there is a fracture near the knee, then let there be a ligament near the knee, so that the extension falls downwards.
Then the doctor should equalize the bone with both of his hands, until he reduces it to its natural shape: and the bone should be joined by a good union.
Then it is necessary to apply a poultice and bandage, if there is no swelling in the member. For if there occurs a swelling in it: then leave it for several days, until the warm swelling subsides, and then return to your cure.
The bandage should be applied thus. It is necessary to wrap a hard bandage over the fracture, that is, to bind it; and double it two or three times; and leave some excess from it. Then wrap the leg until the heel reaches the root of the nativities.
And insert a long thread between the hip and leg near the knee downwards, and let the ends of the thread come from above on both sides. Then turn back over the shoulder and knee which is redundant from above.
Then place a splint on the knee in the location of its fracture, and place one of them over the bone of the leg.
Then fill the gaps between the shin and the knee with soft cloths, so that the constriction may be equalized.
Then begin with strong bandaging from the middle over the location of the fracture, with three or four foldings. And as much as you stretch the bandage away from the place of the fracture, let your bandage be less tight and softer, and more gentle.
Then tend to the two ends of the cloth, that you have inserted between the knee and shin. Bind with each of them three splints which are above. Then go with the two ends of the cloth to the lower parts, until you reach the ankle of the foot. And with each of them tie also the ends of the splints from the other side, so that the bandage is not moved from its place.
Then release the bandage over that, as long as it remains, so that there is no danger of member corrosion, or abscess, or swelling, and similar things. If anything happens to that. Therefore hasten with its dissolution and correct what has happened from it entirely, according as we have said many times.
If however there is a bone fragment in the bone that pierces: then it is necessary for you to equalize it if it is possible for you. And if not, find something above it and remove it; and take care with the one whose previous mention was made, until it is healed.
And when this fracture of the knee is bound, besides what splints are added to it, as we said in the aid and arm.
However, in its restoration when thus fractured, it does not happen that an invalid suffers from lameness. And if it is restored alone, except that another leg is applied to it, then it is necessary for the one who has it to limp forever.
And know that the Hip is tightened in fifty days, or increased a little, or decreased a little: all this is according to the diversity of complexions and other dispositions.
On the restoration of a fractured Knee-Joint.
Know that a fracture of the Knee-Joint rarely occurs, but wear and tear often happens to it.
If indeed a fracture occurs to it, then only either a cleft or an opening can be found in its parts. And it is that with a wound and without a wound. And stands over it altogether with sense.
And its restoration is such that what has been disrupted from its parts with the fingers is made equal again, until it is gathered and joined together as much as possible by equality, facility, and skill.
Then place a poultice made from sesame flour or miller's flour with egg white on it; and put over that a round bandage, if needed; and bind tightly above it with a suitable strap.
Then consider all the conditions which we have described in other fractures, such as warm abscesses and similar ones; so that you counteract every accident with what is suitable for it, until it heals.
On the restoration of a fractured Leg.
Know that there are two bones in the Leg, one of which is large and is called the Crurus, and the other is slender and is called the Fibula.
And it happens to both of them in the same way as a fracture that occurs to two bones of the arm; and because of this, its restoration is like the restoration of the arm, equally, and the operation is one.
If two bones are broken simultaneously, it is turned towards all parts.
And if a slender bone is broken, the splint is turned towards the anterior part.
And if a thick bone is broken, you will find it lower down; and it is one of those that do not remain hidden from you.
Then apply extension, equality, and astral binding according to what is equal.
However, if the fracture of the leg is a foul one, having many seths, so that there should be less extension and gentler alleviation by your means.
And in the leg there is something like a procedure for the arm: and it is, that when you equalize the astral bindings, and complete your entire operation, then take two strips of pine wood, which are used in the fabrication of solaria, which is placed under tables: and they are made from palm leaves: and choose among them those with a small thickness, nor are they very thin: and let their length be according to the length of the leg from the knee down.
Then wrap around each strip with two wrappings according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side: and they should be from the knee down to the foot.
Then bind the two strips in three places at both ends and the middle. When a constriction is prevented, the leg bends to the right and left, and remains in a good position.
And now apply a cradle made of wood according to the length of the leg, and place the leg in it, so that it may preserve itself from movement.
And indeed very much is necessary, that you should do this in a fracture when the wound is fresh and proper.
Then consider the leg every day, and strive with it with utmost effort to prevent abscess, or swelling, or other things. If then something happens to one of those things, then apply to it what is needed until it heals, if God wills.
On the Fracture of Bones of the Foot and Fingers.
Indeed, a fracture does not occur at all in the calcaneum.
The bones of the foot sometimes suffer a fracture, and the fingers also suffer a fracture to a lesser extent. And this does not happen to them except by attrition in many dispositions.
If a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot, and you see those bones elevated above themselves to infinity, then let the patient place their foot on prepared ground, as if they were walking.
Then stand you, and place your foot on what is elevated from those bones; afterwards press or tread upon it; and equalize it until it returns to its place.
Then apply a poultice, and grease on top; and place beneath the foot a small flat plate with two flat heads.
Then bind it to the foot with a tight wrapping, after you have wrapped it with cloths and other things that are needed.
When then three days or four have passed for him, then loosen the bandage. For you will find that the bones are equalized, whether they be fractured or dislocated. The operation therefore is as you see it.
But if any fingers are broken, then restore them and equalize them as I have told you about the restoration of fingers and hands. Then place a splint on your finger according to the length of the finger, and let it be slightly wider at that point; then place this plate under the foot as I told you, and bind it with a tight wrapping.
But if what is broken is two or three or more bones, then place a splint over all the fingers of that size, wrapped in linen cloth; and bind the plate to the lower foot; and let it stand above one head of the plate outside the belly of the foot, so as to hold good retention.
And it is fitting for you that you do not forget, unless you consider all the things I told you about other fractures from accidents we discussed; and oppose every accident with what is necessary.
On the fracture of a woman's vulva, and of the bone of the hip, and of the man's beard.
When a woman's vulva is broken, then make her sit square. Then bend her towards the part of her own back, and hold her back a little bit.
Then let the midwife fill her vulva with cotton, until she is filled: and it should be in the vulva like a sphere.
Then beat the woman and raise her back gradually. For that cotton comes out until it becomes like a sphere before the entrance of the vulva, and the broken bone returns.
Then place a poultice on her back. When she wants to urinate, remove the cotton with ease, then let her urinate; and return it according to the way you inserted it at first: then let her return to her original poultice.
Let it be done for seven days, or around that time, because the bone itself is restored.
And if you want, take a sheep's bladder and tie it over her opening with a reed tube, and insert the whole bladder into her vulva. Then blow into the tube with force, until the bladder is inflated within the vulva, because the fracture returns.
Then let it be filled with cotton and stand for a few days, according to what we narrated, until she is healed.
And when the bone of the hip of a man or woman is broken, then apply what we narrated for the restoration and equability of the anchor bone.
And the anus is not concealed in these nearby fractures that are somewhat connected, especially for someone who has some knowledge or use.
And understand my book thoroughly, for the fracture itself signifies to you a straight path in many dispositions for restoring it and binding it up; therefore, understand.
But when the man's arm is broken, take a goose's gullet, and insert the rod into it. Then place a bandage made of cloth over it, and wrap it up, and let it be for three days or about that time, and it will heal if God wills.
Of the restoration of bone fractures when there is a wound.
It is suitable for someone who suffers a fracture with a wound, especially if it is great, such as the head of the femur or pelvis, or similar to those, that you hasten and perform bleeding on them immediately: if the conditions of bleeding are indicated to you, as we have mentioned before.
But if the wound flows with blood, then you should hasten to its excision, so that you powder powdered zinc on top of it: if you do not have anything else present.
Then begin to restore the fracture in that very same day: and do not put it off if no abscess occurs.
If a warm abscess occurs, then put off the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess subsides. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all, for you would cause to happen to it bad accidents.
But if a broken bone is prominent above the skin and detected: then you should reduce it, and equalize it with your hands with ease and slight extension.
But if its extension is not prepared, nor its equalization by your hands: then reduce it with that instrument. And the instrument is one made of iron, whose length is seven or eight fingers' breadth, and its width is according to the size of the wound. And for that reason it is necessary for a doctor to take from them three or four according to the quantity which he needs for curing any kind of fracture.
And let it be rounded: and let there be a small thickness to it, so that it does not double upon the pressure on it at the time of the operation: and let its sharp extremity have an edge on its ends. And let its upper part be to the thickness from its middle up to its lower parts.
And this is its shape.
It is necessary in this operation that the sharp extremity be placed curved over the end of the prominent bone; and push it with one force until the bone returns and becomes equal to some sort of equality.
Therefore, strive to make the ends of the fracture equal to each other.
But if the ends of it are a thin fracture and do not receive it by good acceptance, then it is necessary to cut off the end of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce them with what we have described entirely, then cut it off with the one that suits it from the saws which we mentioned: or saw it through in whatever way is possible for you.
Then remove what remains on the bone of roughness and small splinters.
When therefore the bone is reduced and the patient after its reduction finds a violent and painful suffering, then you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Do it. For you bring great benefit to the patient, when your completion of restoration is done on the bone.
Then plunge a cloth into black wine for dressing. And if it is proper in summer. And do not place a poultice over the wound nor anything that has oil on it, lest it cause putrefaction and corruption to occur in it.
Then administer astragalus for the completion of an hour to restore bone. And let the wound discovered be thus: that you cut with scissors a hole in the swellings according to the size of the wound.
And beware with all caution, lest you suture the wound with a fracture. For many times foolish doctors have done this: and they have brought about upon their weak patients either death or consumption or gangrene, that is, suppuration. And let your stitches be soft, gentle, and different from the stabs of other fractures.
For if the wound is bad or a great one, and you fear some evil accidents that we have mentioned happening on it, and you find pain suspended in the place; then it is not fitting to apply astragalus to it. And make swellings on them with hard cloths in the place of astragalus, and bind it with them.
When however it is after one day or two days, and you see the wound already beginning to generate pus: then remove from above it the cloth which you placed over it with wine. Then administer lycium and ointments with which we are accustomed to treat wounds, such as the four-drug ointment, and similar ones.
And it is fitting for you to loosen the bandage. And consider the wound every morning and evening, until it is consolidated and healed.
And it is necessary to prepare the member so that the pus may flow from it downwards with ease.
For if many days pass over the wound and it does not consolidate, nor is the pus cut off from it: then you will know that there are small abscesses of bone. Therefore it is necessary to explore the wound with a probe. As many of those small abscesses are separated, remove them and take them out. And what are not separated from them, and pierce the member, and cause pain to occur, try to cut them off and remove them in every way possible for you that thing.
But if it happens that a wound is inflamed, or gangrenous, that is, corrupt and putrid: then you should apply to each one of them what suits it for treatment, the account of which precedes in its own chapter.
And from that in which my speech should stand and to whom you should direct your present mind when the jawbone is broken and protrudes over a member, such as the os coxae and pelvis, and similar ones from large bones: it is, do not presume its attraction, for often death occurs because of it, nay, leave it alone until it putrefies.
Perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty days, or thirty.
Then therefore treat the wound if it seems to you; and otherwise, leave it alone.
Of the Treatment of Swelling after a Fracture.
This swelling often occurs as a result of the healing process of a fracture. Especially those near joints: and it is deformed by the figure of the member. And perhaps prevents the member from performing its natural function.
Therefore, consider then if the swelling is recent: apply to it medicines that have astringent properties, such as aloe, and olibanum, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, and acacia, and similar ones.
So that you take some or all of these, and mix them with astringent wine, or with egg white, or with vinegar: and apply them to the swelling in a poultice, and bind them securely on top of it.
And leave the bandage, nor loosen it for many days. Then dissolve it and proceed to another one until the swelling is removed.
Or bind on top of that metal plate a piece of lead evenly. For it is the property of lead to remove everything that is feared from the member.
But if the swelling has already turned to stone and is tight and pressing circumstances require it to be removed promptly: then find a way to cut away the excess part above it: or shave it off with certain rasps until it is removed; and take care of it until it heals.
On the cure when restored, and the member remains after that subtle one not according to its natural state.
When a bone fracture is restored and the member remains after that subtle one weak: then it does not happen unless for many reasons. One of which is the multitude of ligament solution and its binding not according to what is fitting: or due to excess tightness of the ligaments, until nourishment is prevented from reaching the member; or due to excessive application of embrocation at an improper time; or due to a lack of blood in the body of one who is infirm and weak.
And its cure is to feed the infirm person and make their body tender until blood increases in them. And administer a bath. And introduce joy and gladness over him.
Then place pitch on the member: so that the pitch may draw to it a great deal of nourishment. And continue to apply its embrocation with warm water, until nourishment flows and it returns to its natural shape.
On the cure of fractured bones when they are restored in a twisted way.
When it happens that a member already restored after its healing becomes twisted and the fractured bone or swelling appears, and is disfigured by that member's form, although the member is not prevented from performing its natural function: then it is not necessary to accept its advice, which thinks that the member should be broken again.
And already there have been many foolish surgeons and restorers who did that thing on our earth.
And this operation is indeed very reprehensible, leading to death or great fear, so that it will be mortal.
But if the swelling and constriction are recent: then it is necessary to anoint with warm water in which herbs that soften have been decocted, such as tall grass leaves, and its root, and sweet melilotus, and things similar to these. And a poultice should be made with a softening plaster, such as dychilone made in this way.
Or the mucilage of tall grass root should be taken and mixed with hen's fat or sesame oil, and poulticed with it.
Or they should take figs that are ripe, and pound them with dove's dung, and similar things which are called by medicines that reduce consolidation.
And sometimes constriction is loosened with frequent, gentle, and soft friction done with moist hands. And movement of the member should be administered to every part at all hours.
But if the twisting has already occurred and is strong, and has turned into a bone and necessity for its cure with iron has been provoked: then it is necessary to cut above it, and to release the continuity of the bone, and to cut away what is excessive from the constriction or bone with fine scissors; and to administer ease in that place with solicitude and study.
On Speech in Dislocation.
A dislocation is the departure of some joints from their place. Therefore it is prohibited from its own motion, and the figure of the member is disfigured. And it causes great pain and violent injuries to occur over the weak person.
When therefore a dislocation occurs to someone, then it is necessary to hasten to its restoration: and not to delay it at all.
If it is delayed, the site will become inflamed and perhaps with it, reduction of dislocation.
Therefore, one should not move or stretch it during the inflammation of that place. Because it often causes cramp and piercing pains.
However, when that happens, then it is necessary to hurry to perform bloodletting on the patient. Then let it be left alone until the inflammation subsides.
Then anoint the member with warm water and oil. Then reduce it with ease.
And treat the entire member along with him whose remembrance will come into its place.
I have indeed already arranged the chapters on dislocation, just as it preceded in fracture, from the upper part of the body to the lower.
Chapters on the Treatment of Dislocation of the Lower Jawbone.
Two jawbones are only slightly dislocated unless rarely.
And the dislocation of both is done according to two modes. Or indeed they are moved away from their places by a small removal and are softened for a little while. Or they are dislocated entirely and completely, until they are softened to the point of the breast, until the patient's saliva flows, and he is unable to hold it or close his mouth, and his tongue becomes entwined with speech.
When however the dislocation of that is small, then it returns to its place by itself with slight difficulty.
If the dislocation is complete and entire, then it is necessary to apply reduction quickly and not delay at all: and it is, as if one would hold the patient's head in place; and the doctor should insert his thumb into the root of the dislocated jawbone between the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is from one side. He should insert his two fingers simultaneously, if the dislocation is from two parts. And the remaining fingers of his hand shall be outside, to which it corresponds.
And he should instruct the patient to clean their jawbones and prepare them for eating in all parts. And the doctor will set the jawbone and push it until it returns to its place.
But if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jawbones are simultaneously dislocated: then administer a poultice with hot water and oil until it becomes easy to reduce both; nor should you delay reducing both altogether, as we said.
When therefore they return and are set in place, and the patient's mouth is closed and not relaxed: then place over them poultices of cloths, made with wax and rose oil.
Then it should be bound easily with soft ligaments.
And let the patient sleep on his back: and let his head be placed between two pillows, so that he does not move it to the right or left: nor should he try or be forced to chew anything: but rather have his food offered by gentle sipping, until when the pains are removed, and the jawbone is relaxed; then let him eat what he wants, and administer it with ease.
He should not exert himself over his mouth's function during eating and drinking, and kissing, until the jawbone is relaxed and healed.
What if the reduction of both jawbones becomes difficult when they are dislocated at some time and do not return to their place: then many fevers and prolonged illnesses occur; and perhaps the patient's bowels become loose, and perhaps he vomits pure bile.
When therefore you see that: then you will know that it is a loss, and many times that person dies within ten days.
On the reduction of a shoulder dislocation and the extremity of the arm.
The shoulder indeed does not become dislocated from the internal side, because of its continuity with the breast. And it becomes dislocated sometimes to the outside: and that is made known by sense.
And its restoration is, that the weak person lies on his back, and stretches out his arms. Then compress the place with a firm palm compression, for it will return itself.
Then place a poultice on top of it, and bind it tightly.
As for its extremities which follow the elbow and are connected with it, they do not become dislocated, unless rarely. For if it becomes dislocated one day: then it is necessary to reduce and set it right according to what we said, and what has been prepared for you.
Then place a poultice on top of it, and bind it tightly. And instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and quiet, until they are healed.
And with this same treatment, the extremity of the arm is reduced when it becomes separated from its place.
On the reduction of a shoulder dislocation.
Know that the arm does not become dislocated, unless according to three modes.
One of which is, that it becomes dislocated towards the part of the titillium downwards. The second is, that it becomes dislocated towards the part of the breast. And perhaps it becomes dislocated to the upper part of the arm: and that happens rarely.
And it does not become dislocated towards the back, due to the spate. And it does not become dislocated towards the front, due to the nerves.
And it is indeed mostly dislocated and comes out towards the lower part towards the titillium: especially in those whose flesh is rare. Because it departs quickly from them and enters quickly.
But in those whose flesh is many, it is contrary to that, namely because it departs with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to certain people that they are struck or fall, and the shoulder becomes inflamed with apostema, and is thought to be because of that, since it has already become dislocated.
Therefore, you must test it until you are certain of its nature, and then proceed with its cure.
And it is known to be a dislocation when it turns towards the lower part in a tilting manner; and distinguish between a dislocated shoulder and a healthy one. For you will find a manifest difference between them, and you will find in the head of the shoulder a hollowing out, and under the tilting part at the touch it is as if the head of the humerus were an egg; and the infirm person cannot bring their hand to their ear or move it with all movements.
And similarly, if it becomes dislocated towards the chest or upwards: then you will find a manifest touch and it is not hidden.
And the reduction of this dislocation is easy when it is recent or the infant is weak.
And its reduction is to lift one's hand up to the higher part. Then place your fingers under the tilting part of it and lift the joint with force upwards to its place; and the minister will lift their hand and stretch it upwards. Then put it back down, for it returns quickly by itself.
But if it does not return by what we said, and there are many days since the dislocation occurred: then it is necessary for the infirm person to bathe in warm water, and a poultice should be applied which softens and soothes, just as if one were to decoct roots of althea, and fenugreek, and melilot in water, and apply it.
Then the patient should be placed on his back: and a sphere and woolen wadding should be put under his headrest, which is equal between softness and tightness.
Then the doctor should place his own heel on the sphere, and lift the patient's shoulder with force, and pull the patient's hand down towards the lower part.
And if you wish, reduce him according to this method: and it is, that you should make the present man who is taller than the patient, stand on his side, and insert his shoulder under the patient's headrest; and lift up the headrest of the patient until he is suspended in the air. And another attendant should pull the patient's hand down towards his lower stomach. But if the patient is light, then it is necessary to suspend something else with him, so that he may be weighted down: for the dislocation will return immediately.
And he is also reduced according to another method: and it is, that a long piece of wood is placed on the ground, whose head is rounded like a mortar handle: not thick nor thin. Then a soft cloth should be placed under the patient after they are placed on top of the wooden headrest: and the patient should stand according to the length of the wood.
Then his hand should be stretched down from the other side and his body should be stretched out from the other side with strength: for the joint will return to its place quickly.
But if his reduction is difficult through all that we have said, then use this treatment: and it is, that you should take a piece of wood whose length is the quantity of two arms, and its width the quantity of four fingers, and its thickness the quantity of two fingers: which has a rounded head to facilitate its entry into the deep headrest, according to this form.
Then soft cloths are placed over the round head, so as not to hurt the weak wood.
Then it should be placed underneath the weak person's armpit, so that their hand or arm can be extended over the wood up to the lower part: and the wood should be tied above the assistant, the arm, and the end of the hand.
Then the arm should be placed over the step of the ladder in width, and the hand extended downwards, and the rest of the body suspended from the other side. For the junction enters at once.
When however the entrance is completed in any way possible: then it is necessary to place under the armpit a sphere of equal size made of wool. Then place the prepared poultice made from mill dust with frankincense and egg white over the entire shoulder, as it turns over above.
Then bind under the armpit a suitable tight bandage; and turn the ligature over the poultice above; and attach his hand to his own neck, and let it be, so that his hand is not moved for seven days.
And it is necessary to place a light diet for the sick person until the member is comforted: because it is more conducive to its healing.
Then place a larger one after seven days, or five, and exercise with movement. If it is then strengthened and not weakened, then he is already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times, due to moisture that happens to him, or for some other reason: then it is necessary to apply a cauterization with three openings, according to what was previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
But if this is done entirely, and the ligament is loosened after seven days, and the joint is not confirmed, and the poultice and bandage are applied again over it several times, and it does not firm up, and it falls, and he cannot lift it to the higher part: then you will know that the nerves of his who are related to the head of the shoulder have already been cut, or stretched, or weakened; and you will know that the joint will never be set in its proper place.
However, the dislocation that occurs towards the chest and nipple, or is reduced to the back, is accomplished with a blow and extension using hands, until it returns, and then a remaining binding and care are administered until it heals.
But if heaviness occurs in a member after healing, and tardiness in its movement, then the invalid will use a bath many times until that heaviness is alleviated, and it returns to its original nature.
Of the Curing of Elbow Dislocations.
Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty also; and indeed it dislocates to all parts and particularly to the anterior or posterior.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you; because it falls under the sight and touch, according to whatever shape it may be dislocated. And when you join the dislocated elbow with a sound one, it is made manifest to you. It is bent, and cannot straighten the arm, nor touch its shoulder with it.
And you should hasten to reduce the dislocation immediately, before a hot abscess occurs.
For if a hot abscess occurs, the reduction becomes difficult and perhaps not at all successful, especially when it is located in the back. For it is indeed worse than all other types of dislocations and accompanied by more violent pain; and many times death follows with it.
And the restoration of it when it is possible to reduce it, is for his hand to be stretched out with both hands: and his arm to be expanded, and the hands of the doctor to be above and below the elbow, and he himself to push the joint with the tips of his fingers or with the palm of his hand, until it returns to its place.
Or indeed the dislocation is to the front: then it returns thus, that he doubles his hand with his own, until he strikes the elbow which is dislocated with the tip of his palm.
If the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer a strong and great extension; and this is, to have two attendants stretch out the arm, and for the two attendants also to hold it so that it will not be moved during the extension.
Then roll back the arm to all parts after it has been wrapped around his hand with a doubled long cloth or broad bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his own hand, let him anoint it with oil, so that it may be one of those things which aid in the lubrication of the joint with ease. Then push the joint with a strong push until it returns.
And after the reduction, it is necessary that a poultice be placed on top of it, in which there should be a soothing quality, and a cooling with a white ointment; and let it be bandaged tightly. And let the arm be suspended from the sick person's neck; and leave it for several days.
Then it will loosen. If the joint is strengthened in its place, then untie the bandage from it and let it go.
And if you see the joint not well bound, then repeat the poultice, and the bandage, and let it go for several days until it is bound. Then release it.
But if heaviness occurs after the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion: then administer moisture in bathing, and gentle friction, and compression, until it becomes smooth, or place a fatty sheep's womb on top of the joint, that is, a rich goat's placenta. Then let it be bound, and leave it there day and night. Then take it away, and introduce him into the bath. When he sweats, then rub the joint with a moderate friction. Then place a poultice on top of it for one, two, and three days with the introduction of bathing, until it is softened.
And if you wish, place over it sheep's dung, moist, warmed with butter, and tie above it.
Do that several times. It is itself eased, and returns to its natural state.
On the treatment of a broken limb.
The limb called Mahassem is often dislocated, that is, the joint which is between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of this dislocation is easy. On the contrary, it is more difficult than the other joints. However, it is necessary that the swiftness be in reducing this dislocation within an hour of when it occurs, before the location becomes inflamed or a warm abscess forms.
And the reduction of this dislocation is to place the Mahassem hand, which is weak, on a table, and let the servant stretch out his hand: and the doctor shall place his palm on the prominence of the joint, and push it until it returns.
However, it is necessary to consider whether the palm has already receded to the back of the hand: then let the weak person place the back of his hand on the table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is proceeding towards the back of the hand, then let the position of his hand be inward on the table, that is, the inner part of his hand shall be placed on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls over it onto the prominence of the joint.
So if it returns immediately, it is good; and if not, then bind it with a soothing plaster and abscess, and leave it alone, nor repeat that.
For if it does not tolerate, nor can you work on its reduction after the days have passed, yet the joint remains according to its own twisting; and it does not harm the patient anything except that the hand becomes soft, and cannot grasp anything: then you will know that the nerves are cut or worn out.
It is not, therefore, a talent in it, unless it is bound with caustic near its fall. And perhaps that thing does not matter at all.
When therefore Almahassem does not heal, then place a poultice on top of it as we have described. Then let it be bound and let it remain for five days; afterwards let it be loosened and let it remain, and let the hand be exercised.
But if it is deprived of movement and something grave happens to it; then soothe it with warm water and gentle friction several times, until it becomes soothing.
Of the Curing of Fingernail Dislocations.
When a finger is dislocated in any direction, or one of the fingers to the back of the palm or to its belly; then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger and suspend it towards the direction in which it is dislocated, and let it remain for two days.
Then suspend it and extend it until it becomes straight on that day itself.
When therefore it is night, bind it according to the same narration; and do not cease to loosen it by day: and exercise it with movement: and bind it at night.
Do that for several days until it becomes bound.
And do the same with him if it is dislocated towards the palm of the hand; and bind him to that part, and perform your first operation on him until he is healed.
And do the same with him when it is dislocated to the other parts.
Of the Curing of Dislocation of the Spine of the Back.
When it happens to anyone that the spine of the back or neck is completely dislocated, or many vertebrae are removed from their places; then there is no cure for this, since death approaches the sick person.
And its sign is that the patient's evacuation occurs without his will, nor can he hold it; and some of his limbs become softened, or two legs of his, or two arms of his, or one of them: or it is removed from its place.
For indeed it is often removed, because removal occurs often to four parts.
Therefore, that which is removed to the rear is called Gibbositas.
But its cure is that you should consider then, if Gibbositas occurs from childhood: then there is no cure in it, nor is there any recovery at all.
But as for that which occurs by chance, or striking, or similar things, the ancient modes of treatment have already been said in lengthy speech. Of which most do not return with profit.
However, I have already abbreviated that from which there is little excuse due to my proximity and intention: and the explanation of it, as I explained it, and shaped its instrument in a different way than they showed it, and exposed it.
I say therefore that in the gibbosity which occurs from the anterior part, there is no remedy, nor recovery from it.
And similarly in that which occurs to two sides as well.
And it is not cured from them, except for that which occurs properly on the back, as I narrate: and this is, that the patient lies stretched out on his face on a level platform near the wall; and a wet cloth is spread out beneath him, so that his chest is not injured.
Then a straight piece of wood should be placed, fixed in the corner of the floor on one side of the platform, near his head; and another piece of wood around his feet on the other side of the platform: and a servant should hold the wood and stand not firm in the corner. And let the other servant hold the other one.
Then wrap a soft, sturdy bandage around the patient's head, and extend the end of the bandage to the wood that is at his head. And tie it there.
Then bind another bandage above their shoulders, and above their knees, and around their calves. Then gather up all the bandages and tie them to another piece of wood that is at his feet.
Then let every attendant stretch out their bandage to the piece of wood and not move the two woods from their places where they are fixed: yet they should not be tightened as we said.
And let the doctor place his hands on the spine with strength until he returns or places a board on it. Then let him attach his feet to the board until he returns.
If however he does not return through this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three arms' lengths. And make an opening in the wall that we mentioned, which is near the patient, to the place where the end of the board will fit. Then place the middle of the board on the spine. And let the doctor place his feet on the other end. And let him tie it well until the spine is straightened and he returns to his place.
Then if you wish, operate with a turn that is wrapped around your hand; and it is, to fix two pieces of wood on the ground at the patient's head at the end of the bed, each being the length of one arm: and at his head in the end of the bed, two pieces of wood.
And let the length that is between all the wood be one palm: and now a hole has been made in every place where the turn goes; and strengthen all the wood firmly on the ground, so that it may not move at all.
And insert a round piece of wood: and there is a turn where the bandage is wound around in two holes of two pieces of wood.
And at its end is a hole, in which the wood is fastened, whose length is a hand's breadth plus what is turned back; and similarly there are two other woods.
Then tie the ligaments which you have tightened in the patient's chest to the ring that is at his head; and the ligaments which you have tightened in his legs to the ring that is at his feet.
Then stand by every turning post with the attendant who turns his hand with the lever, as the turning post is turned back; and the physician adjusts the sponge, according to what we have said.
This is the form of the turning post that follows.
Then after the sponge returns and the place is adjusted, then it is necessary to put on an adhesive plaster with egg white. Then a poultice. After that, place on top of the plaster a platelet from a tablet, whose width is three fingers or about those. And its length should be as much as it can take up the place of the gibbosity, and above the sound part of the sponge.
Then it is bound with the ligament that we mentioned. And the patient should be nourished with subtle food until he heals.
But if something remains of the prominence in the place at the end of the healing process: then it is necessary that medicines which soften and soothe be administered, along with the application of the platelet we described for a long time. And now it is applied with lead foil.
And when an elevation occurs at the last sponge of the back: and it is thought that there has been a displacement through it, and it is that bone which now protrudes. Therefore one should not presume to treat him with this medicine: perhaps it will cause death.
Of the cure of a dislocated Anca.
You shall know that the joint of Anche and the joint of the shoulder do not happen unless a dislocation occurs. Nor does it occur to them as it occurs to other joints due to a small removal and hollowing out.
And indeed, the joint of Anche is dislocated into four parts. Which is because it dislocates towards the front and the back.
And indeed, it dislocates mostly towards the inside: and a little towards the front and the back.
And the cure for this dislocation towards the inside is: because when you join the infirm leg with a healthy one, it is farther along; and his knee is more prominent than that of the healthy one, and the infirm person cannot duplicate their foot at the groin; and the location that follows is inflamed with a hot aposteme, because the head of the hip has already arrived there.
And the sign of it to whom the dislocation occurs towards the outside is that the accidents that befall him are contrary to these accidents.
And the sign of it to whom the dislocation occurs towards the front is that he stretches out his healthy leg according to its complement: yet he does not duplicate it without pain in the knee; and if he tries to walk, he cannot get beyond that point towards the front: and his urine will be retained, and his groin will become inflamed, and while walking there will be a pressure on his heel.
And the sign of it to whom the dislocation occurs towards the back is that he does not stretch out his knee, nor can he duplicate it before duplicating his groin; and his leg is also shorter on one side: and his groin is softened, and there is the head of the hip in that location.
The reduction of this dislocation is such that you should consider then, if the dislocation is old, which has already become antiquated in the one having it. Then if you administer its reduction and it remains according to its own disposition: then there is no cure at all for it. Therefore it is not necessary that a presumption be made for him entirely.
But in the one who has a recent dislocation, and it is of one of the four kinds of dislocations; then hasten to do this, so that you may manipulate the joint, and stretch it out to the inner and outer parts, and move it right and left: perhaps it will return, and it will not need further care.
But if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare a strong assistant, and have him stretch his leg from the lower part: either with his own hands or with a bandage that is to be tied above his knee; and another assistant should stretch out his hand over it, so that he may insert his hands under the patient's knees. Then bind him with a soft bandage above the hip joint, and hold the end of the other bandage in place.
And let his extension be either from the front part of the groin to the crural region, or from the back part to the dorsal area.
And let their extension be all together one way, until the patient is lifted up with his own body from the ground, and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is a common type among the four kinds.
If then the dislocation returns as we said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to follow the proper cure of which I will speak.
Indeed in the reduction itself, when the dislocation is to the inner parts, it is necessary that the patient be placed on his sound side. Then place a bandage over the hip joint, in that part which is between the head of the femur and the location below the groin. Then stretch the bandage upwards from the part of the groin to the higher part of the body, to the crural region.
Then let another strong assistant take hold of his arms and reduce the swollen area of the weak hip joint, and stretch it out to the outside with a violent extension. Now then, it returns to its place.
And this type is easier than the other types of healing, by which this member is restored.
But if it refuses to obey you and does not submit to this type of healing at all, then you should bind the two legs of the patient together with a strong and gentle bandage, from the heels up to the knees. And let each part be stretched out one finger's breadth more than the other.
Then the patient should be suspended above a wooden beam that is in the house, and its length from the ground should be equal to two arm lengths.
Then instruct a strong youth to support the patient's hips: and another youth should be suspended with the patient; and the other youth should push gently, supporting the hip with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
But when the dislocation is to the outside, it is necessary that the patient lie on a platform, as we have described in the case of having a hump. And let a bandage be wrapped around his thigh, specifically the infirm one, and also around his chest.
Then two wooden poles should be placed, one at his feet and another at his head. Then a wooden pole should be placed in the middle of the platform, securely fixed; with wet cloths wrapped around it, so that it does not hurt the patient. And let this pole be between his hips, so that he is not drawn down to the lower part during the stretching.
Then all the attendants should stretch out to their side, and the doctor should equalize the reduction with his own hand.
If it then submits to being put back in place, it will be good.
And if not, place it on the table and press down on it, as we have said in the case of a hump, evenly. However, it is necessary that the patient lies on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary that the patient's leg be extended quickly; and according to this same account on a pedestal; and the doctor should place his right hand on the patient's thigh. Then he should grasp him with one hand and with that grip place him extended to the lower parts of the knee.
And if the dislocation is to the back, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended downwards and lifted off the ground. Rather, he should be placed on a hard surface, just as is also the case if his ankle dislocates to the outside, according to what we said about his lying on two ankles: and it is above his face, and stretched ligaments: according to what we have recently said.
And it is necessary that pressure be applied with a board even on the place from which the joint protrudes, when the reduction is complete according to what is proper.
And the sign of its return is not hidden from you: and it is, when you stretch out the patient's two legs: and when you see them equal, and the patient tightens his leg and expands it without straining: then you will know that already the limb has returned as it should: then join the two hips together, and apply a poultice, and bind with a bandage, namely, a wheel: so that the ankle does not move to any part; and the patient should remain quiet for three or four days.
Then release the bandage and poultice, and compare the leg with the other one: then if you see them equal in state, then you will know that the dislocation is already set right: therefore, therefore let the patient go for walking.
And if you see something softened: then return and reapply the poultice, and bind it according to your first tightening; and let it also be for three days.
Then loosen it and make it delay in walking on both sides for a few days until it is well comforted.
Of the Dislocation of the Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated to the outside, inside, and downwards, that is, to the back.
And it does not dislocate to the front.
And a sign of its dislocation is that the patient cannot straighten up, but instead applies his leg to his hip. But if it does not adhere with the hip: then you will know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all three ways of its dislocation is to make the patient sit up straight, so that he can extend his leg if possible over it, and lean his back against your face: and place his foot between your feet.
Then make him apply his knee to your palms, and straighten them up between your fingers over his knee. Then apply with your palm both sides of his knee with force. And have another person stretch out his foot until the knee returns to its place.
And a sign of its return is that the leg adheres with the hip gently, not painfully.
Then bind him and make his leg adhere to his hip. Then bind them together with a bandage for three days or four. Then loosen them.
And the patient should not use his leg in walking for a few days until he is healed.
But if it resists your reduction, then apply a strong extension with ligaments of which the narration was previously mentioned in the cure of an ankylosed limb, until it returns.
Of the Cure of Dislocation of the Heel.
The calcaneus is sometimes removed by a small removal, and sometimes it becomes displaced according to its own nature. And its displacement occurs either towards the interior or towards the exterior.
And a sign of its displacement is that you see the Calcaneus inflated, proceeding to the side to which it becomes displaced.
But the cure of its removal is easy reduction: and this is, to stretch it out with facility by hand, and equalize it until it returns.
But in the cure of it when it becomes displaced according to its own nature, it is necessary that you make the patient sit straight: and have him held by a strong assistant very firmly from the back part of his shoulder, in the middle of himself.
Then you should take hold with your right hand at the upper part of his foot, and with your left hand at the lower part of his foot in the location of the heel.
Then pull his foot towards yourself with your right hand. Then with your left hand, on both sides.
Then stretch it out with your left hand, and push the foot of the calf with your right hand towards the knee without any effort.
Do that twice, as we have narrated.
Then push the foot of the calf towards the knee on the third side, and you pull the heel.
If then it returns to one side or two sides according to this method, and you see the foot equalized, it is good; and if not, then iterate the operation on it: for it will return.
But if reduction is prevented from happening with him according to what we have narrated: then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place a small pillow firmly on the ground so that it falls between his thighs: and you should already be wrapping cloth around him, so as not to harm the patient.
Then the assistant should grasp his thigh: afterwards, the assistant should stretch out the other foot with their hands or with a strap that binds around the ankle of the foot. Then let every assistant stretch out against the extension of his companion: and a splint shall stand between the two weak hips, holding him back so that his body is not drawn down towards the lower parts with the stretching.
Then let the doctor equalize the dislocation by hand, and let another assistant hold the sound leg down below. For the dislocation returns with speed.
When therefore the dislocation returns and its return is declared to you as sound: then put on a poultice and a compress, and bind it firmly with bandages, and bind the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And it is necessary that you beware or fear of the nerves which are above the posterior calcaneus, lest the bandage be too tight over them and hurt them.
Then let him go for two days, or three. Which if the bandage becomes soft, bind him again; then loose him on the third or fourth day: and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. But if he tries to walk before that period, there will be no security lest the dislocation recur over him, and be corrupted, and not receive subsequent treatment.
Which if a hot abscess occurs to him: then it is necessary that you apply to his sedation what we previously described in another place concerning treatment, and an ointment, until it is removed.
Of the Dislocation of the Toes of the Foot, and the Cure.
It is necessary that what is dislocated be equalized with extension a few times without effort; and indeed it is not difficult, rather easy.
But if the dislocation is in certain knots of the back of the foot: then it is necessary that the patient sit with his foot on an equal spot of the ground, or on a board; and he should stand as one walking.
Then you stand, and place your foot on what protrudes from those joints. Then tread on it with your foot with force until it goes back, and you will see it now level and not appearing in the elevated place.
Then place a plate under his foot that will take up the whole foot, having two heads. Then bind him with a bandage suitable for three days. Then release him and make him rest from walking for many days, until he is bound and secured by reduction.
On the kinds of dislocations with injury or fracture.
When something happens to that and you try to cure it and restore its condition, death often results: and therefore one should not presume over the curing of it, unless one is skilled in the art through long practice, compassionate, pious, slow, not bold, nor presumptuous: and use medicines that sedate apostematic sores only when hot, and let the patient be dismissed to divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for salvation from destruction with the gentleness of suffering, and in which something appears as a glimmer of hope. Therefore, attempt to reduce it immediately at the beginning of the case, before a hot aposteme occurs.
So if the member returns as we wish, then administer a treatment that will calm the aposteme: and care for the wound with what is suitable to it from drying ointments.
What if the dislocation is with a fracture, and there are separate cracks in the bone, then attempt to remove those and do in that what we said for simple afflictions from what occurred in those places.
And beware according to your own strength and guard yourself from entering the way of fear: according to what my preceding warning has been to you.
For it is better for you with your Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and more safe for your body among them at your time.
