After I have completed the book for you, my sons, this one which is the last in the science of medicine with its complement, and I have reached the end of it from its explanations and its declarations, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this Treatise which is part of an operation, namely, surgery with hand.
Since the operation with hand is laid to waste in our region and at our time, entirely private: until perhaps the knowledge of it has perished, and its trail has been severed: and there remain from it only small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which hands have altered: and an error and hesitation occurred, until its intentions were sealed, and its force was loosened. It seemed to me that I should revitalize it with the arrangement of this Treatise in accordance with the way of position, declaration, and abridgment: and to come with the forms of iron instruments of Cautery, and other tools of work: when it is done with the addition of declaration, and its necessity requires.
The reason why a skilled craftsman of this sort is not found with his own hand in our present time is: because the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary for its author to have been trained beforehand in the science of anatomy, as Galenus described, until he knows the benefits of members, and their forms, and their connections, and separations, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, tendons, and their numbers, and their exits, and the courses of arteries, and quiet ones, and places of exit.
And for that reason, Hippocrates said that a name with a name is much, but with work it is little, and especially in the art of hands.
But we have already spoken about him at the beginning of this book.
For one who is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will not be corrected, and will already fall into error, by which men are killed; just as I have seen many of those who claim to know this science, but boast about it without knowledge, and without experience.
What happened was that I saw a foolish doctor cut open a scrofulous abscess on a woman's neck and cut some arteries in the neck. Therefore, the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead between his hands.
And I saw another doctor who presumed to remove a stone from an old man who had grown old, and the stone was large.
So he came to him and removed it with a piece of bladder.
Wherefore the man died on the third day.
And I myself had been called to remove it: and I saw from the magnitude of the stone and the condition of the sick man that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was receiving pay from a certain Duke of our land on account of his medicine: and it happened to a black eunuch who was with him that he got a fracture in his leg near the heel: and the doctor hastened with his ignorance, and tightened the fracture over the wound with poultices, and splints, and strong bandages, and did not permit the wound to breathe.
Then he dismissed him according to his own desires.
Afterwards he dismissed him after a few days and ordered him not to loosen the bandage: and so it stood until his leg and foot became gangrenous and he came to ruin.
I was therefore called to him: and I hastened to loosen the bandage: and it followed that there was quietness, and he was delivered from his pains.
However, corruption had already been confirmed in the member, and I could not stop it.
Then the corruption ceased to spread in the member until he died.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess: and it ulcerated after days, until the evil of his deed was greatly increased with his lord.
What is this, because when a pure cancer comes from melancholic humor, then it should not be cut with iron at all, unless it is in a limb that can tolerate it, so that the whole of it may be removed.
And therefore, oh sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation is divided into two divisions by hand: namely, an operation associated with salvation, and an operation with which there is danger in many dispositions. And I have now stirred up fear and trembling in every place of this book, where the operation is, which is full of terror.
Therefore it is necessary for you to beware of that and let it go: so that foolish people may not find the way to speak and be ashamed.
Therefore receive the measure with solicitude and protection, and heal your infirm ones with facility and firmness, and use the better way leading to salvation and a praiseworthy succession by God's gracious favor: and dismiss terrible pains of difficult healing: and lift up your souls from that which makes you afraid, so that hesitation may enter upon you in your faith and comfort. For it is more remaining for your glory, and higher in this world, and ultimately for your account.
For Galen has already said in some of his exhortations. You will not heal bad illness: lest you be called evil doctors.
Chapter One.
On section and perforation, bloodletting and wound-cleaning, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows, and similar things to these: and all this chapter, distributed in forms of instruments.
Chapter Three.
On restoration, and setting, and curing of twistedness, and similar things to these: chaptered, ordered from head to feet, and in forms of instruments.
To God alone be glory.
The book of surgery by Albucasis.
Part one.
On the use and harm of cauterization: to which complexions it is suitable, and at what time; and whether with iron or gold.
Chapter one.
But before I recall the operation with him, it is necessary for me to say what kind of benefits and harm it has, and in which complexion it should be shown.
I say therefore that the speech about the quality of the benefits and harm of cauterization is a long and subtle discourse, a science, and a hidden and occult secret.
And many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagreed on this point; and for my part, I am satisfied with a little of their words, fearing length.
I say therefore that cauterization agrees with every complexion that is with matter and without matter, except for two complexions which are the hot complexion without matter and the dry complexion without matter.
But they disagreed in a hot and dry complexion with matter.
For some said that cauterization is beneficial in it.
And others said the opposite of that, namely that cauterization is not suitable in a disease which is due to heat and dryness: because fire's nature is heat; and it is unsuitable for someone to be healed from a hot and dry disease with something hot and dry.
And he who said the opposite of that said: that through cauterization a benefit occurs in every hot and dry disease which happens in human bodies; because when you compare a human body and its humors to the fiery complexion, you find a human body to be cold.
And I myself say through his speech: because experience has already revealed it to me on several occasions.
However it is not necessary for someone to come upon that unless he has already been tested and trained in the last exercise of chapter Cauterii, and knows the diversity of humoral temperaments of men, and the disposition of illnesses within themselves, and their causes, and accidents, and the time frame of those.
But there is no fear over you from the other humoral temperaments, and especially in cold and moist illnesses. For now all doctors have agreed on these matters and do not differ in opinion with Cauterius about their treatment.
And know, sons, that from the secret of cure by Cauterius with fire and his good skill in combining medicine with burning, because fire is simple, whose action does not reach beyond the member being cauterized: and it does not harm another connected member unless causing a small injury.
The action of the burning medicine reaches beyond that which is removed from the member: and perhaps it causes disease to occur in the afflicted member, and perhaps it kills.
But fire, due to its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do that unless it is excessive.
And now we have learned that through experience, due to the length of service and study with art, and my standing on the truth of things: and because of that I excuse myself from the length of this speech.
And know, sons, that the same ones disagree about the time when cauterization should be done, and they put better the true time.
And I say that cauterization is fitting at any time: therefore, because the harm occurring due to time is submerged in the benefit that is attracted with cauterization.
And especially if the cauterizer is necessary on account of pains that are grievous, excessive, and intense, which do not tolerate delay: therefore, since fear arises from them lest a greater evil occur than the small harm that may be done during the time.
And let it not fall into your minds, my sons, that which the common and foolish doctors do not appreciate, namely that those who are cured by cauterization do not always recover: and they put forward this consequence, and it is not as they think: therefore, because cauterization is not a substitute for medicine, which alters the complexion and dries up the moistures that are causes why pains occur.
However, cauterization is sufficient over medicine by the swiftness of its own health and the power of its operation and the intensity of its dominion: and it is possible for sickness to return within some period of time according to the complexion of the sick person, and the location of their sickness, and its virtue: and what is prepared in their body from excesses in it: and what comes to them in acquisition through foods and similar things from causes, unless sickness occurs in which cauterization is administered. Subtle sickness in a few excesses and moistures of the member, such as cauterization of the tooth for pain and similar things: it is possible that this pain will not return in that place.
But this happens in few cases.
But the common people's speech is again, that cauterization is the last medicine; it is a true saying: not according to what they intend in this; for they believe that there is no cure which agrees with medicine, nor with anything after the application of cauterization.
But the fact is contrary to their intention, and it's not true that cauterization is the last medicine, unless when we administer modes of cure in some sickness, and those medicines do not agree; then we administer cauterization at the end of things, and it agrees: thus it falls out that cauterization is the last resort, not according to the understanding of the common people and foolish doctors.
The old ones said that the cauter with gold is better than the cauter with iron. And they didn't say this unless because of the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance. They also said that it doesn't make a pus location of the cauter. That is not true absolutely: for I have already tried it and found that it does not do that in some bodies without other things.
And the cauter with it is good, and better than with iron, as they said.
However, when you take the cauter made of gold and put it in fire, it is not revealed to you until it is ignited according to the quantity you want, due to the redness of the gold. And when it approaches the heat, and if you add ignition on top of it, it melts in the fire and turns into scales.
Therefore, the craftsman falls out of that habit: and because of this, the cauter with iron is faster and closer to us among our operations.
And I myself have already organized this Chapter on the Cauter, according to chapters: and I have organized them from head to foot: so that they may relieve whoever seeks what he wants from it. Chapter: On the manner of cauterizing the crown.
II Chapter.
This cauterization is helpful for controlling the dominance of moisture and coldness over the brain, which are the causes of headache, and the excessive flow of humors from the head to the eyes and ears, and many sleepings, toothaches, and throat pains: and universally all kinds of illnesses that occur due to coldness, such as paralysis, lethargy, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar ones from those illnesses.
The method of cauterization is this: you should precede the patient with a medicine that is soluble, purifying and cleansing the head for three nights or four, according to what the strength of the patient requires, and his age, and habit.
Then command him to make his head radiate with a scalpel.
Then have him sit between your four hands, so that he has already placed his own hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your hand on the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever then your middle finger comes to rest, mark that spot with a seal. Then apply the cautery of olive oil, whose form is this. Then place it on top of the marked spot with a seal, with a slow descent by which your hand is gradually constricted and you will turn it over.
Then quickly lift up your left hand and look at the place.
For if you see already a quantity of bone or flesh removed from the skull, like an alkali or a zeuhuberbe, then lift up your hand.
And if not, repeat your hand with the same iron or with another one that is cooled down from it: until you see the bones which I told you about.
Then take something from the salt and dissolve it in water, and pour it into the same wound, and place it on top: and leave it for three days.
Then place the soaked compress on top of the wound, and leave it there until the scab is destroyed by fire. Then care for that with the ointment tetrapharmakon, until it heals.
They have already said that the wound that remains more open emits pus, therefore it is better and more helpful.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone and held with a cautery until something thickened on the bone is burned.
Then it will be reduced after what has been burned off from the bone, then it will be cured.
And others say that it is necessary to reach the end with a cautery, until it stamps its mark on the bone like a kirate form: or an instrument that women use to write small letters: and they fear that vapors of the head will escape from this place, and the wound will be left open for a long time.
Then it should be treated until it is consolidated.
But to me, these two types of cautery seem utterly useless except in certain people according to the way of fear.
And to leave it up to me is better for its salvation.
For the head is weakened by the dissolution of its natural continuity, just as we have testified in other members; and especially when the head of an infirm person is weak by nature. And indeed, the first type of cautery is more salutary and better for me, and I use it: therefore I will operate with it for the sake of health.
On the manner of cauterizing the head when the entire head is in pain.
Chapter 3.
When chronic pain occurs throughout the entire head and persists in an invalid, and they use hellebores, and gall-nuts, and head-clearing medicines, and oils, and poultices.
And especially if it has already been cauterized with the first type of cautery that we described, and nothing benefits them from those things: then consider.
For if the head of an invalid is strong by natural creation and not weak, and it finds a moderate coldness: then cauterize with another type of cautery under that slightly.
Then cauterize it above all the horn of one's own head with that cautery, so that it does not penetrate the skin and uncover a quantity from the bone as we described.
And cauterize it with the first type of cautery at the back of one's own head, in the place which is called the vessel: and it is a location where a tumor is placed; and lift up your mother's hair on this spot, and do not uncover the bone.
For an invalid finds it due to that intense pain, and different from the pain of other cauterizations throughout all the head.
And I will say that this cautery is in its place: and it must be a cautery by which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of it is subtly cauterized with a cautery by which the middle of the head is cauterized.
And this is its form.
On the method of cauterizing in a headache, whether with burnt medicine or iron.
Chapter Four.
When it happens that there is pain and swelling on the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and the head is cleansed with medicines, and the rest of the treatment which I mentioned in my divisions of diseases is applied, and this does not help at all: then cauterization in it is done in two ways: either by cauterization with a burning medicine, or with iron. The cauterization with a burning medicine is this: take one tooth of garlic, and extract the pulp from it, and cut off its extremities from both sides.
Then divide the place of pain with a broad lancet in time, until there is a space under the skin where the tooth is taken.
Then insert it into that space under the skin until it is hidden: afterwards tie a thread over it with a gentle constriction, and leave it for fifteen hours; then loose it and take out the garlic, and leave the wound two or three days; afterwards put a poultice soaked in butter on top of it until the place becomes pus-filled: then cure it with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to do that with certain burning medicines, which I wrote about in the twelfth treatise on Blistering Medicines.
The cauterization with iron is done in this way.
The Ignis Cauterium, whose form is this.
And it is called Clavilus: because the form of its head is like the form of a hook, in which there is some curvature, and in the middle of it is a small projection.
Then place it on the spot and hold your hand: and turn the iron slowly with speed: and let the amount that is burned be equal to the thickness of the skin, as its middle.
And lift up your hand so that the artery that is below may not be burned and bleeding may occur.
Then soak the poultice in salt water and place it over the wound, and let it be for three days. Then put the poultice with butter on it. After that, care for it with an ointment until it heals. And if you wish, cauterize this hemi-cranium with the second edge of the cauterizer's knife.
And beware of cutting into an artery in this hemi-cranium, not one that is truly old.
About the way to cauterize in an old hemi-cranium.
Head 5.
When you are treating a hemi-cranium, with what we mentioned earlier in the previous treatment and what we said about divisions of illnesses, and not to give a remedy: and you see from an illness that what we said about cauterization first with medicine or with fire does not suffice for him; then it is necessary to take the burning Cauterium knife until it becomes white after which you mark above the place of pain with a line, the length of which is half a finger's breadth or so: and put your hand on one side and press it until you cut into an artery and reach the mouth. However, it is necessary for you to beware of the continuation of the jawbone which moves during mastication, lest the side or nerve that moves it be burned, and a spasms occur.
And be on guard against bleeding from the artery which has been cut.
For the cutting of it is a source of fear, and especially for one who does not know what he is doing and is not studious or experienced: and he leaves off the operation with that very first.
And I come back with the recollection of the regimen for controlling the bleeding that occurs from an artery according to its own method, and in its place in this book.
If you see that from illness the cautery does not suffice for him, and you see the patient's body enduring the cautery in the middle of the head, as we have narrated, care for the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, apply the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on extracting an artery with a cautery having two knives.
For this cautery is better and more effective. On the manner of cauterizing the ears in pain.
Chapter VI. When pain occurs in the ear from cold and is treated with remedies and the remaining treatment that we mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply a cautery with fire: and it is what is called a Point, whose form is this.
Then the point with it after its ignition in a circle around the entire ear, as it revolves; or in a circle of both, if pain is simultaneously present in both.
And extend yourself with the cautery from the root of the ear for a little bit, after you have marked the places with encaustic: and let the quantity of the cautery be ten points on each ear, and so on.
Then care for the places until they are healed.
On the manner of cauterizing in Torture.
Chapter VII.
The torture that is cured with cauterization is not from any of the types that occur due to phlegm, according to what we mentioned in the divisions of illnesses. And having applied the cautery to the species that occurs due to drying and nerve spasm.
When you treat this species of torture with hirings, head-washings, and gargling, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient three times: one at the root of the ear, and the second a little below its time, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery opposite the weaker part.
Because softening does not occur unless it is in a part that appears healthy.
And the shape of cauterization is this: that you cauterize with the cautery directly on the upper extremity of the ear, a little below the horn of the head; and at another time: whose length is according to the length of the thumb.
And place your hand with the cautery until it burns a quantity equal to the thickness of the skin in the middle.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a kind of knife, whose shape is as follows: although it is not much thinner than what you see, and it is necessary for there to be a little excess thickness on it. Then take care of the area with what has preceded: until it heals.
Of the manner of cauterizing in old apoplexy.
Chapter VIII.
When old apoplexy is present and you treat it with what we have said, but your treatment does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on all of his horn-like protrusions from the head, and the cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said, and the cautery at the back of the head, according to what has preceded: and the manner of cauterization is according to what has preceded.
Also cauterize with a cautery on the mouth of the stomach: and it is the most last.
Then treat, with what has preceded.
Of the manner of cauterizing in Oblivion.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in the cup, be given first to the patient a great amount of hyeracium, and purifying pills for the brain.
Then apply an emplaster to the whole head of the patient, and place on the back of his head the plaster described in the treatise on emplasters, and repeat it several times. This is the method of cauterization. Do it in the same order that I told you there. If it heals through that, it's good.
If not, then make three cauteries on the back of his head, which will descend from the upper part to the lower part of the eye, and place between each cautery the thickness of a finger.
Then care for the cauterization with whatever came before it.
But if you want to add more and he is weakly enduring that, then make a cauterization in the middle.
And if you want to add more, then cauterize him above both horns.
Then care for him until he is healed, and make the cauterization with oil according to the form that was previously mentioned.
About the method of cauterizing in paralysis and relaxation.
Chapter 10.
You should proceed with the cleansing of the head with hieries and with what we said.
Then shave the head of the patient. Afterward, cauterize him with a cauterization in the middle of the head, and a cauterization above all the horn of the head, and a cauterization above the back of his neck, and three on the vertebrae of the neck.
But if you are in need of relaxation for the body, and he is weakly enduring it, and the disease is strong: then cauterize him with four cauterizations above the vertebrae of the back, and the last one with a cauterization, until most of his skin is burned away, and raise your hand.
Then care for him until he is healed: and so anoint the cauterization with oil.
About the method of cauterizing in epilepsy.
Chapter 11.
The epileptic is not cauterized unless it is the one whose epilepsy is due to phlegm. It is therefore necessary that you cleanse his brain first with vinegar and along with the other treatment which we mentioned in the division; when he is very sick or is able to tolerate medicines.
But if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then a gargle and cleansing mouthwash for the brain are administered many days before with good food.
Then, quickly cut off his head. Afterwards, cauterize it with one cautery instrument in the middle of the head, just as it was done before; and another cautery instrument on the back of his head, and over all the horn of his own head.
But if the sick person is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize him with the cauteries that I mentioned in the case of paralysis, and soften his body over the vertebrae of the neck and back; and let the Cauterium be olive oil according to the method that preceded. But if it is a child who is sick, then place a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Of the method of cauterizing in Melancholy.
Chapter XII.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries that we mentioned in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive tendency towards melancholy and his body is weakly moistened, then give him to drink something that will cleanse his brain, according to what preceded in the division; afterwards, quickly cut off the head of the sick person, and make a ring later on well-made from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head; and have the sick person sitting square and held back by all parts.
Then apply the poultice. And it is more worthy from old sheep's tail butter.
And warm him over a tempered fire by degrees, as much as his finger can tolerate when it is introduced into him.
Then remove it from the middle of its head in a circle, and let it go until it cools down.
Make him do that once every week with the rest of his good management, until he is healed.
Or if you prefer, cauterize him by making small holes in many places on him, except for keeping your hand with the cauterizer; indeed, with a pleasant smell.
For this kind of cauterization moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place a poultice soaked in butter or goose fat over it.
On the method of cauterizing in descending water to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When the beginning of water is revealed to you in the eye by signs which I said in the division, then begin and poultice the sick person, as long as it cleanses his head.
And guard him from all moistures, and make him sit in the bath on fasting days for a few days.
Then command him to wash his head and cauterize himself in the middle of his head. Then cauterize him on both temples with two cauteries, if there is an obstruction of the descent of water in both eyes at once: or on one side, if there is an obstruction of water in one eye; and cut off with the cauterizer all veins and arteries that are under the skin; and let the cauteries be long in width across the temples; and beware of bleeding.
What if you see something from it, then cut him immediately with any possible medicine; and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and their cutting off, and caution against bleeding.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck, under two bones, with two cauteries produced lastly.
On the method of cauterizing in Old Tears.
Here is the translation:
When the tears of the eyes are old and frequent: and they are above the veins, and arteries which are in plain sight on the outside of the head, it is verified that this is due to excesses of cold and phlegmatic things. Then cauterize with the same cauterization I narrated for the beginning of water flowing down, at the top of the head, and two cauterizations above each temple, and two cauterizations on the neck below each bone.
And if you need an addition, then cauterize it on every side of the eye cautiously, above the eyebrow tip with a small cauterization.
Of the manner of cauterizing in the foulness of the Nose.
Chapter 15.
When you are treating this, with what we said in the division, and the medicine does not agree: then hasten, and give it to drink infirm-coochies three nights: afterwards gently press his head, and cauterize it with a medium cauterization, with an olive cauterization.
Then cauterize it with a cauterization of the hinge, two cauterizations, above both eyebrows under the hair a little.
And guard against the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of the hinge cauterization.
Of the manner of cauterizing in the softening of the Eyelid.
Chapter 16.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or humidity: then cauterize the eyelid with one cauterization, with this lunar cauterization.
And if you wish, cauterize it above both eyebrows a little with two cauterizations in every part; and be distant from the two temples: and let the length of all the cauterization be according to the lengths of the eyebrow: and do not end your hand with the cauterizer, but rather according to the quantity that is burned by the third eyelid.
And this is the form of a cauterizer according to this lunar cauterization method.
About the manner of cauterizing the eyelid when hairs turned inward pierce the eye. Chapter 17.
The cautery is done in two ways: either with fire, or with burning medicine.
However, in the cautery with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to remove his hairs, if he is one of those who plucks them, until they are lengthened and strengthened. But if they prick him at the root of his hair, then bind his eyes with a bandage, so that they may not be disturbed until new ones grow.
When they have grown and become equal, then place the patient's head on your shoulder: afterwards mark above his eyelid with encaustic, making a sign that is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs.
Then place the soaked poultice on white of egg: or on eyeball with psyllium mucus.
Then a cauterization by fire, whose form is this.
Then cauterize on the figure you marked gradually in many places, until the surface of the skin that is like the shape of a myrtle leaf appears fully and properly.
And the sign of the success of your work is: if you see that the eyelid has already begun to contract and the hairs are lifted at the point of the eye.
So then lift up your hand, and let him go after three days.
Then place a poultice with butter on him until the scab is removed.
Then care for him with an ointment, until he is healed.
And if some of the hairs return after an hour and the eyelid becomes soft: then repeat the cauterization on that same spot, just as you did at first.
If however hairs are on the lower part: then cauterize it, until it is elevated to its natural place: and it will be equal so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
On the manner of cauterizing with burning medicine in the same case.
Chapter 18.
It is fitting to hasten the weak one, so that they may let go of their hair until it has grown out and become equal.
Make a shape like a leaf from myrtle on cloth from linen.
Then take from known soap and from unimbibed lime one ounce or nearly that each separately. Then grind those simultaneously with good rubbing and make it quickly so that it does not grow cold.
Then spread it over the cloth which you made in the shape of a leaf from myrtle, and place it on the eyelid of one eye, or two.
And put it under the eye covered with egg white: and the head of the weak one be in your bosom.
And place your index finger on the medicine and press it slightly.
And you move it whenever the weak one feels the biting of the medicine, for his biting is like fire.
While therefore he persists in this that he has found the biting, then let go of the medicine and move it with your finger.
When therefore the biting ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And consider then, if you see the eyelid elevate like it is elevated in contraction with fire or incision, it is well: and if not, then repeat over it from the medicine on the spot where the medicine does not imprint and does not grow worse, until your operation is equalized and the eye is contracted.
Then place butter over it, until the burned skin is eradicated.
Then care for it with a balm of diaphanousness, or another, until it heals.
And it is necessary for you to keep guard during the operation, so that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye.
What if the eyelid becomes soft after a day and something from the hair gets into the eye, then apply medicine to that spot which becomes soft from the eyelid itself, just as you did at first.
Then care for it until it heals.
And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And know that human eyes differ in size and smallness.
Therefore your consideration should be according to this: and the way of rectitude is not hidden from him who has a study in this art.
About the method of cauterizing in the tear duct.
Chapter XIX.
When you cure the tear duct as we said in the divisions of illnesses, and your treatment does not take effect: then it is necessary for you to cauterize it according to this method.
Order the patient to put his head in your lap, and have a servant hold his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or be moved with his head.
Then place the medicated poultice on the white of the eye, or on the psyllium mucus over his eye: then apply the cauterizing fire, which has this shape.
Let it be concave, like the shape of a vulture's feather at one end, with which the cauterizing is done: and if you wish, make it penetrating up to the other end, and if you wish, test it upwards.
However this concavity is better for your purpose.
Then place the cautery on it, which becomes very hot.
And hold your hand near the cautery with your eye on it, by the nose, so that your hand does not wander or disturb the patient; and place the cautery on the fat of the eye and corrupt it.
If you then reach from the beginning of your cautery to the mouth, it will be well.
And if not: then reiterate the cautery once or twice, as needed; and let that be for three days.
Then place a poultice with butter, and care for it with an ointment of the drying kind, until it heals. And if forty days pass and it does not heal: then place a sharp, corrosive medicine on top of it, until the mouth is exposed; and scrape it off as it comes in its own chapter.
And there is another method for a cautery abscess, which some of the first ones said.
Direct yourself to the location of the abscess, and find it; then place into that same opening a thin camel's hair, that is, a thin cannula, which has this form.
And pour into it a quantity of a drachma's worth of liquid lead; and hold your hand with the cannula retention good, so that the patient does not move at all, nor run or bring the liquid lead to his eye.
And it is necessary that you place on top of the patient's eye a poultice infused in egg white or water.
For lead burns the location of the abscess and cures it with a miraculous healing.
And if the abscess is healed, as we said from the cautery, and with the cure, it is good.
And if not, then it is necessary to administer the nostril, and reduce the abscess to its natural course through the nose, as it will come into its own proper place.
Here is the translation:
Here's the translation:
Many times occurrences happen on the lip fractures which are called Pili, and especially on the lips of boys.
When therefore you treat the fractures with fire cautery, as we have said in the division of diseases, and the cure does not conduce, then make a small incision with a small knife, according to this form.
And let the depth be according to the fineness of the knife.
Then cure it with cerate, until it heals.
On the manner of cauterizing in a mouth ulcer.
Chapter 21.
When an abscess occurs at the root of a tooth or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth: then it makes pus and bursts open: afterwards it suppurates and runs and forms a fistula: then you should treat the fistula, and if the cure does not conduce in it, then you must use fire cauterization according to its size, as much as it will fit into the fistula.
Then insert the hot instrument into the opening of the fistula and hold your hand, until the burning iron reaches to the depth of it and its end: do that once or twice.
Then treat it afterwards with what we said about treatment until it is cured.
If the pus therefore is lanced and healed, it will be good.
And if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupt bone according to what will come to its head.
On the manner of cauterizing in Gums and softened Teeth.
Chapter 22.
When the gum becomes softened due to humidity and the teeth move and you treat it with medicines, but it does not conduce: then place the head of the patient on your shoulder.
Then apply the burning cautery, which will come after this, so that you place a cannula over the tooth: and insert into it the lit cauterary quickly: and hold your hand for a little while, until the patient feels the heat of the fire has already reached the root of the tooth.
And lift up your hand: then repeat the cauterization a few times, as you wish.
Then have the patient fill their mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour: and spit it out.
For the tooth is strengthened by motion, and the softened gum is tightened and dried, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
Chapter 23.
When the toothache is due to coldness, or there is a worm, and treatment does not bring relief with medicines: then the cautery is done in this way, according to two methods: either with butter, or with fire.
The cautery of this sort with butter is, that you take whey butter and boil it in an iron kettle or a cauldron.
Then take a cloth, and wrap it around the end of the tented area.
Then submerge the cloth in the boiling butter: and place it quickly over the painful tooth: and hold it until it cools: then repeat it a few times, until the power of fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge a wool cloth or a piece of cloth in cold butter, and place it over the painful tooth: and place a hot iron on top of it, until the fire reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.
The cautery with fire is, that you attend to a metal or air cannula. And let there be some thickness in the body of it, so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
Then take the cautery, which will have this shape; and place it on that tooth; and hold your hand until the cautery becomes cool.
Do that several times, for pain is removed, either on the same day or on another day.
And it is necessary when the impression of that cautery is made, for the sick person to fill his mouth with good butter and hold it for one hour; then he should spit it out.
And this is the shape of the cautery.
Cauterize with any instrument you can get, as much as possible; and this is the shape of the cannula.
About the way of cauterizing in strophules.
Chapter 28.
When strophules are caused by phlegm and cold moisture, and do not obey the natural process of digestion through medicines, and you want to hasten their digestion: then take a hollow cautery fire, which has this shape.
Having two open ends, so that the smoke may come out at the cautery from one end; and place it lit on that swelling once, and again if you need to, until it reaches the depth of the swelling.
What if the swelling is small: then place the cautery according to the size of the swelling.
Then leave it for three days, and place on top of it a poultice infused in butter, until what the fire burned is removed.
Then care for it with tooth ointment, until the shape of the cannula heals.
About the way of cauterizing in hoarseness of voice and constriction of breathing.
Chapter 25.
When humors overwhelm the trachea of the lungs, and especially when it is accompanied by a cold complexion, then it is necessary for the sick person to evacuate first with dissolvent medicines.
Then cauterize it at the back of the neck near the root of the throat in a depressed place; and beware, lest you reach the throat or skin with the cautery, except for a little bit of it.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck at the last vertebra of that same part; and let the cautery be locked in place according to the method that came before.
Then treat it with what came before until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing for afflictions of the Lungs and Cough.
Head 26.
When Cough and affliction of the Lungs are caused by cold humidities, and the patient does not have fever or phthisis, nor an old affliction: then cauterize it with two cauterizers above the armpit in depressed, smooth, empty places.
And cauterize with another one in the middle of the chest between two breasts; and let the cautery be shaped like what came before.
And if you wish, your cautery should be done by piercing with a cautery called the Punctum, whose form has been described for piercing pain of the ears; and let the points be from thirty points almost to another.
Then treat it with what came before until it is healed. And now let the cautery be one having three branches: according to this shape.
Why is it alleviated with that when you do it with him in a single vice of three cauterizers.
On the method of cauterizing for Titillics, in dislocation of the Shoulder.
Head 27.
When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to humidities and does not fit into its hour of return from its dislocation until it has become accustomed to returning, then afterwards it is dislocated by a small motion which happens like what we have already testified about; then it is necessary that you reduce the dislocation first.
Then let the patient be placed upon his back, or upon a healthy side.
Then lift the skin which is inside the navel to the upper parts with your left hand fingers. And if the joint becomes dislocated inwardly.
Then having a cauterizer with two bristles. Whose form is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side and comes out with a figure of cauterization with four cauteries.
And sometimes a cauterization is done with a cauterizer having three bristles, and then the figure of cauterization comes out with six cauteries; and the bristles are according to the subtlety of the thread.
And this is the form of a cauterizer having three bristles.
And sometimes one more is added to this method, and there are then eight cauteries.
Then place crushed cloves with salt on top of the cauterizer.
Then make the patient remain still in tranquility, so that no part is moved at any time, until they are comforted.
And if the dislocation is above, and this rarely happens, then cauterize it on the shoulder with a nail-shaped cauterizer, or with many punctures by multiple cauteries.
For the joint is strengthened, and humidity is removed; and the patient is healed.
Chapter on the method of cauterizing the Stomach.
Chapter 28.
When coldness and moistures many occur in the Stomach, until they expel the patient from his own body, and multiply catarrhs to him, and insist on constant methods of cure, but do not help: then it is necessary for the patient to be placed upon his back, and to stretch out his legs and arms.
Then cauterize with three bristles, using a cauterizer shaped like the undercurve of the pectoral bone, as long as one finger, and having a nail-shaped cauterizer; and two bristles below from the two sides of one cauterizer, until the figure of the cauteries becomes triangular.
And stretch between each one so that they may not join together when they make pus. And let the depth of the cautery be the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the shape of the cauteries be according to this figure without addition: and if you wish to cauterize, cauterize with a great cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this figure: and let the cautery which makes this cautery be one according to the shape of a circle according to this figure.
And the stomach is cauterized by piercing it with a needle which is frightened by this cautery: and it is, as signs are made above the stomach at the point according to the quantity you wish with an encaustic: then cauterize it with the puncture cautery: then care for it with the cure that preceded until it is healed.
About the manner of cauterizing a cold liver.
Book XXIX.
When it happens that the liver hurts from cold and moisture, or from a thick flatulence, until it discharges its natural excess through excessive excretion, and the patient is cured with what we have said, but does not benefit in that: then it is necessary to have the patient lift up his head onto his neck, and mark three cauteries with an encaustic according to this figure, and of the same quantity on the liver below the navel, where the man's elbow reaches: and let there be a space between each cautery according to the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery be straight according to the length of the body: and do not press your hand with the cautery too much.
And let the quantity of what is burned be the thickness of the skin, the middle part not added to: and let the patient stand on his feet.
If however he is not standing, then let him be lying down, who has already extended his legs and lifted up his arms. This is the form of a cautery.
And it is indeed possible for you to use this cautery with a surgical knife when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And take care that you do not proceed too far in cauterization, and the thickness of the skin is burned all over, so that the body is entirely burned and reaches the intestines; for the skin is thin there, therefore know this.
On the manner of cauterizing abscesses on the hip.
Chapter 30.
When it happens that an exitus occurs and you wish to know whether the apostema is in the flesh of the hip or in its membrane: then if it is in the flesh of the hip, a painful and severe illness attacks the patient without sharpness; and if it is in the membrane of the hip, with pain there is sharp distress: and you see now that his cure has exhausted the doctors.
Therefore, the patient should lean back on his own neck.
Then place the figure of the abscess with encaustic; then apply fire to the cautery, which is like a ray.
And this is its form.
And cauterize with this cautery one, until the skin is completely burned and reaches the siphac, until all the pus comes out; then cure him with the cure of abscesses, until he is healed.
And it is not proper for someone to use this type of cautery unless they have prolonged study in the art of medicine, and through whose hands these illnesses converge with some experimentation: then indeed he may dare to perform such an operation.
But actually, it is better for me to let it go.
On the manner of cauterizing in pleurisy.
Chapter 31.
The ancients have said that a cautery with the roots of Aristolochia should be used for cold pleurisy in this manner.
And you should take from the dried roots of Aristolochia, one root that is longer than the others found in it, and let it be as thick as a finger.
Then immerse it in oil: and burn it over fire.
Then cauterize it with a cautery in the spot between the fork of the jawbone and the neck, and two small cauterizations slightly declined under the guide to the side that is below the beard.
And also two cauterizations in the spot between the fifth and sixth ribs slightly declined towards the back a little; and another cautery in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach.
And three cauterizations from behind: one in the spot between two spatulas; and two cauterizations from the two sides of the chest, with the lower one being that which is between two spatulas.
And it's not necessary for you to press your hand onto the cautery, but rather let it be held out openly, smelling of the skin. And some ancient people have said that there are certain individuals who use a cauterizing iron similar to a radiating rod; they burn and insert it inside the person in the spot between the ribs until it reaches the abscess, and pus will then flow out: just as we said in the case of Epatis.
But in this perforation with a cauterizing iron there is fear that the sick person will die immediately, or that an abscess will form in the place, which does not have a cure.
Chapter 32: On the Method of Cauterizing the Spleen.
When you treat the ailment of the spleen, according to what we said about treating ailments by division, and your treatment does not bring relief, then you should use a cauterizing iron in three ways, all of which are correct.
One of which is to make three or four cauterizations, lining them up according to the length of the spleen, following the figure of the cauterizations described by Epatis, whose preceding figure precedes.
And let there be among all cauterizers the quantity of a finger's thickness, or a little more.
And let the method of cauterizing be equal to what we have said for cauterizing the liver.
And do not press your hand with the cauterizer, and let the patient be lying on his back weakly.
And another method of cauterizing is this: take a cauterizer with two prongs, as we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the skin which is on the direct splenic area, where the patient's left arm reaches; and let your elevation be according to the width of the body, so that the cauterizers fall along the length of the body.
Then insert two burning prongs deeply, until they penetrate the skin from the other side; then withdraw the cauterizer; thus four cauterizers are made. And if you wish to cauterize with a cauterizer that has three prongs.
Then care for the cauterized area after you have released it to discharge pus over many days; for it is more beneficial than the rest of what has preceded in terms of healing.
Of the method of cauterizing in Hydrophobia.
Chapter 33.
A cauterizer does not fall in hydrophobia, unless it is applied properly.
When you treat a hydrophobic patient with the methods of treatment that we have said in the division, and the treatment does not take effect, then it is necessary to cauterize him four times around the navel, and one cauterizer above the stomach, and another above the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back between the vertebrae, and one directly on the chest, and another directly on the stomach: and let the depth of the cauterization be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then release the cauterizer open so that it may discharge pus over a long period.
And do not remove the patient from treatment after cauterization until with him, because it is necessary that two intentions congregate to him; and he will hasten towards his cure with God's assistance.
The shape of the cauterizer with which the belly is cauterized should be a key; according to its form preceding it. And that with which the back is cauterized, should be olive-shaped, according to its form preceding it.
Of the manner of cauterizing Feet and Legs. Head 44.
When they apostemate in hydropico and are filled with citrine water: it is necessary that you cauterize on the dorsum of the foot at nocturnal, which is between auricular and annular; and lift up your hand with the cauterizer, and do not twist it: then lift up your hand again: and do not touch it entirely.
For the water citrine will ooze out, and let the cauterizer be according to this shape.
Then make two cauterizers on each leg, one in every leg, and let the cauterizer be with the edge of a cutting cauterizer; and let it be according to the length of the leg, one under the knee, and another lower down by about the middle of the leg: and over all the hip make two cauterizers: and leave the cauterizer open without treatment for a long time, so that something may ooze out from it; then cure it with the others which we have said.
Of the manner of cauterizing in the dissolution of the Belly. Head 35.
When there is a dissolution of the belly due to cold and humidity, until the powers of retention and digestion, which are in the stomach and intestines, become weakened: and that thing is cured with modes of treatment, but is not healed; and you see the patient bearing cauterization with excessive vigor, then cauterize him with a great cauterizer over his stomach, according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with the circular cauterizer, and four small cauterizers in the circumference of the navel, with a subtle key-shaped cauterizer: and a large cauterizer on the gallbladder above the gallstones.
And if you see excessive moistures and the patient endures that, then cauterize him with a cauter on his chest and with another one on all of his hip: and perhaps add two small cauterizers near the navel.
For it is a successful treatment whose benefit does not fail.
Chapter on the manner of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are old and many hemorrhoids in the anus, or one, which are formed from thick, cold, or corrupted humors, and they are treated as we said in our division, but do not yield to treatment: then cauterize with three cauterizers on the lower part of the back of the spine, a little triangularly shaped, and one under the navel, almost two fingers deep.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and his food is not digested, and you see his face breaking out in acne, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cauterizer, as before: and one on his liver, and another on his spleen, with a small cauterizer: and leave the open cauterizer for some time: afterwards take care of him until he is healed.
Chapter on the manner of cauterizing altchill after their resection.
Chapter 37.
When you excise the altchill, then take a cauterizer that is like a beam of fire.
Then insert the burning one into the excised altchill: and with your last hand, until the cauterizer reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows: do that once or twice. If therefore there are many altchill, then cauterize each one with a cauterizer as we have narrated.
Then take care of them by applying to them what is beneficial for them from ointments, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery on alum, it is more beneficial for his recovery.
On the manner of cauterizing an anal fistula.
Chapter 38.
When an invalid does not submit to the cutting and operation as we described in its place, and is terrified by it, perhaps it will be cured with a cautery.
When therefore an abscess occurs to someone, and becomes old, pus runs out of it, and corrupted humors flow.
Therefore it is more noble as needed, that you probe it with a fine tent.
Then know the quantity of its depth with a tent.
Then apply hot coals or a cautery, which is similar to a red-hot iron.
Then insert yourself, ignited, into the abscess and as far as the plug has gone inside. And apply the cautery to her repeatedly, until all those corrupted bodily parts are burned away, once, or twice, or thrice, according to your own necessity.
And guard yourself from burning the nerve, if it is there, or a great vein; or if the abscess goes to the bladder or intestine, then guard yourself from all those places.
And do not do that unless the abscess is in a fleshy place; and consider, because it is not piercing.
Then care for the place until it heals.
But if the location is sealed and the materials are removed from it, and it remains thus for a long time; then you will know that it has already healed completely.
And if the materials are not removed from it, then you will know that it is piercing, or that there is a corrupted bone deep within it, or something similar: whose memory will come to its place.
On the manner of cauterizing the kidneys.
Chapter 39.
When it happens that in the kidneys there is pain from cold or from gross swelling, and this weakness decreases because of the patient's infirmity, then it is necessary to cauterize him above the flesh over the kidneys with a cautery on both kidneys with a clavicular cautery, whose preexistence has been remembered.
And perhaps we will cauterize him again in the same place at almeidatum.
Therefore three lines are needed.
So they will be more useful for soothing.
On the method of cauterizing the Bladder.
Chapter 40. When debility and softening occur in the Bladder due to cold and moisture, until the infirm person no longer retains urine, then cauterize him on the lower part of the back above the Bladder, where the pubic hair begins, with a cautery from the right side of the back and another from the left: and let the length of this cauterization be according to the size of the knuckle joint: and cauterize him with a lower dorsal cautery, or two cauteries if needed: and let it be as the clavicular cautery preceded.
On the method of cauterizing the Womb. Chapter 41.
When cold and moisture occur in the Womb, and it is prevented from conception by that, and its menses are corrupted, and their production is delayed, and pain occurs to her at their coming, then it is necessary that she be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the Bladder, and a lower dorsal cautery, or two cauteries: and let it be as the clavicular cautery.
On the method of cauterizing the Shoulder in Dislocation.
Chapter 42.
When the mucus' moisture flows to the shoulder's joint, and becomes the cause of its departure from its place: and the sign of this is that the leg stretches over another when they are brought together; and a vacant space is found in the location of dislocation.
Therefore it is necessary that you cauterize the ailing part over the wax on the anchor of its own cauterio similar to a circle: after you mark with encaustic around the wax, as it rolls off; and so the wax falls in the middle of the circle.
And let the cauter be like one that has preceded in cauterizing the stomach.
But if you do not have this cauter at hand, then cauterize it with three cauterizers, using a large olive oil cauterizer; and make the depth of the cauterization according to the thickness of the skin in its entirety.
Then take care of it until it heals.
About the way of cauterizing in Sciatica. Chapter 43.
When the pain occurs in the wax on the anchor and it is caused by cold and moisture; and the patient is treated with that which we said in the division, and the cure does not take effect, and it becomes old: then it is necessary to loosen the patient from gross humors with stinking pills, or with artificial pills, and similar things.
Then cauterize him.
And the method of the cauterization in that is according to two modes: either a cauter with burning medicines or a cauter with fire.
The cauter with fire is according to many modes.
One of which is that you cauterize over the wax on the anchor's own three triangular cauterizers, according to this shape.
And make their depth good or bad.
And let the space that is between all the cauterizers be as much as the thickness of a finger; and let the cauterizer be olive-like.
Sometimes however, the cauterization is made in the middle over the head of its own anchor.
Therefore there are four cauterizers.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose form has preceded in the cauterization of an anchor's displacement, one by one; so that the circle contains the entire anchor.
And burn the thickness of the skin entirely.
This is the method of cauterizing in sciatica, when the pain adheres to the anchor itself and does not extend as far as the hip and leg.
But if it extends as far as the hip and leg, then you should cauterize that part with two cauterizations on the hip, over the place where the patient feels pain, and your own cauterization on the hollow four fingers to the left a little bit: and let the cauter be a knife-like one. And let the depth of the cauterization be according to the thickness of the skin.
But if the patient says that the pain extends as far as the toes of the foot, then you should cauterize there where he indicates with a small point, three or four or more times, if necessary.
And if the patient says that the pain is beneath the knee towards the leg, then you should cauterize there with one knife-like cauterization.
And beware of yourself in every cauterization of yours, lest you should not be careful and burn the nerve or a great artery, and bring harm or contraction upon the patient through that.
And I myself have indeed seen one and another of those who cauterized above the hollow, and left off in the cauterization, and the leg has been swollen until a tumor has followed the foot, and it has been pierced through and the whole foot has been corrupted: then afterwards there occurred dissolution of the bowels, and death after that.
But if the pain is in both parts at once, cauterize both in this way.
And certain wise people have said that in the cauterization of the anchor, this is the method.
Make a similar one from iron, the diameter of which is half a palm: and let it be at its opening according to the thickness of the knuckle of a finger, or slightly less: and inside that iron let there be another iron.
And let there be space which is between all the bones by the quantity of the knuckle's joint: and let the bones be open from two sides: and let their height be as a knot, or two knots: and make for them a handle of iron, decently adapted to the bones.
And this is its shape.
Then burn it in the fire until it reddens and sends sparks: then place it on the anchor over an invalid's bed set up against a healthy side.
Therefore, cauterize him with three rounded cauters in one direction.
Then let it be for three days.
Afterwards, apply ointments with butter: and let the wound remain open for many days.
Then care for him with an ointment until he is healed.
Albucasis says that this kind of cauterization is rarely used by sons, on account of the fear of its appearance: and therefore, because we find few who will wait upon it.
However, it is one of the good cauterizations for him who suffers, and finds a place with it.
However, the cauterium with burning medicines is, that you make two bones having a perforated armband, into which the hinge of its door descends from air or iron, long enough to reach the height of them, whose in their height are two knots, or as if they themselves were.
And let there be space which is between each one by the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and let them be open below and above: and let what contains them together, according to this shape.
Then place it on the anchor over an invalid's bed set up against a healthy side.
And press your hand firmly onto the anchor over an invalid's bed very much.
Then pour between the two circles of hot water that has been warmed with fire for a little while, and hold it for as long as an hour: and let the invalid endure its burning and charring, for he will find the burning to be like fire, until the burning subsides.
Then elevate your hand with the instrument, and wash away hot water from all around with sweet water; then let it be for three days.
And put honey on top of it, until the blackening of burning goes away; and let it be for several days, and an abscess will develop from it.
For this is the last resort in healing.
Then care for it with ointments until it heals.
But if the pain extends to the hip or leg, make a poultice on it as contains water, just as you did on the anus evenly.
And this is the method of hot water; and I have already written it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Take alkali and unextinguished lime, each one-fourth part of a whole: grind both together and put them in a new jug, the lower part of which is perforated with a small hole, according to the size that the radius will go into; and put another jug filled with vinegar beneath the bottom of the first jug; and pour the alkali and lime over it with sweet water, so that both are submerged by about an inch: after which you press them down with your hand using good pressure; and leave the jug until the sharp water has flowed down to the lower part of the vinegar-filled jug.
Then collect all that water and pour it over the other lime; and let it sit until it is renewed.
For it will then be very strong and sharp, which is administered in many operations of medicine, and in cauterizing other limbs.
Because it causes the operation of fire itself.
And from medicines are those with which the anus is cauterized, also like tissoe, and honey of the anacardium tree, and lime with soap, so that both are mixed together.
And Galen indeed reported, telling the story of some man from ancient times who was cured through treatment for the pain in his anus and sciatic vein: and he greatly praised its effectiveness.
And he said that the patient did not need another treatment and that he was cured from one application, until he returned, because himself perhaps had gone into the bath carried away and came out already cured. And it should be taken from the green soapwort: and if not found green, a new dry one is to be taken, and it is to be pounded much with some fat, and placed on the part where there is pain, or knee, or in the hip: and it is to be bound and left for three hours, or for as long as the patient feels relief from burning.
Then introduce him into a bath.
When his body becomes sweaty, introduce him to the sun.
For the pain subsides and he is healed.
And know that it is not right for someone to use a cauterizer with these medicines, unless after the body has been purged.
And Dioscorides who said that goat dung, when it is used to cauterize the sciatic vein with him, brings relief to him: and a cauterization is done in this manner.
Take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it on the deep spot which is between the big toe and the ankle bone, and is closer to the ankle.
Then take dry goat dung and burn it in fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place the charcoal on the wool and leave it until it is extinguished.
Then repeat that.
Do not cease to do this until the sensation reaches as far as the hip and the pain subsides.
And this method of cauterization is called the "Vaccinium" cauterization.
Of the Cauterization of the Back Pain.
Chapter 44.
Sometimes it happens that pain occurs on the back due to many causes, or by chance, or through a blow, or excessive evacuation, and similar things, through the infusion of cold and moist matter: and indeed cauterization does not fall, unless in this single species which is made from the infusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after the patient's evacuation with fetid pills and similar ones, to make them on the back where there is pain, three lines according to the measure of the afflicted one's body, after which signs are marked with encaustic in each line five or more cauterizations, depending on the quantity that comes from the patient's endurance by virtue of his/her strength: and let the cauterization be done with a cauteriopuncti.
And if you wish, cauterize three times or four with a middle clavicle cauterizer, in this way.
About the method of cauterizing in cases of Gibbons' swelling.
Chapter 45.
This affliction often occurs in small infants.
And the sign of its inception is this in children: that it happens to him a constriction in breathing at elevation, and movement; and one finds in the last vertebrae of the back and its knots, which already begins to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When therefore you see that and wish to do that, then cauterize it with a cauterizer that is a circle in this shape.
And take the cauterizer over all parts of the vertebra equally: and if you wish, cauterize on the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cauterizer two lines or three: and let them be close to each other.
Then take care of the place until it is healed as we said.
And beware, lest you administer a cauterization on a gibbosity that occurs in muscle spasm.
About the method of cauterizing in Gout and pains in joints. Chapter 46.
When pains occur in joints due to cold humidities that flow into any part of the body, then when they happen in feet, according to the custom of physicians, it is proper to call that Gout.
When, therefore, podagra is cured by cold causes with modes of cure and pains are not removed, then the cautery removes them.
And it is necessary to cauterize him after evacuation at the joint of the foot, with many cauteries; and let the cauter be olive-based.
This is its form.
And if you need to make small holes on the surface of the foot, then do so with a cauter.
What if the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize him on all of his knee with three or four cauteries from every part, using the same olive-based cauter. But if you need more of this cauter, then cauterize him again. And do not immerse your hand with the cauter, rather let it be around the thickness of skin only.
But if the pains ascend to the knees and back: then administer what we said in its chapter.
What if the pains are only in the hands: then make holes around the knuckles, as two lines turn back.
But if there remains pain in the fingers: then make holes in them, above every knuckle and on the palm of the hand.
But if the pains ascend after a day to the hips or shoulders: then cauterize both sides from every part.
And do not evacuate the patient from good treatment, or from receiving medicines.
For if a good regimen is observed, and the phlegm is evacuated, it will be healed with the help of God through this cauter.
Of the manner of cauterizing in Ruptures.
Chapter 47.
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestine descends or the vermiform appendix comes close to the testicle, and it begins to be proximate: then it is necessary that you hasten to have the patient give up eating on his own day.
And he will make use of mild things, whereby dung descends from his belly.
Then sit him between your hands on his back: and tell him to hold his breath until it comes out, or appears as a stool, or intestine.
Then lead him with your fingers and mark with an enema under the rupture above the pubic bone, marking where the end is like the middle of a circle to the upper part of the body.
Then apply a caustic fire whose shape is this, until white pus comes out and casts off scabs.
Then lead the intestine or stool back to his concavity.
Then have the servant place his hand on the spot so that the intestine does not come out: and you already opened up between the legs of the infirm person, and placed a poultice beneath him, and another servant is standing above his legs, and another above his chest which holds hands.
Then place the caustic on top of it with your hand holding the caustic steady upright.
And hold him until you reach his mouth: or proceed with him otherwise, if you are not successful with him up to the mouth.
And prudently observe from the exit of the intestine during your cauterizing hour, lest you burn him and something bad happens to the infirm person, or death, or great evil.
And know that when you do not succeed in reaching his mouth with the caustic, your operation is of no use.
And it should be a caustic for children, subtle according to their measure.
Then take care with the other ointments until he is healed.
And let the infirm person lie on his back for forty days, until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary to place his nourishment in proportion to the length of time needed for his cure, which will soothe his belly: so that his intestine does not come out during digestion and evacuation.
Then when he wants to operate after forty days, then administer a well-made ligament and hold it for forty other days.
For when he uses this regimen, he is restored to a complete recovery.
When, however, ruptures occur in the remaining part of the abdomen and are beginning to form, and it is necessary that they not increase, then cauterize the rupture with a rounded caustic according to its size: and let what is burned be as its third part.
Then treat it as we have said, and it will not increase further.
And certain people have said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular caustic, according to this shape.
After it has been marked with encaustum, and a line is placed which is for the breadth on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with a small caustic.
But the first caustic is easier and better. On the method of cauterizing in cases of pain due to fall or percussion.
Chapter 48.
When it happens to certain members due to a fall or percussion and there is pain, and that pain persists for a long time, and treatment with medicines does not help: then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the puncture caustic.
And let the caustic be a puncture caustic for every member according to its size, and its weakness, and its debility, and its strength, and the twisting motion, and the pain that comes from it.
If then he is healed by the first caustic, it is good.
If not: then apply a cautery over it.
Since it is customary for pains of this kind to be transferred from one member to another which approaches it.
Wherefore you should follow them with a cautery until the patient recovers.
About the method of cauterizing leprosy.
Chapter 49.
But some lepers are greatly benefited by a cautery.
And especially the kind of leprosy that occurs due to the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile; therefore, when you wish to cauterize it, take heed.
If therefore the leprosy is ineipiciens and you have treated it as we said in its division, and it does not descend or stay: and you are afraid for the patient, because corruption may affect his entire complexion; then cauterize him over the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, marked, and a second lower down towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two above each horn, and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And with the last of your fingers and the cautery a little while, until it leaves on his mouth a small impression, and the membranes are dislocated from him: so that the expulsion of gross vapors may be alleviated from him, and cauterize also over the spleen with the same cautery, according to what has preceded.
But if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is manifestly apparent: then it is necessary that you cauterize with those cauteries which we said in the chapter, and also with a cautery over the tip of the nose, and two over both cheekbones, and two over the vertebrae of the neck, and six over the vertebrae of the back, and one large over the heels at the end of the tailbone, and one above it, in the same almeidat: and two over the armpits: namely, one over every armpit, and two over both knees, and two over both shoulders, and two over both elbows, and two over the tendernesses of his own breast: and cauterize him over every joint, from the joints of his own fingers, hands, and feet: and cauterize also over every heel of his own feet, and underarm regions of his hands.
And beware of the nerves that are above the last bone of the heel, lest you burn them. And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery over the bone of the hip, and another over the bone of the stomach, and another over the liver.
And know that as much as you add to the cautery, it is more beneficial and more effective.
And know that the weak do not find pain in cauterization, as the healthy do: therefore, because his body is already numbed.
And it should be that the cauteries are of great size and smallness according to members and joints: according to which they preceded from the types of instruments.
Chapter 35.
When some member is stuporized and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then cauterize that stuporous member with cauteries, according to the magnitude of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery be inserted into the thickness of the skin for a moment.
Then cure it with ointment, until it is healed.
And sometimes it is cauterized for some kind of numbness that occurs in the hand and foot at the joints of the back near the outlet of the nerves which move that member: and the numbness is removed.
But do not presume to do so unless one is wise in the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves that move the body.
On the manner of cauterizing in ulcers.
Chapter 51.
When an ulcer becomes old and nothing from the powers of medicine is applied to it: then cauterize over it with a deep cautery for a moment, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color changes.
Then take care of it with barley flour and lentils mixed with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and dove's blood, and swallow's blood: each one should be a single part; mix all these together, and apply them to the cloth, and let them adhere to the place until it is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing in Cancer.
Chapter 52.
When Cancer begins and you wish to stop it: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference, as it rotates.
However, wise men have said that the last cauterization should be made in the middle.
But to me it does not seem so, for I fear that it may cause ulcers; and I have already seen this happen on several occasions. And it is better to cauterize around its circumference with a circle, as we said, or by multiple cauteries. On the manner of cauterizing in Adubenalti.
Chapter 53.
When someone has Adubenalti and it is delayed in its maturity, either due to excessive bleeding or due to the age of the weak person, when he is decrepit with little blood, or due to time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of Adubenalti, then cauterize around its circumference with small multiple punctures.
Then leave it alone.
For she will hasten with maturity itself.
But if you wish to puncture it with a cautery, then set fire to the cautery, of which this is the shape.
And place it in the middle of Adubenalti, until it penetrates the skin; and let the cautery be from that which follows the weak one, so that the flow of pus may be alleviated.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing in a corrupting sore. Here is the translation:
Corroding is not except corruption in a walking limb and it corrupts it; like fire consumes dry wood.
If then you see the corroder in a place that bears a caustic with fire, then many cauteries, small and great, fit according to the place where the corroder is.
Then cauterize it entirely from all parts until you eradicate the entire corruption, and nothing remains of it at all. Then leave it for three days, and put powdered sulfur with oil on the cauterized areas, until all scabs are removed and all corruption is eradicated.
Then care for it with ointments producing flesh.
If then you see that after three days healthy new flesh is born, in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the caustic on what remains of the corrupted areas.
And the corroder is cured sometimes with sharp medicine.
Itself rises in the place of the caustic.
However, the caustic with fire is more effective for quick relief; and I myself have already said that it should be done with sharp medicine in division: so take it there when you need it.
Paragraph about the manner of cauterizing in Claws and Warts. Chapter 55.
This affliction often occurs in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a rough, filtered thing that injures the foot. And the caustic indeed is used in them in two ways: a caustic with fire, and a caustic with hot water.
However, when it is done with fire, let the ignias cauterium be hollow and concave, like a vulture's feather, made of iron, according to the size that contains a claw from all sides: and have a thin rim.
Then place the ignited thing upon the nail. Then revolve the hand with the cauterier around the nail, until the cauterier reaches the depth of the nail: and let it be for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then apply poultices to it with the leaves of wild mallows, crushed with salt: and let the poultice be on it at night. For it will be uprooted from its roots.
Then care for the place with a unguent of generated flesh, until it is healed.
But if they are not converted and frequently occur on the surface of the body, especially in hands and feet: then apply cauterization to them with hot water: and this is, as you take a tube made from air, or iron, or from the quill of a bird: and place it over the nail, or some other point.
Then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube: hold your hand firmly and turn it with gentle pressure from your hand for a short time, so that the rim of the tube imprints on the root of the nail, and the hot water finds its way to the depth, to the root of the nail: and let the patient wait for a short while after the burning of the hot water for one hour.
Then let it go, for the nail is uprooted with its roots.
So do this to each one after another, until you come across all those that are in the body.
Then care for them after they have been uprooted, with that which generates flesh from ointments.
About the manner of cauterizing in Tremor.
Chapter 56.
When a tremor occurs to someone from chilliness of the nerve, or from quartan fever, or another cause: then it is necessary that you cauterize him with four or five cauterizations, above the vertebrae of the back, and between every vertebra cauterize, and in his chest cauterize, and above his stomach cauterize.
Shaking settles with olive oil cauterization, and speedily health recovers from cold illness. On the manner of cauterizing by Albatir.
Chapter 57.
Sometimes Albatir's impurities are expelled from the body, that is, boils which occur due to corrupted gross matter.
It is therefore necessary at first to cauterize all boils on the head with a subtle cauterization using the wood of myrtle, whose extremity has been burned with fire.
Or with the root of long aristolochia.
Or with a lentil-shaped cauterizer. And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion, according to this method, and they do not increase; and excess is broken off, making them well again.
However, it is necessary for that to be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
On the manner of cauterizing in a flow of blood from an artery in a wound.
Chapter 58. It often happens that a flow of blood occurs from an artery which has been cut at the wound, either externally or at the incision of an apostema, or cauterization of a member, and similar to these; and it becomes difficult to stop it.
So when it happens to anyone, then hasten with your hand to the orifice of the artery, and place your index finger on top of it: and press it tightly until the blood is trapped under your finger and does not escape from there. Then place a small and many large olive oil cauterizers into the fire, and blow on them until they become very hot.
Then take one of them, small or large, according to the wound and place where the artery is disrupted, and place the cauterizer on top of the vein after you quickly remove your finger; and hold the cauterizer until the blood stops.
If the artery is expelled when you lift your finger from the artery opening, and you extinguish the cautery, then quickly take another cautery prepared from those that are ready in the fire. Therefore do not stop doing it with one after the other, until the blood is cut off.
And beware that you do not burn the nerve that is there, and another evil occur over the patient. And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to cut it off: especially if the artery is great, unless with one of four methods.
Or with a cautery, as we said.
Or with extraction, when it is not extracted. For when it is drawn out, its ends are contracted, and the blood is cut off.
For when it is drawn out, its ends are contracted, and the blood is cut off. Or it may be tied with a strong tying thread.
Or put on top of it medicines of property which cut off blood, and tighten with a suitable constriction.
However, he who administers its cutting off with a bandage and tightening with cloth, or positioning of things that are burning, and similar things, does not bring it complete benefit, unless rarely.
If however that happens to someone and there is no doctor present nor medicine: then he will begin with the positioning of his index finger over the opening of the vein of that person, as we have narrated, and its constriction very much, until the blood is occupied from the upper part of the wound and above the artery.
And the finger should not be removed from above it with cold water of very great coldness always, until the blood congeals and thickens and is cut off. And meanwhile he should consider what remedy is needed from the cautery or medicine.
Part 1 End.
Book of Surgery by Al-Bubbusi, Part 2. About incision, perforation, and phlebotomy in wounds and similar things.
We have already spoken in the first chapter about every illness where it is fitting to use a cauterizing iron and burning medicine, and its occasions, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterizations. And I have placed the chapters from top to bottom in that place.
And I will proceed in this chapter by following the same path, so that the sought thing may be found for one seeking it. And before I begin to speak of it, O children, you must learn what is in this chapter, which is a terror that is in the first chapter on cauterizations.
And therefore it is necessary to be all the more cautious because in the operation that is in this chapter, evacuation often occurs with blood, along with which life stands at the opening of a vein, or incision over an apostema, or opening of an exit, or curing of a wound, or extracting of an arrow, or incision over a stone, and similar things: from all of which fear, terror, and death fall upon many of them.
And I warn you not to fall into that which is a hesitation, for sometimes such men with such kinds of infirmities fall upon you in this art.
For from them is one who is angry at his own affliction, and is light-minded about death; on account of the vehemence of his own infirmity and the length of his wickedness.
And with affliction he is from fear that signifies death.
And from them is one who gives his physician to you and enriches you with him, hoping for healing, and his affliction is deadly. Therefore it is not fitting that you should assent to one who comes to you from them, whose manner is such.
And let your caution be greater than your greed and avarice.
And do not presume to take anything from that, unless after certain knowledge has verified it before you, which confirms the thing to which a praiseworthy outcome leads.
And use prognosis and indication for the treatment of all your patients, so that their recovery may be suitably ensured.
For in that there is help to you for the acquisition of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, his children, with His understanding, and not take away from you guidance and inspiration, for it is in His hand.
And I myself have arranged this chapter by dividing it into chapters, just as it preceded in the chapter on Cauterization, from head to feet: so that what you seek may be alleviated for you, and what you need.
On the cure of Water that accumulates on the heads of boys.
Chapter I.
You should know that this affliction often occurs in boys at birth: or when the afterbirth tightens the boy's head without ease.
And sometimes it happens also due to a hidden cause that is not known.
And I myself have not seen this sickness in anyone except children, and it has hastened death in every one of them that I have seen. Therefore it seemed best to me to abandon treatment for it.
And I myself have seen a boy from them whose head was filled with water, and his head swelled up every day, until he could no longer sit upright because of the greatness of his own head; and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture either accumulates between the skin and the mouth: or it accumulates beneath the bone above the forehead.
And the operation is this, if there is moisture between the skin and bone, and an abscess is small, then it is necessary to make a single incision in the middle of the head's fissure, one that is as wide as two knots, until the moisture flows.
And this is the shape of a spatula.
So if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is greater, then make two incisions, according to this shape.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and its sign is that you see the corners of the head open on every side: and water flows when you press it with your hand to the inside, and it does not hide from you: then it is necessary to make three incisions in the middle of the head, according to this manner.
And after making the incision, remove the moisture entirely.
Then dress it above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the sutures and care for the wound with tents and ointments.
And do not stop binding the head evenly.
And feed the sick person all dry food with a little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision is, to consider where the magnitude of the abscess appears, and the collection of water.
For sometimes it is more in the back of the head, or in the forehead, or on the right side, or on the left side.
So climb up with an incision where you see the abscess and the filling of water: and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And observe, lest you cut an artery and a flow of blood occurs, and the patient dies from that flow with evacuation of moisture.
Of the Incision of Arteries which are behind the Ears.
Here is the translation:
When cataracts occur to someone's eyes or breast and it becomes old and medical treatment does not help: then the final cure is in that case cutting of these two arteries.
Therefore, when you want to cut them, the patient should be positioned so that his head is facing downwards.
Then make a small incision with a rough cloth, so that the arteries appear.
Then the patient should bind his neck with any of his own cloths.
Then examine where the vein pulsates.
And the places of both are the places that are below the ears, depressed; and it is rarely hidden, unless in certain people.
Then mark with encaustum above each one; and cut both with a sharp instrument, making the cut reach from ear to ear and across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatumile under the artery, and cut it at the top with the same incision.
And let the length of the incision be about as long as two joined fingers.
For when the vein is cut, blood flows out with a pulsating flow, which jumps into the interior in rapid succession.
But if the artery does not appear to the sense, then it is necessary to measure from the ear a space of three fingers.
Then mark with encaustum, and make the incision up to the mouth.
And what needs to be emitted from the blood is six ounces, and perhaps you may emit more or less from it. The entire amount according to the quantity that appears to you from the strength of the patient and the filling of his artery.
Then examine the wound.
Then if something remains at the mouth from the blood, then cut it off so that a warm abscess does not occur; then bind the wound with linen cloths.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
About the extraction of arteries that are in time.
Chapter III.
When an old hemicrania or acute catarra occurs in a person due to acrimonious moistures and heat in the temporal arteries, or an old, thick, and similar condition: and one medicates with modes of medical treatment, but does not apply that; then we are experienced in these afflictions by extracting arteries from the temples or cauterizing them, as we have narrated.
And the method of operation for extracting those is, that the patient should shave off the hair that are on the temples, and direct his attention to the appearing artery in the temple.
For it is itself revealed to you by its pulse, and is rarely hidden except in a few people or in dementia due to cold.
If it is hidden from you, then the patient should bind his head with any cloth of his own; afterwards, he should rub the place with a rough cloth.
Or sprinkle the place with hot water, until it appears to you in a manifest manifestation. Then take the spatula which I formed a little while ago. Then scrape with it the skin with ease, until you reach the artery.
Then throw a needle into it and draw it out upwards until you have drawn it out from the skin and made it to go forth from the tunics that are beneath it on all sides.
If however the artery is thin, then wrap it around with the tip of the needle.
Then cut from it a portion according to the length by which its ends are stretched and contracted, and that there may not be a flow of blood.
For if it is not cut, and if it is not divided, the blood will not ascend completely. Then take out from the blood six inches of needle up to three.
If the artery is large: then it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a double strand of strong silk or seric thread, or with the strings of the alhohod, so that it does not become prone to putrefaction before the wound has consolidated and bleeding occurs.
Then cut away the excess which is between the two ligatures.
Do that at that hour, or after another hour. And if you wish, cauterize it with a cauterizing instrument, up to the edge, using a cutlery cauterizer, until its ends are severed and it remains in place as part of the same work.
And it is a better outcome, unless the patient has a fever or a warm complexion.
Because the cauterizer is one of those things that help to dry out humidity.
Therefore it is a better remedy.
And after the removal of arteries, the place should be filled with old dressings and small cloths made decently.
And after the wound has closed, it should be treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow and with lint cloths until it is healed.
If in the meantime while you are operating a hemorrhage occurs from the artery, then hasten to stop it with a cauterizer or by filling the place with sawdust, and tie your hand tight until the bleeding stops.
If none of those things are available to you, then place your finger on top of the wound until the blood coagulates.
And apply the place with water of very cold temperature, until the sharpness subsides and it is tightened as needed.
And because it is easier and less troublesome to remove the artery, it is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterizer having two knives, so that the sharpness of the two knives is like a well-known instrument.
However they are much duller than two knives.
For if they are sharp, like two knives, both will cool down quickly; and they will not cut the flesh with swiftness.
And so when there is a slight thickness in them, the heat of fire remains in them, and flesh is cut quickly; therefore this work is better than any other, easier, and more easily done.
And let there be a space between the two knives of the thickness of a finger, after you mark two places with encaustic: and put both out very well, until they reach the mouth, and cut the vein in two places: so that what is between its extremities may be lengthened.
For they are not thoroughly sealed with this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Of the treatment for frequent and sharp tears flowing from the eyes.
Chapter IV.
When there are frequent tears and their flow is from the veins that are above the outer part of the head: and no medicine can be applied to them with medicines, and you see the face of the sick person already red, and feels a walking sensation in his forehead, just like the walking of ants; and his eyes are worn out, humid, so much so that their hairs have been corroded along with the corrosion: and his eyelids are heated from the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients were in need of curing them by this operation, and they called it a cure with an Ense.
And it is as if you are telling the sick person to shave off the hairs that are on his forehead.
Then cut three incisions in the forehead at equal distances according to the length of the forehead: and let the length of each incision be about two fingers, and one incision should be equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second should follow the length a little beyond the movement of the arms, and the third on the other side: and beware of cutting into arteries that are on both sides: and stretch out your hand from the continuation of two jawbones, and let the space of all incision be equal to three fingers joined together: and have a prepared sponge or many pieces of dry cloth with which you will absorb blood.
Then introduce a spatula with two sharp edges at its ends, whose shape follows.
From the incision that is on the part of the temple, up to the second incision; and scrape away with it all the skin that is between the two incisions, along with the siphon that is above the bone. Then do the same thing from the middle incision up to the second incision.
Then extract this spatula and insert into the first incision again another instrument, which is called a sharp curved knife, with one side blunt and not sharp on the other.
And this is its shape.
And place the sharp side of it towards the attached flesh with the skin, and the blunt side towards the bone; and push it in until it reaches the middle fissure; and cut away with it all the sinewy parts that descend from the head to the eyes: except for what is contained within the incision up to what appears on the surface of the skin.
Then do the same thing in the middle fissure up to another fissure.
And after an equal amount of blood has flowed out, express the places from the clot of congealed blood. Then place linen cloth from old pottery into every fissure and place above them poultices soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar.
And see that a warm abscess does not occur.
And on the third day dissolve the ligament and administer an infusion with hot water.
Then care for that with balsam ointment and other things by which wounds are healed, until it is sound.
A treatise on the cure of sharp tears and catarrhs in the eyes from internal head conditions.
V.
When sharp catarrhs occur in someone, and they are frequent, intense, and persistent; and you see their eyes emaciated, small, and already weakened in appearance; and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hair falls out of them, and there is a sharp, piercing pain deep in the head, which causes damage and coughing follows: then take from these afflictions what is proper to those materials, and catarrhs do not come forth except through many veins.
And the better cure for them is this.
And it is, that you cause the sick person to shave his forehead.
Then cut one slit in the middle of the forehead, or another a little to one side, and start with the slit from the left temple to the right: and make the incision up to the bone; and stretch out your hand away from the temples which move during mastication: until when the bone is laid bare: and dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with an old piece of cloth or linen strips.
Then tie over it with bandages: and soak the bandages in wine and oil, so that a hot abscess does not occur.
And when you dissolve it and see that the hot abscess is already subsiding: then it is necessary to burn the bone until flesh begins to grow on it.
Then care for it with a regimen of emollients that cause flesh to grow: such as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony: and prepare an ointment from them, and apply it to the birth of flesh in these wounds.
About the cure for what falls on the Ear. Chapter VI. All that falls into the Ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or like one, such as iron and glass: or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans: or it is a flowing substance, such as water and vinegar, and things similar to these: or some animal.
When therefore a stone falls into the ear, or some kind of stone that does not add anything nor grows in the ear, expose the Ear to the sun: if however you see the stone, then dilute something from violet oil or sassafras in the Ear.
Then administer the extraction of it and make him sneeze with you, and close his nostrils at the advent of sneezing, after you put strips of cloth or wool around his ear, and stretch the ear upwards.
For this treatment often goes out many times.
But if it does not go out, then administer the extraction of it with gestures, that is, gentle pizzicatos: whose form is this.
If therefore it goes out with gestures, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction of it with a subtle, small, blind hook. If therefore it does not go out through that, then make a tube of air, and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal very much, and close what is in the circle of the tube with a soft wax mixture with oil, so that there will be no way except for the tube: then draw it out with your strong breath attraction. For this often goes out as we have told.
But if it does not go out this way: then take a small amount of glue prepared from egg white or bird's gut, with which birds are caught, and place it at the end of the radius after you have wrapped around it a well-positioned cord: then insert it into the ear canal easily, after you have dried the ear from moisture.
But if it does not go out with all that we have told: then hasten to cut, before a hot abscess or convulsion occurs.
And the method of incision is, to make a wound first in the cephalic region on an invalid: and draw out from his blood according to the measure of his strength.
Then make the invalid sit between your hands, and turn his ear upwards, and find a small wound in the root of the ear at the fatty part of him in a depressed place on himself: and let the wound have the shape of a crescent, until you reach the bone: then remove it with what is possible for you from instruments.
Then apply a poultice to your wound with speed and care, until it heals.
But if something is growing in the ear that causes a swelling and inflammation, then perform its extraction.
But if it does not obey you for exit, then take a thin, subtle spatula, in this shape.
And administer with it the removal of that type of grain from the ear canal, and do not do so when you think that grain is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you place many plugs: then take them out with a hook or a thin instrument or suction, as we said, for its extraction is facilitated.
However, when the water enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use a nose-dropper at first: and then he has filled his ear with some old boiled liquid: and he lies on top of that ear where there is water.
If it comes out through that, it's good.
And if not: then take many small stones, as long as a finger, thin and soft, and warm them with fire for a little while, and the patient should insert one of them into his ear canal: and he should sit on one foot from that side, and strike another stone on the stone that is in the ear.
Therefore do not stop doing that with stones until all the water comes out.
And when the water has come out like that, take a feather or a reed, and insert one end of it into the ear: and burn the other end with fire until most of it is consumed.
Then take another reed and do that many times until all the water has come out: and draw it out with a syringe as previously stated in the stone.
In the extraction of an animal entering into it, if it is a small body, such as a flea, and similar to that, care for it as I said in the division.
But if it is a large tumor that appears to the sense: then administer its removal with gauze and forceps: and its outcome is easier for all those that are held in gold.
However, in the extraction of a worm born in the ear, when you care for it with what we said in the division and treatment of distillations, and your cure does not agree: then it is necessary to look at the ear in the sun.
Therefore, if something appears there from worms, then remove it with forceps or with fine forceps.
But if nothing appears there, then take a cannula, of this form: tight below, broad above; and insert the slender end into the ear according to what an invalid can tolerate: then suck with it using strong suction.
Do that many times until all the worms depart.
But if they do not obey you at exit, then apply wax to the surrounding area of the cannula with cerate, as I said in stone.
And if they do not depart with what we said, then administer the distillations which ancient people have already experienced in the destruction of worms; and you will find that in the treatise on distillations.
And let your flow be as when you pour oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose form is depicted here.
As you see, make it of silver or air, lower part tight, with a small hole below, broad above.
So let the propeller that is in the concavity of the cannula be made of air, decently fashioned.
And if you wish, take a wick and wrap it around the end of it with a decent wrapping: then pour oil, or sap, or whatever you like from these medicines into the cannula: and let it be in the ear: then insert the wick with the wrapping on top and express it by hand compression tempered until the oil is forced into the concavity to be heard, and let the invalid feel it inside: and what is poured into the ear should already be warmed with fire for a little while: and beware that what distills into it is not very cold: for medicines do not tolerate that.
On the treatment of accidental gold swelling.
Chapter Seven.
At times, some infants depart from their mothers' wombs unperforated.
And it also happens to certain people that swelling occurs on the ear as a result of a wound or flesh growing there.
And this swelling sometimes occurs in the deep cavity of the ear, which does not follow sight; and sometimes it happens to the outer parts of the ear's opening, and follows sight.
Therefore, that which occurs in the deep ear and does not follow sight is difficult to heal in many cases.
And as for that which follows sight, it is necessary to place the ear of the afflicted person in the sun and look at it; then if you see swelling appearing, open it with a thin spatula, whose shape is as follows: let its end be where there is a small flat area, with a sharp part: and the rest of the spatula should be smooth on both sides, so that it does not hurt the ear.
If the swelling is from flesh growing in the ear canal, then take it with a thin scalpel and cut it away with great ease, until all the flesh is removed.
What if the swelling is in the deep ear? Then take a thin, gentle rod and warm it with fire for a little while; then put it into the ear canal.
If then you feel the swelling with what the afflicted person feels with heaviness of hearing, try to open it gently; and beware lest you wound the nerves of the ear.
Then put a liniment into the ear according to the size of the opening that you wrapped with Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure of the wound's consolidation.
Or take a liniment and mix it with rose water, and powder zeig thrice over it, and use it.
If you see the ear already suppurating: then it is necessary to remove the ligature, and permit another ligature to be tied on, which will be wrapped in a cloth that has been prepared with rose oil, until the warm abscess subsides: afterwards care for it until it heals.
But if bleeding occurs: then submerge a sponge or cloths in cold water and place them over the ear: and use the remaining treatment that is described in the chapter on distillations, which stops the flow of blood predicted above.
Of the cure for Althele's eyelids.
Chapter 8. These are the Altheles which occur on the eyelids of the eye, sometimes they are wet and sometimes dry.
Therefore you should keep them with tweezers or forceps, and cut them off at the roots with a spatula.
Then place powdered zei over the places.
But if blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine glass cauterizer.
And it is better to cauterize them after the incision.
For many times they return when something remains from their roots.
And when they are cauterized with fire, the roots are burned and do not return.
Of the cure for Eyebrow Hives of the eye.
Chapter 9.
Many times something happens on the eyelids which is similar to a Grandin in its firmness and durability, and for that reason it is called a Grandin: and it is a thickening of moisture in the upper eyelid and lower eyelid.
Therefore the operation on them is that you should consider then if it is a Grandin proceeding from within, which appears on the eyelid and moves to every part, and its nature is easy.
Find therefore a fissure above it by breadth.
Then remove the skin from it completely with ease, until it is stripped away.
Then suspend it with a hook and cut it off.
But if the cutting off of it is not prepared for you, unless after you pierce the eyelid with a small incision, then that can harm the sick person somehow.
But if it is a large wound: then gather it together with stitches and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it.
For ointment restores it and fleshes it out.
And if the discharge is flowing downward from the inner parts of the ear towards the internal surface, then turn back the eyelid and suspend the discharge with a hook: besides which you will need an incision, and press it from all sides.
But if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, it does not harm anything in any way.
Then wash the eye after the incision of the discharge, with salt water: and care for the place with what fleshens it out, until the sick person heals.
Of the cure of Eye-Sores of the Eyelids.
Chapter X.
Axirnath is a fatness that is generated on the upper lid of the eyelid: and it happens most to boys: and it weighs upon their eyes, and causes them to have cataracts in the mornings, and they are unable to look at the light of the sun, therefore because tears flow towards them, and for this reason you see them lying down on their faces always, and sleeping on them, and their eyelids are moist under the eyebrows, which is already swelled up with inflation: and indeed Axirnath appears as a lump to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the method of operating on it is, that the sick person places his head in your arm.
Then receive a linen cloth and prepare linseed in it, and make from it a linseed circle according to the quantity that contains Axirnath from all parts.
Then place it on top and press with your fingers all around, so that Axirnath gathers together in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a spatula, making incisions by length, and let no incision be deeper than that made in phlebotomy.
Or it is necessary to make a cut all the way through until you reach Axirnath, because Axirnath proceeds from the incision in various forms according to the shape of white fatty residue.
Therefore, extract it with the cloth you infiltrated between your fingers to the outside: and then turn your hand to the right and left until it spreads out: and beware, lest you add to the incision, so that you do not reach with a spatula to the eye and hurt it.
But if Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the incision, you should add a little to the incision with ease until Axirnath proceeds.
Then extract it as we said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the spot, and bind it with stitches.
And from people there are who sprinkle salt, and place it in the hollow of the incision, so that what remains of that moisture may dissolve.
Then take care of it until it heals.
If however an abscess arises warm at the place, then treat it with soothing poultices until it heals.
Of the modes of Ataxmir for the eye, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft and the eye blinks, which should not happen.
Head XI.
When hairs grow on the eyelids of the eye in addition to their natural course and become old: then they harm the eye and cause various forms of sickness, such as constant tears, softening of the eyelids, and whitening, until it becomes a cause for the destruction of the eye.
And the eye of Ataxmir is cured according to four modes. Or by cauterization with fire.
Or with sharp medicine, according to what has been mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterizing.
Or Ataxmir is cured by incision and stitching.
Or with reeds, according to what I shall say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the sick person on your shoulder.
Then turn the eyelid with your left hand.
If it is turned, it is good.
And if not: introduce a needle into it, in which the thread is from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread above, and let that be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow: and draw the thread up to the upper part with the eyelid, and turn it with a rod.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid, under the added hairs, with a spatula coming from the larger tear duct to the smaller one.
Then draw out the thread and place a small poultice of bread or cloth under the eyelid; then mark above the eyelid with wax, so that it is like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the figure be made according to the size and elevation of the eyelid; for that already varies among people.
For some of these people are in need of having the eyelid incised to remove a large quantity, according to the softness that comes from the eyelid. Then with the spatula find above the two lines you marked, and begin from the larger tear duct to the smaller one, and let the incision be one near the natural hairs, just like the thickness of a rod.
Then introduce a hook into one of the two corners of the skin. Then strip off the whole skin. Then gather together two flaps with a suture, using a needle and fine wool thread. And wipe away the blood, and make what overflows stick to the threads on top of the two eyebrows; if you want to do that; and if not, don't bother.
Then leave the suture and threads for three days or four: afterwards care for it. And if you wish, leave the wound without a suture and take care of it in such a way that it dries out and tightens.
For the eyelid is elevated above the wound's suturing and its accumulation; but it will be better.
The ancient ones taught this method of healing to Azemar.
However, there is concern for the weak person, and it comes from good practice, and there is no fear in that.
And another method is also in Azemar, and it is to make signs on the eyelid like the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have narrated.
Then lift the eyelid with three separate or connected hooks, according to this following shape, then cut off what overflows with small scissors, according to this shape, with equal incision.
But if it is not possible for you to hold the hook and it does not match up: then take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the shape; and insert another thread near the larger tear duct, and another thread near the smaller tear duct: and tie the threads together between your fingers with equality.
Then lift up your hand with equal elevation; and lift up the skin above which is marked out, as we have narrated.
Then gather together the two flaps of the wound with a suture; and care for it until it heals.
If however an abscess occurs at your incision or cut, but treat it with a poultice and similar remedies from ointments that soothe.
And when it happens that the eyelashes even turn around its hairs.
On the treatment of Ataxmir with a reed.
And you should turn the eyelid and cut the cleft that is inside, as I have described.
Then make two reeds or two thin sticks, whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and their width is less than the width of a small splinter: and you have already incised at the ends of each one on both sides where you hold the threads.
Then gather both of them together with delicacy over the excess that protrudes from the eyelid of the eye, and bind the two reeds tightly on both sides with strong stitching, and leave it for several days. For a tight skin will die, become blackened, and putrid until it falls away by itself.
If then it is delayed, then cut it with forceps.
Then care for it until it heals.
When then it is consolidated, the eyelid will lift up: and the hairs will not sting.
And this is the form of two reeds which you should make according to this figure and size in length and width.
On the elevation of stinging hairs in the eye with a needle.
Chapter XII.
The operation is this: you should take a fine needle and insert into it a thread of silk that is fine and soft. Then gather up the ends of it and tie each one with a knot very thin: and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then place another fine thread beneath it in a short space, and tie up its ends if you wish.
Then let the patient place his head on your shoulder and be near the sun as the operation is performed: for it is a subtle or minute operation.
Then introduce the point with the spatula into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid until you withdraw it from above the natural hair.
Then pull out the hair up to the spatula: and introduce into the spatula that hair: if it is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then pull your hand with him until the hair goes out with the spatula into the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if the spatula is pulled and the hair does not come out with it: pull the spatula downwards, along with the thread that you have tied in it, until the spatula comes out from the upper opening, and you see it with the vision of your eye: then indeed pull the spatula and the thread: and draw both out, and shut the eye: and let it be closed for two days, or three, until the hair adheres to its place, and flesh grows over it.
But if the hair is short, then either join to it a long hair from the natural hairs, and raise it with it: or let it go, until it grows longer after some time, and then raise it.
Of the care of Alxatratia that occurs on the upper eyelid.
Chapter 13.
When this Alxatratia occurs in the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this Alxatratia is either natural or accidental.
Therefore the accidental one occurs from the consolidation of a wound, or incision, or cauterization, and similar things.
And the method of treatment for it is, that you open up the consolidation, and separate its edges, and place a linen thread in between them, and bind it, until it heals.
And it is not necessary to use things that dry and constrict in the treatment of him, for if you do that, Al-Khatri will return worse than he was. Instead, use things that soften, such as Greek hay: and smear with water in which althea has been cooked, flax seed; and anoint with dyaquilon ointment, which is mixed with some oil; and wrap him up with it and care for him with it.
And your treasury of cure is to strive with all skill so that nothing may harden, according to the shape it had at first.
And this operation we mentioned is nothing other than a correction of Al-Khatri so that he does not return to his former form. On the cure of Al-Khatri which is done on the lower eyelid, and it is a wrinkling or contracting upwards to the right and left.
Chapter XIV.
This which is done below is truly called Al-Khatri.
And it is natural and accidental.
And the accidental one arises from a wound, or incision, or cauterization, and similar things.
And the method of operation in this case is to take a needle with a double thread, and dye it in flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the skin.
Then stretch the skin upwards with the needle, and cut it with a broad spatula.
If then the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, it is good.
And if not, take a radius and place it in the incision, and turn with it the eyelid; and make two incisions on the inner side of the eyelid, and they should be at the ends of two fissures from the two angles of the incision, until they meet and form an angle: until when they are gathered together this figure is formed, and it is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh by the quantity of what is its sharp side below, from what follows the eyebrow.
Then gather up the separated parts; or bind it with a thread of wool.
Then care for them with what we mentioned, soothing medicines and lotions, until they heal.
And if a cut or incision occurs from a laceration, or suture, or cauterization: then it is necessary to open up the flat area under the eyelashes, even according to what has gone before.
Then separate the two lips with a lotion, according to what we said.
And the summary of the discourse on curing an Alxatra, whether it is above or below, is that the operation should proceed according to how it was prepared from the form of an Alxatra.
For it is indeed a multiple variety of forms: and the skilled artist prepares his mind with whatever means are possible to him, until he makes return the figure to its natural form, or nearly so, and even the infirm person, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
About adhering eyelids with conjunctiva or cornea.
Chapter 15.
Sometimes this consolidation occurs in many people, so that the upper eyelid becomes consolidated with the white of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore it is necessary to insert the end of the radius under the eyelid and lift it up; or stretch it with a hook: then cut through the adhesion with a thin spatula, which should not be sharp with an acute incision, but rather blunt for a moment: so that the infirm person does not become disturbed during the operation, and the spatula is removed, and the eye is hurt by its sharpness: and your incision should be as if you were removing that adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the adhesion is healed entirely.
Apply then salted water to the eye, washing it clean with water. Or let it drip into it from a sieve made from something like this, after dissolving zinc with water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a linen cloth: and place a woolen cloth infused with egg whites over the eye: and after three days, use a poultice, and with solidified matters, until it heals.
On the cutting of the nail and the excrescence of tear-producing flesh.
Chapter 16.
Know that a nail is according to two modes. Or it is nerve-like and is similar to silk, hard and fine.
Or it is not nerve-like, similar to frozen white moisture: which when touched with iron or is taken up with forceps, it is cut off and does not stick to the forceps.
And both kinds do not begin to grow unless from the major tear-producing flesh, until it gradually spreads and covers the visible part, and prevents light and movement of the eye.
And the method for cutting it is: that the patient places his head in your lap.
Then open his eyes and lift up his eyelid with your hand.
Then take the nail with forceps of a few foldings, and stretch it upwards.
Then take a needle and insert it into the nail with a horse's or cow's hair, and make the thread strong and double the end of the needle for a little bit, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and pierce it with the needle and tie the nail with the thread, and stretch it upwards: and scrape off with the hair the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were to gather it up with the hair until its end.
Then cut off the remaining part at the root of the tear-producing flesh with a thin spatula or small forceps: and leave the natural tear-producing flesh, so that there is no risk of an unending flow of tears from the incision.
And when the claw is stretched with a single hook alone; or with a thread, as we said.
Then it should be peeled with a gentle file, whose shape this is.
And beware, lest the file touch the horned coat and a tear occur in it, and the pupil be pierced.
Then after making an incision, pour something crushed salt into the eye or make it from zinar, and let it remain until another day.
Then take care of it with what is necessary until it heals. But if the claw is not inflamed and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor can a hook be fixed to it, then this type of claw is often treated with medicines and heals as I described in the division.
But if you wish to cut it, then open the patient's eye and take a gentle, soft, weak file with fine sharpness, in this shape.
And gently scrape the claw above with subtlety.
And if you see that it is becoming thinner and breaking apart, and a file is impressed on it, then pour from your hour-glass into the eye made from zinar, or red powder, or crushed salt: and cover the eye until another day.
Then repeat this same operation over it, until all of it is removed.
Unless there is a contrary swelling in the eye, a warm one; then leave it alone and cure the swelling until it heals. Then repeat the operation over it with a file, until it heals.
However, the excess of the tear duct flesh, if it causes great harm in the eye, should be suspended with a hook and cut off from that part; and do not stop cutting until no more tears flow.
Then pour into the tear duct red powder or made from zinar, until it heals. About the incision of Alguardenic, and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter Seventeen.
Sometimes in certain human eyes, a red flesh is formed, either composed or superimposed, until it covers the pupil, approaches it, or stretches over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward: and it resembles a rose hedge.
And the operation in that case is also to place the patient's head on your shoulder.
Then open his eyes and collect all that flesh with suitable forceps for it; and hold it with one forceps or gesture.
Then cut the flesh first, until you have completed the entire thing with a cutting instrument.
And beware of the eye during the operation, lest you harm it; and let your incision be such as you make it with or with a spatula, which we described in the incision of the toenail: or with small forceps, with which the flesh is collected, according to its shape after this chapter.
When your incision is complete and the entire Alguardenic is removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt: or distill red powder into it, and similar substances from corrosive medicines: and place a poultice with egg white outside the eye to secure it against warm aposthema.
If anything remains of the Alguardenic and a warm blood dominates over you, and you fear a warm aposthema: then leave the eye alone and care for it with that which settles apostema.
Then go back to it with an operation until it heals.
And do the same for the additional flesh that occurs in the eye of this kind.
However, it is necessary that you cure all weak eyes by way of nature or accident, operating with iron: and do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member is bearing with that operation.
Concerning the collection of pus from an eye.
Chapter 18. Pus is a red vein which forms over the eye and prevents its natural function; and it weakens the eye with the passing of days.
Therefore it is necessary for you to consider first whether the eye in which there is pus is strong and there is no other disease in it except the pus; then collect its pus.
And that you should instruct the weak person to place their head on your shoulder.
Then suspend those veins with a single hook or two, according to your prudence; and the hook should be fine and doubled, like this, or there should be two hooks placed one on top of the other in the same body, like this.
Then collect those veins with fine forceps, with subtlety, and wipe away the blood an hour after the hour, until you see those veins being removed from the eye, and resolving; and beware that you do not hurt the eye with the outer edges of the forceps.
And let your operation be at midday before the sun, and be very firm in your operation; so that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you have finished, then distill into the eye whether green or red; so that its sharpness eats away what remains of the pus.
But if it is not possible for you to collect all of it in that hour, then apply a poultice to the eye with what soothes the pain of the eye; and leave it for several days until the pain subsides: and secure it from hot aposteme: then return to it in the same manner until it heals.
And this is the form of forceps.
Concerning the reduction of a swollen eyelid to the nose.
Chapter 19.
Physicians call the swelling Arissatis a Fistula, which they treat with caustic or burning medicine, as their narrative preceded.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in it: unless you make an incision over the abscess at its birth and remove all the moisture that is in it and the pus, until the bone is laid bare.
When therefore the bone is laid bare, and you see corruption or blackening in it, then scrape it off with an instrument whose shape is this.
And it is called a "scalpel" of the head.
Make it from tempered steel, and let the head of it be rounded like a razor, which should be marked with a shaving or an Aliskiferian point, that is, a fine point: and place it over the corrupted bone. Then turn it back between your fingers and press your hand on it for a little while, until you know that the corruption is now scraped away; and do this several times.
Then turn it back between your fingers and press your hand on it for a little while, until you know that the corruption is now scraped away; and do this several times. Then restore the place with medicinal applications of drying and stinging substances.
If therefore the place is consolidated, and flesh grows in it, and the course of healing proceeds smoothly: and it remains for forty days, and does not renew itself, nor does it apostemate, nor does any accident happen to it: then you will know that it has already been healed.
And if not, then there is no skill in it, unless you reduce the abscess to a nostril's opening, according to this shape.
And it is, as you uncover the bone with a second iron or sharp medicine: and when the bone is uncovered, then take the drill according to this shape, having an iron tip, triangular: and the wood of it should be tapered like a pyramid down to the extremity, just as you see.
Then place that over the bone itself: and let it be near the lacrimal [tear duct]: and stretch your hand a little away from the eye.
Then turn your hand with the drill, until it penetrates the bone and feels weak to him: because of this that he finds air coming out from it, when he holds his hand over his nose.
So then restore the place with drying medicines, as I taught you.
When therefore the flesh is formed and the place becomes hardened: then the material that was flowing outward returns to the nose: it is therefore lighter above the weak person.
The Reduction of a Swelling of the Eye. Chapter 20.
When the eye swells up with its entire contents and does not cause harm to vision or diminution: then you should let the patient rest: afterwards bleed him: then apply poultices on the neck without scarifying, but with suction.
Then place over the eye an ointment made from acacia, and aloe, and aloes, and sarsaparilla.
Then bind the eye with many poultices above the plaster.
And the method of poultices is: take soft cloths, many, and double each cloth from them over four. Make many of these. Then place one on top of another, according to the quantity that the eye needs. Then bind above them with a strong and tight bandage.
And repeat poultices with suction without scarifying.
Then remove the poultices and leave the eye bound tight day and night.
But if the bandage becomes soft again, then you should rebind it tightly. Then remove the bandage after a day and night, as we said.
If then you see the eye has returned to its natural state, that's good. And if not, then repeat the plaster, poultices, binding, and poultices until it heals.
The Incision of the Eyelid Tunic.
Chapter 21.
When a disruption occurs in the eyelid tunic, and then it swells up and progresses outside the eyelids like a grain of sand, and disfigures the face of man because of it, and sight threatens to be affected by it: then the operation in this case is as I shall tell you, and it is, that you should introduce an instrument into the root of the eyelid from the lower to the upper part.
Then insert another needle into which is a thread double from the part of the tear-duct, and make it penetrate. And let the first needle follow its own arrangement.
Then cut the place of the double thread, and tie with it the part of the Vuve (or pouch) around the circumference of the needle, and pull it tight.
Then draw out the needle, and place a soaked wool thread above the eye on the white of the eyelid: and let it go until the thread falls with the pouch.
Then care for the eye with that which comforts it, until the wound is healed.
And when the pouch becomes bound with a cloth circle from all parts, until the eye adds a great prominence.
Then pierce with a fine spatula that reaches to the depth of the eye, and let the moisture flow through the white, and let the eye descend, and enter immediately: then tie it up until it is healed.
A treatment for Alconmay (presumably a type of eye inflammation or disease).
Chapter 22.
This affliction which is called Alconmay is nothing but a discharge that accumulates in the eye, similar to water flowing down, and it is not itself.
And the method of operation in this case is that you make the patient sit on a prepared or straight chair.
Then take hold of his head with your hands on both sides, and move him until you see the discharge reach the lower parts of your eyes.
Then it is fixed and does not flow down, and the light is blocked: and the patient sees things as he used to see them; and if it does not flow below, you will know that it is water.
If however the discharge does not prepare to flow with what we said, then make the patient sit between your hands. Then take a fine spatula and find it with him above the keratinous cloth for a short time at the junction of the conjunctiva with the cornea on the crown, until the discharge goes out.
When it emerges, then pour a warm water mixture of honey into the eye. Alternatively, use water in which you have already boiled Greek chamomile and honey. Then treat it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
On the cure of the water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter 23.
We have already spoken of the kinds of water in division and which is suitable for cutting, as explained and demonstrated by speech. Then receive the same thing according to health.
Then you should make the patient sit between your two hands, opposite the light, near the sun; and bind his good eye with a bandage, and tighten it well. Then grasp the eyelid of his eye with your right hand if the eye with water is the left one: or with your left hand if the right eye has water.
Then take a small piece of amalagma in your right hand if the eye is left: or in your left hand if the eye is right.
Then place the end of the amalagma near the crown of the eye, by the thickness of the apparent white of the smaller tear gland. Then push the amalagma with force and you revolve with it your hand until it penetrates into the cornea of the eye: and feel that the amalagma has already reached the empty space.
And it is necessary that the measure of the distance of the amalagma to the depth be the measure of the space from the pupil to the end of the blackness: and this is the crown of the eye.
For you will see it in the very center of the pupil's vision, because of the clarity of the corneal membrane.
Then place the amalagma up to the spot where there is water.
Then press it downward with one stroke after another.
If then the water descends immediately, then the patient will see that which is above as soon as he opens his sight and the amalagma is in his eye.
Then pause for a moment.
So if water should flow down, then remove it secondly, in addition to which the poultice will issue forth.
When therefore it is fixed and does not rise, then remove the poultice with ease, and turn your hand slowly. Then dissolve something from clear salt crystals in water, and wash the eye with it afterwards.
Then place the whole poultice or wool soaked in rose oil on the outside of the eye, and cover it with a thin layer of wax; and bind with that a healthy eye.
However, we and those who are of our time put powdered vermilion on top of it with egg white.
But if the poultice does not obey you and enter the eye because of its hardness, since it is from humans whose eyes are very hard: then it is necessary to take a spatula called Alberid, which has this shape.
Therefore use it with the same connection and do not let your hand go into the hole: and there is nothing except that you make a way for the poultice to reach its subtle place.
Then insert the poultice, according to what we said.
And as part of the completion of your work, prepare a comfortable bed for the patient in a well-made room, where he will sleep on his back at home; and forbid all movements and coughing from him: and give him food that soothes his nature; and do not let him move his head to the right or left whatsoever.
And let the bandage remain according to its arrangement until the third day. Then dissolve it in that dark house and test his sight; and make him see things.
Then reduce the bandage to its original state by the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do that during the hour of healing or immediately after the incision: rather, let others do it because water ascends quickly due to a strong and intense vision.
If however a hot abscess occurs: then it is necessary to open the eye before the seventh day: and straighten that with what calms the abscess, until it is calmed: then release his sight, and place over his face an oral medication which will govern his sight under those days for a few, while he exists in that dark house.
Then let him gradually go out of the house and live in his usual quarters.
And know that in seven days not a disciple is exempt from vision sometimes: then he may dare to attempt the operation.
And already it has reached us that someone from those who are from Alayrach said, that in Alayrach a madman had his belly pierced, where water is drawn.
Therefore I did not see anyone on your earth who has done that: nor have I read it in any of the ancient books: and it is possible that it is new.
And these are forms of remedies from madga, so that they may stand over him who does not know them.
Let them be made from pure air: and let their extremities be like this same fine triangle, with an acute edge.
Madga forms.
Of the cure of a born flesh on the nose.
Chapter 24.
Sometimes flesh is born on the nose of diverse kinds, some of which resemble a scorpion with many feet: and from it there is rough skin, stony-like, of a dull color: and from it there is soft flesh, not of a dull color.
Therefore, since the flesh which is from these kinds of flesh is soft and not deceitful nor cancerous, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands opposite to the sun, and open his nostrils, and insert a needle into those fleshy parts: then pull them outwards, and cut what you have grasped with a fine, sharp instrument from one side, until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
If anything remains from that which is not possible to cut off: then scrape that with one of the subtle instruments with ease, until nothing remains from it.
But if blood dominates you, or a warm abscess occurs: then apply to it what is necessary: or if it's from wicked ulcers, then hasten by cauterizing it, until the blood is cut off and all flesh is removed.
Then pour vinegar, water, or wine into the nose after the incision.
But if the nose is opened and moisture proceeds from it as far as the palate, then you will know that he is already well.
But if moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that inside him is flesh born in the upper bones of the nose, to which the instrument with the incision cannot reach.
Then it is necessary that you insert a linen thread with some thickness and knot it in many places: and put between each knot the amount of a finger or less. The weak person should make himself like a worm by sending one end of the thread into the nose with a rod, or with whatever means he can after he has made it similar to an earthworm: and draw out his mucus until it reaches the cavity and flows over his throat.
And many times they do this kind of thing to an atom-like child in schools: and it is a easy thing for one who wills.
Then place the two ends of the thread, one end which is coming out over the nose and the other end which remains inside the nose.
Then and finally, apply a knife or saw to the flesh with the knots that are on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is already cut along with the knots of the thread.
Then draw out the thread and put it into the nose after wiping away the blood with the licorish that you have mixed in Egyptian ointment. Do this for three days or more until the ointment has softened all that remains of the flesh.
Then place a lead tube at the end of the thing into the nose for several days until it heals.
But if it needs a treatment that dries, use that one.
To make a head-pot for distilling oils and other medicines into the nose, make one from silver or bronze, similar to a small lamp, with an opening like a shell, and its channel similarly.
And if you want to make a closed tube, like a reed.
And the shell-shaped instrument for making a head-pot should be full and open: to which there is a handle at its end, by means of which you will hold it when you warm it with oil or whatever you want from the juice and flowing things.
And this is the shape of the instrument. Chapter on the treatment of a nose boil.
Book XXV.
A boil called Thelul often grows at the end of the nose and becomes swollen and larger with days until its appearance becomes foul.
And because of this, it is necessary to cut off that boil at the very beginning of its appearance and to uproot the whole thing.
Then place something over the place, or a cautery, or a burning medicine that takes its place.
So if the cutting is delayed until it grows and becomes large, then consider whether it is hard, rough, and of a dull color, with few sensations: then do not touch it with iron, for it is a cancerous sore.
For I have often seen someone who cut open a cancerous sore and as a result suffered great harm to the one who had it.
And if the sore is soft to the touch, not of a dull color, and you see that it can be cut open entirely, then evacuate the patient, and cut it open without fear or trembling: and care for the place with what dries and constricts until it heals.
On the suture of the nose, and lip, and ear.
Chapter Twenty-Six.
You should know that when a separation of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it is not very helpful to perform this operation on that person, except in certain individuals.
Therefore, when something happens to someone from that, you should consider whether it is a recent wound with its own blood; and then gather the edges of the wound together with a suture: afterwards, take care of it until it heals.
And if the separation of continuity has already caused the lips to be separated and each part is healed: then it is necessary that you remove all the parts from their apparent skin until they are bled.
Then gather the two lips together with a suture and tie them tightly, and powder the top of it with dragon's blood and ground galangal: and place on top of the powders a piece of diafinic plaster and another consolidating plaster: and leave it bound for two or three days.
Then release it, and change the medicine: and leave it until the threads cut themselves free. Then care for it with ointment, until it heals.
The method of suturing is to gather the separation of continuity either with needles, as we explained in the suturing of the belly: or gather the separation together with a thread, as I have taught you.
On the removal of lip knots.
Chapter Twenty-Seven. Indeed many people experience swellings mostly inside their lips, similar to plant seeds, and some are smaller, others larger.
Therefore, you should turn the lip inside out, and scrape over all the knot on it, and hang it up with a hook, and cut it off from every part.
Then fill the place after the incision with powdered zygium, until the blood is stopped.
Then it should be treated with vinegar, and the spot where there is suppuration should be cured with it, until the wounds are healed.
On the incision of a growth on the gum.
Chapter 28. A flesh grows many times on the gum, which the ancients call an abuluss.
Therefore you must hang it with a hook; or hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, and let the pus flow, or blood.
Then place powdered vermilion or other stinging powders on top of the place.
For if that flesh returns after the cure, and it often returns, then cut it again and cauterize it: for it does not return after cauterization.
On the trimming of teeth with iron.
Chapter 29.
Sometimes they accumulate on the surfaces of teeth from both inside and outside parts, and between the gums rough, foul, and sometimes yellowish or greenish scales form, until the decay reaches the gum and the teeth become foul through that.
Therefore you should make the patient sit in your hands and his head rest on your shoulder, and scrape away with a file or tooth, where the scales appear to you like sand: until nothing remains of them, and similarly do the same for the blackness, greenishness, and yellowness, and other defects until they are cleaned.
Therefore if what is in them is removed from the beginning of the operation, it is good: and if not, then repeat the operation on them another day, a second time, and a third time, until finally the effort reaches its goal as you desire.
And know that each tooth needs to be trimmed with different forms and shapes of files, many figures, according to how you prepare your operation: therefore, the file with which you trim the tooth from the lower part is different from the one with which you trim between teeth, in other shapes.
And those forms of razors should be prepared by you that you see.
Of the removal of toothache pain.
Chapter 30.
It is necessary to cure a tooth from its own pain with all your skill and not delay in eradicating it.
For it is not the case that its place should be supplied when it is eradicated: since it is a substance of high quality. Therefore, until there is no excuse for eradicating it, then it is necessary to eradicate it when one is compelled by weakness, so that it may be strengthened and certified in your presence, the tooth which pains.
For many times pain deceives the weak and makes him think that there is a cavity in the tooth and he eradicates it; then pain does not cease until the patient's tooth is eradicated.
For we have already seen that from the practice of bloodletters.
When therefore the aching tooth itself is certified to you, then it is necessary that you scarify around the tooth with a sharp instrument, in which there is something of virtue, until the gum is loosened from every part. Then move it with your fingers or with fine forceps little by little, until it is dislodged.
Then place the large forceps in a good location on him and his head between your knees: which you have already held so well that it does not move. Then pull out the tooth according to its proper straightness, lest you break it.
If it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it under him from every part with ease, and try to move it, just as you did at first.
If however the tooth is perforated or corroded, then it is necessary that you fill that hole with cloth and tie it up with a fine thread at its end, so that it does not break during your constriction on it with forceps.
And you should take great care to work finely with a scalpel around the gum from every part.
And preserve your strength so that you do not break it, and a part of it remains, and it returns over the sick person from the very evil that is greater in their initial pain.
And beware, lest you do what ignorant bloodletters do in their haste and the boldness of their removal, beyond what we have narrated.
For they often bring about severe illnesses in men, which are more difficult to break and remain all their roots or some of them, or that they extract the very bone along with certain jawbones, just as we have testified many times to this effect. Then it should be washed after removal with wine, or vinegar and salt. But if bleeding occurs from the wound (which often happens), then take something from zeera and fill the place with it; and if not, cauterize it if zeera is not available to you.
The forms of fine forceps by which the tooth is moved first should be long at their tips, short at their handles, thick, so that they do not bend when pressed upon a tooth: let them be like what you see in the handles of heavy tools, until when you tighten them with them, they will not open themselves or bend; short at their tips and made from iron well finished, or well-made copper, directed at their tips: and on those tips should be teeth, some of which enter into others, and bind by a decent constriction, strong.
And sometimes the tips are shaped like the beak of a bird called a stork, and they have strong constriction.
Chapter on the removal of teeth and the extraction of fractured jawbones.
Chapter 31.
When something remains at the site of a tooth that is breaking off, then it is necessary to put butter on the area for one or two days until the place becomes soft: then introduce into it algast, or forceps, whose tips are shaped like the beak of a bird called a stork.
The form of this is forceps.
Let their ends be made like a file inside: or like scalpel feathers.
So if it does not obey you at the exit with these forceps, then you must, as it were, cave in above the root, and remove all the flesh, and introduce a small instrument called Palanca, whose form is this.
Let the short end be rough and slightly thick: and not let it be soaked so as not to break.
So if the root goes out through that, it is good; and if not, you should help with these other instruments whose forms are these.
The form of the first instrument is triangular, with a certain thickness.
The form of the triangular end is fine.
And it should also be helped with this instrument having two branches, whose form is this. And with other instruments and tools that came before for shaping teeth.
And it should also be helped with this instrument that is similar to a large hook, having the form of a triangular end twisted, which has some thickness so as not to break; and let it not be soaked.
And know that instruments for teeth are many: and similarly other instruments are not counted; and a skilled artisan, subtle in his art, finds for himself an instrument, according to what the operation and ailments themselves signify.
Because from ailments there are some to which ancient instruments did not speak, on account of the diversity of their kinds.
But if the bone is broken from the jawbone or from other bones of the mouth, or putrefies: then search for it in its place with what suits it from the instruments and forceps that I said for extracting roots, and help with gestures, whose form is this.
Let there be some thickness in it gradually, so that it may bind or hold with the bone, and not flee and go, until the bone goes out; and restore the place with medicines suitable for it.
If however there is small rot in the bone, then scrape it off from its own rot and care for it until it heals.
On the Excision of Prominent Teeth above Others.
Chapter Thirty-Two.
When prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and become distorted in shape; and especially when this occurs in women and girls, that is to say, in those with a venereal condition.
For if a tooth is born after another tooth and does not sit properly, or its excision or sharpening is possible, then remove it; and if it is connected to another tooth, then cut it off with this tool, which has this shape.
It is similar to a small file, and is made from tempered steel, very sharp at the end.
And let your incision be such that you cut it on many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so as not to disturb another tooth.
If however it is prominent and exposed to sharpening: then sharpen it with a file made of tempered steel, which has this shape.
Let it be all of one piece with the tempered steel, and let its handle be short and have a strong pointed tip, like a file with which needles are made: by which the tooth is slowly sharpened over many days with ease, so that the tooth does not become dislodged and falls; then smooth it out, and finally scrape it off with certain rasps.
And if there is a tooth from which a piece breaks off and injures the tongue: then it is necessary to sharpen it also, until the roughness of that breakage is removed and it is made even; and smoothed out, so that it does not injure the tongue, nor corrupt the speech.
On the Rounding Off of Teeth with Gold Threads.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
When it happens that anterior teeth are shaken and disturbed by percussion or fall, and the weak person cannot bind them securely so they do not fall; and you have treated them with stiptic medicines, but the treatment did not help: then there is a natural inclination in them to be bound with gold thread: because silver becomes greenish and putrid after a few days: but gold is never changed.
And let the middle thread be in subtlety and coarseness according to its quantity as it lies between the teeth.
And indeed the form of the suture is this: you take a thread and insert double its length between two healthy teeth; then sew with both ends of the thread between the moving teeth, whether one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side with the thread.
Then repeat the suture up to the part from which you began; and bind your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it is not at all loosened: and let your constriction be such as binds the thread around the roots of the teeth, so that it does not come loose.
Then cut off the excess ends of the thread with scissors; and gather both together, and turn them with your hand; and hide them between the healthy tooth and the moving tooth, so that they do not hurt the tongue: then let it be left in this tightened state until it remains.
But if it should come undone or be cut, tie them again with another thread, and so they will remain for the whole time.
And this is the form of teeth, and the figure of the suture of two healthy teeth, and two moving teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one or two teeth return after a fall, to their places, and are retained as we narrated, and remain; and this is done only by an artist, who is prudent and experienced.
And sometimes a bone from the shin is fitted: and it becomes like the form of a tooth, and is placed in its place, where the tooth is anchored and tied, as we said: and it remains, and serves with it for a long time.
Of the cutting of the ligament that occurs under the tongue, and prevents speech.
Chapter 44.
But if there is something hard and knotty in him, and it is due to the consolidation of the wound: then put a hook into it, and drive it through its width until you cut the ligament, and the knotting will be released.
But if there is a flow of blood, then place powdered eggshell over the spot. But if the blood flows too much, then cauterize the spot with a caustic, which is suitable for that; and then care for it with the rest of the cure until it heals. About the removal of a ranula that occurs under the tongue.
Chapter 35.
Sometimes an abscess occurs under the tongue, similar to that of a small frog, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function, and perhaps swells so much that it fills the mouth.
If therefore you see it of a dark or black color, hard and insensitive to the touch, which the patient does not feel: then do not touch it, because it is a cancer.
And if it is inclined towards whiteness, where there is moisture, then put a hook into it and cut it with a thin silver instrument, and free it from all parts.
If blood overflows upon you during your operation, then place powdered alum above it until the bleeding stops. Then return to your operation and remove it with its complement.
Then dress it with vinegar and salt, and care for the rest of the treatment suitable for that, until it heals.
On the cure of an apostema of two Pectoral Glands.
Chapter 36.
And then either you will pierce it or it will break open by itself.
And if it is of white color, rounded, and the root of it is fine: then you should cut into it.
And the operation is, that you consider before your operation, if the apostema has cooled down quietly and completely or diminished by some reduction: then therefore make the patient sit before the sun, and his head be in your bosom; and open his mouth, and have a servant standing between your hands, and press down his tongue with an instrument of this shape. Make it of silver or air, so that it is as thin as a knife.
When therefore you press with it the tongue, and the apostema is shown to you, and falls upon it according to your sight: then take a forceps and insert it into the amigdala, and pull out as much of it as you can to the exterior, except that you take something away from the garments.
Then cut it with an instrument whose form is as follows:
It is assimilated to forceps; yet its extremities should be curved, so that the opening of each is on a straight edge of the other's point. Therefore, take care that it is made of iron tempered, or else it is well-filled with lead.
But if this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spoon-shaped instrument, whose form follows:
Be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other.
And after you have cut out one almond, cut out another in the same manner of incision.
Then after the incision, the patient should gargle with cold water or with vinegar and water.
But if bleeding occurs to him, let him gargle with water in which the rinds of pomegranates have been boiled; or myrtle leaves and similar things from the stypsis, until the bleeding ceases: then care for it, until he is healed.
And sometimes other apostemes are born in the throat, besides the two tonsils.
Cut it therefore in accordance with what I said for the cutting of the two tonsils equally.
And indeed I myself was once cured a woman from an aposteme that had developed between her throat, which was pulling towards suffocation, and almost all sensation had ceased because the throat was already closing: and the woman was breathing through a narrow opening, and already she had forbidden food and drink to herself; and if this state had persisted for one day or two days, she would have died.
And the aposteme had risen so far that it had discharged two branches, until they protruded above the two openings of the nose.
I therefore hastened and fixed one of its hooks.
Then I pulled it out, and a large portion was extracted from it.
Then I cut it where it is grasped from the nasal opening.
Then I did to him what had come forth from the other nostril.
Then I opened his mouth and pressed his tongue; and afterwards I fixed the instrument into the abscess. Then I cut off from it a part of him, and only a little blood flowed out from it: thus the woman's throat was closed, and she began to drink water immediately, then received food again.
Therefore I did not cease to cut into that abscess many times over a long period of time; and the abscess succeeded in its place as I was cutting, until it became too long and with it.
I therefore cauterized the abscess between the throat.
It therefore remained uninfected: then I walked away from it, and did not know what God had done with her after me.
Paragraph on the cutting of a quinsy.
Chapter 37.
When the catarrh descends to the uvula and becomes inflamed, and is long: then it is called a quinsy; and if it is in the lower part thick, rounded, then it is called a tonsil.
When it is cured with what we said in the division, and the cure does not agree; and you see that the abscess has cooled down from it, and is thin: then it is necessary for you to cut it.
And that which is joined to it, rounded, and has no length, and is bloody, or of a reddish-brown, or black color, and feels no sense: then it is necessary for you to make the incision on it.
For in it there is fear above the patient.
Therefore when you see it according to the manner I said from its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit before the sun; and press his tongue with the instrument of which the narrative preceded: then insert the forceps into the uvula, and pull it downwards; and cut it with one of the two instruments that I said for cutting the two tonsils.
And it is necessary that you do not cut from it unless what is added above the natural term without addition.
For if you cut from it more, you will wound the voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use what we have described for the incision of two adrenal glands; and care for it until it is healed.
But if the patient is terrified of the incision, then it is necessary that you use your skill in cauterizing him without fear and trembling.
And the method of cauterization there is not, except with sharp water; and it is, that you put the head of the patient on your shoulder.
Then press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned.
Then take the water which I told you in the chapter on cauterizing, and fill with it a shoe that is not extinguished, and place it not thick, nor thin, and fill into this concavity of the instrument, whose form is this.
Let the end of it be at the spot where medicine is placed in the concavity, just like the concavity of a ear-shaped radius.
And place the instrument with medicine on the roof of his mouth: and let the patient lie on his side as he breathes, so that saliva may flow from his mouth from the inner medicine, lest anything from it descend to his throat and harm him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine.
And you should put it on top of the mouth by a quantity of the first half hour, until you see that it has already begun to whiten and calm down the pungency of the medicine.
And if you wish to take a plug, and wrap it around the end of the radius, and pour the plug with medicine, and insert the radius with the plug into the tube above, until the plug adheres to the roof of the mouth. Do that many times, until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the uvula.
Then let it go: indeed it dries out and falls after three days, or four.
But if you need to repeat the medicine, apply it again: and after cauterization, wash it with a poultice made from the rind of an apple, mixed with butter that has been soaked in it, and cleanse it with what is found on its surface from medicine: and wrap it with cold water.
And treat it externally with ointments, and internally with gargles, until it is healed.
Therefore this method of treatment is more conducive to health through incision and less fearful because of its length.
And sometimes the wound is also cured with something that is finer than caustic and cutting: it is cured with fumigation, in this way.
Take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, sseah, chamomile, abrotanum, and similar herbs from among those that grow: and gather them all together, or some of them in a pot, and immerse them with vinegar, and let them boil: and the pot should be smeared with clay decently: and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, on which an instrument shall be placed according to this method.
Make it from silver or bronze: and insert the end with the pomegranate into the mouth of the sick person, until the vapor ascends to the wound above the tube, until the wound is greatly obscured.
Then repeat this over it many times, until it dries out.
And beware, lest you perform this treatment at the beginning of an aposteme.
For often it adds to the aposteme; and it is not fitting for you to do that unless at the decline of the aposteme's heat.
But if this instrument is not present to you, then take a reed and compose at its end the rind of an apple: so that the sick person's mouth does not burn: for the rind of an apple prevents vapor from burning the mouth: and this is a good treatment with salvation.
On the extraction of thorns and bones from the throat.
Chapter Thirty-eight.
A bone or a fish spine or something else often sticks in the throat.
It is therefore necessary to remove what appears above the surface and falls into view, after you have pressed your tongue with an instrument in the sun, and it is declared to you that it is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make a weak vomit before food is digested in the stomach.
Perhaps indeed something will emerge attached through vomiting.
Or a weak person swallows a piece of a leek, or the root of a lettuce, or swallows a dry biscuit: or receives a piece of dried sea sponge and binds it with thread, then swallows it.
When therefore it arrives at the place where the spines or bones are, and is removed, then it emerges. If however it does not emerge with what we said: then use a leaden instrument according to this shape.
Let it be thicker than a radius, and at the end of it let there be a curvature, which insert into his throat with ease: and he should have his head raised upwards.
And beware of touching his epiglottis, lest he coughs, and push with him the bone or spine, or insert it himself by hand.
But what the sick person inserts is better: on account of his knowledge of the place where the attached thing is; and push it down below, or draw his hand up with the instrument, all that according to the quantity prepared for him, until it emerges.
On the Extraction of Leeches.
Chapter Thirty-nine.
When a leech is being cured with what I said in the division of treatment with medicines, and does not yield, then examine the patient's throat before the sun or after the sun, after you have pressed his tongue with an instrument as I told you.
If then your patient falls on a bloodsucker, remove it with a small hook or with fine forceps.
But if it is not possible with them, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient's throat up to the throat; then insert into the cavity of the tube a burning iron with fire.
Do that many times, and let the patient refrain from water all day.
Then let him take a wet compress filled with cold water, and open his mouth into it; and let him hold his mouth in it, and not swallow anything from it: and move the water one hour after another with his own hand.
For the bloodsucker indeed falls when it feels the water.
But if it does not come out with what we have described, then fumigate the patient with cimices, or with a feather and an instrument that I have described for fumigating the uvula.
Do this many times, because it will fall.
And the method of operation in fumigation is, that you take a pot in which are living prune pits with fire; and let the pot be covered with a lid, in whose middle is a hole; and arrange the extremity of the instrument within that hole.
Then pour the fumigation, and let the patient put his mouth to the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape, until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodsucker.
For the bloodsucker will immediately fall.
But if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And let the patient be thirsty, and eat salted foods, and other things, and not drink water. It is necessary therefore that it come out with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the bloodsucker is drawn out of the throat when it falls onto it.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: except that it has this curvature which enters into the throat.
And its extremity is similar to the beak of a bird called a stork, in which there is roughness like a file: when it grasps something, it does not release it completely.
About the opening of apostumes, and their cutting out, and care in general.
Chapter 40.
The species of apostumes are many, of various kinds, according to the recollection of them, namely one and one only in this book: and they are different in their perforation and cutting out, in two ways.
One of which is a species of apostema within itself, and because it contains moisture.
And the second method is due to the places in which it occurs from the body.
Because the apostema occurring on the head is another thing from the apostema occurring at the anus: and the apostema occurring on a fleshy part is another thing from the apostema occurring at a joint: and each of them has its own judgment based on its treatment.
And from the apostemas are those which should not be perforated unless after maturation of the flesh within them and its completion: and from these are those which must be perforated while they are raw and do not mature according to their completion.
Such as apostemas that are near joints.
Because when an apostema occurs near a joint and prolongs itself until the flesh surrounding it perhaps corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint; therefore it is a more immediate cause of constriction in that member.
Or it is an apostema in the main member: because if you delay its perforation until it matures, it will harm either that one or through that main member.
Or it is near the anus, therefore perforate it unripe: and it's not necessary to perforate a raw and incomplete apostema, except when it is near the anus, so that it doesn't putrefy deeply and prolong itself to the interior of the anus, and become a fistula, or remain at its end which will not heal. It is necessary that you know the hour of perforation of an apostema, which has matured according to its complement; and it is in sedation of pain, recession of fever, diminution of redness, pulsation, and acuteness of the apostema's head: and other signs. And it is necessary that you make the same perforation in the lower part of the apostema and more prominent prominence: and let the perforation go along the length of the body, if apostemas are in the parts of hands and feet, and places of arms, and tendons, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflexion.
But in those that are reflected, proceed with the perforation according to that member.
When however the apostema is in fleshy places: then it is better to leave off its perforation until its digestion is confirmed, just as we said according to its complement.
Because if you pierce it before that, the course of the virus is prolonged from it, and there are many impurities and corruption, and perhaps its lips become hardened, and its depth.
And some apostemas are pierced according to the width of the body in necessity, or according to that which the member needs.
And it is necessary that you administer a small perforation to small apostemas, and a large perforation to great ones: or multiple sections according to the similarity of the size of the apostema.
And there are apostemas from which the skin must be cleansed: and it must be cut when it has become like a cloth, and it has reached its term, that is already dead: just as what happens to many, such as boils, and bubos.
And there are some which are cut with a section having three angles.
And there is one from which it is cut like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
As an inguinal abscess.
And from these are those in which the circular incision and the crescent-shaped incision are performed; and similar ones among the sections.
However, that which does not have a head, such as mild and superficial abscesses, should be punctured with a superficial incision or merely flattened.
And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has collected a great deal of pus, and you pierce it, so that you do not hasten to remove all the pus at once from that moment; rather, take some of it out from there.
Then dress the abscess with an ointment up to another day.
Then draw out something from the pus again.
Do that many times according to the progression, until it goes out: especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an old decrepit person: for the spirit of the animal often dissolves with the evacuation of pus: and perhaps the sick person dies, and you do not perceive.
Be therefore cautious in this chapter with great caution.
And after your incision, by which you make the incisions on abscesses, it is necessary to wash the wound and observe.
If therefore the wound of an abscess is small or it is a flat incision, then apply linen from flax or old cotton.
And if the abscess is great and there are many openings of the incision, then it is necessary to insert linen into every opening until they all reach each other.
And if in the abscess you have cut away a part of the skin, or hollowed out the surrounding area: then it is necessary to fill it with old cotton, or as when a cloth is stitched together, or by filling it with flax without moisture: and bind it tightly for three days.
Then throw away the dressing, and take care of that which is necessary with ointment until it heals.
If however a bleeding occurs during your operation hour, then administer cold water and vinegar, after the cloth has been soaked in them: and place it on the site of the bleeding many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you should administer a remedy, and treatment, and powders, which I have narrated in many places of this our book, and from division.
But if it is winter time, and the location of the abscess is among many nerves: then you should pour poultices with wine and hot oil: and place them on the areas.
And if it is summer, and the areas are fleshy: then you should place poultices soaked in water and oil, or with wine and oil, and the whole thing will be cold.
Until the third day, as we said, then you should open the abscess, and wash it, and administer to its cure what is fitting for it, until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary from knowing the universal cure of abscesses.
According to the manner of true division, I have already said about every abscess, how is the way to its cure separately by chapter.
About the section on abscesses that occur on the scalp of the head.
Chapter 41.
Abscesses occur on the scalp of the head, small ones, and they are of the species called Nodi, which are contained in the tunics that surround them, as if they were hatched from a hen.
And their species are many.
From these there are fat ones: and from these there are those that contain moisture similar to mud: and from these there are those that contain moisture similar to moss and poultices: and others like them, and from these there are hard and rocky ones.
And in the section of all of them, and their extraction is not feared, as long as it does not make opposition to an artery.
And the operation on their section is that you try them out with an instrument whose shape comes after these things, which is called an Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if that which contains humidity is present, then cut off the section according to the length of the superficial section: in this manner.
And begin with the section from line b to line g. When the humidity is evacuated, then scrape off the crust that contains that humidity, and do not leave anything at all from it.
For many times it will return if something remains of it. Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present; and if not, in water and salt: and fill it with that until another day.
For it eats away what remains of the crust. Then repeat the application of Egyptian ointment over the wound a second and third time, and if you need it, continue until you are confident that nothing remains of the crust; then indeed care for the wound with ointment until it heals.
But if the apostema contains a fatty knot: then cut it off according to this shape, with a section having the form of a cross: and place thorns between the two lobes of the section, and scrape it off from all parts; and try your skill in extracting the cloth that contains it.
But if an artery makes opposition to you, then do what I will tell you afterwards.
And similarly act on the apostema if it is stony, from the section and same cure, according to what we said. And the section over a stony apostema is easier: since it has little blood and moisture.
And sometimes there are certain of these apostemas that are on the head of some people, with which there is no moisture at all.
Or make an incision in them always from the lower part of them, so that the flow of pus may be relieved to below.
Then care for it as is fitting with regard to its cure.
Of the Section of Abscesses on the Neck.
Chapter 42.
These boils often occur on the neck and under the armpits and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And as for those that occur on the neck, there is one kind and many kinds, and they are generated from each other; and every abscess among them is within its own natural envelope, just like those of the head, as we have described.
And the types of these abscesses are many.
And among them there are stone-like ones; and some that contain humors; and some that are malignant, which do not obey treatment.
Therefore, if you see one of good condition among them, which is evident by its proximity to the color of the skin, and it moves in every direction, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the muscles, nor to the artery, nor is it deep: it is necessary to cut it with a superficial incision from the upper part of the body down to the lower part, along the line b. up to the line g., and scrape it off from every part; and stretch two flaps of skin with a hook or many hooks, if you need to, just as we said about boils on the head, and extract it gradually.
And it is said regarding caution, that one should not cut a vein, or a nerve.
And let it not be a sharp splinter very much: so that you do not put your hand to the cutting with the incision, or disturb the patient, and cut what is not necessary.
But if you cut a vein or artery, then forbade from the operation, then place in the wound some powdered alum, or certain powders that stop bleeding, and bind up the wound, and let it alone until the sharpness of the abscess subsides, and the wound softens; or it will begin to putrefy.
For blood is stopped by tunica. Therefore, return to your operation until you complete it.
Then take care of it.
If a stump is cut entirely, then you must gather up the two lips of the wound and set it straight away as soon as you see that there is no excess remaining.
But if you see that there is excess remaining due to the size of the stump, then you must turn your attention to cutting at the root of it and pulling it out; and apply the suture as we have said.
And what contains moisture from the stumps, pierce it with a superficial piercing, so that you may see the location of its maturity; and place the piercing below that which follows lower in the body, as we have said.
Then administer licinia after perforation with ointment and similar things to cover what remains from the corruption, until you see the wound is now cleansed. Then cure it with ointment generated by the flesh, until it heals.
 On the section of the epiglottis from an abscess occurring within the throat.
Chapter 43.
The ancients said that this section is done on the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it; and this is the writing of their speech.
However, in those having synciesis, it is necessary to avoid section of the epiglottis: since no benefit would come from it, because all veins and lung are weak.
In those who have a warm abscess in the mouth or throat or both tonsils, when there is no distress in the canal, it is necessary to use the section of the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that occurs from obstruction. Therefore, when we want to do it, we must cut the epiglottis under three or four circles of the epiglottis, with a small section by breadth, in that which is between two circles according to quantity, so that the section is in the sifac not in cartilage: and this place indeed is suitable for the section, since it is deprived of flesh, and the vessels of blood are distant from it.
But if the surgeon is timid, then it is necessary that he stretches the throat with a hook.
Then he should probe the cut, until he reaches the canal; and if he sees anything from the vessels of blood, he should avoid it.
Then he should cut the sifac as we have described; and it signifies above the section of the canal from the phlegm that issues forth from it, when it is ruptured, and the separation of the voice.
And let go an open wound in due time.
When then the hour comes that one fears inflammation, gather together the two lips of the wound skin, and alone without cartilage.
Then administer medicines which make flesh grow, until it heals.
Albucasis says.
The sum of this discourse which we have narrated is not an exposition, unless when they see that some of these abscesses has already obstructed the patient's throat: and the patient is lifted up above death, and wants to be cut open for his breath: they go to incise the Epiglottis, so that the patient may breathe over the wound in a certain respiration, and be saved from death: and on account of this they have commanded to leave an open wound, until the malice of the sickness is consumed, and it is three days old, and almost itself: then therefore they have commanded to sew up the wound, and cure it, until it heals.
And what I saw by myself is, that one servant girl received a knife, and sent it with into her own throat, and cut with it part of the windpipe.
And I was called to cure her, and I found her groaning like a dead person's death rattle.
I therefore removed the stitch from the wound, and I found a little blood that had flowed out of the wound.
I therefore trusted that she had not cut the vein nor guided it: and the wind was issuing forth from the wound.
I therefore hastened and attended to her wound, and cured it until she was healthy: and nothing befell the servant girl except a slight hoarseness of voice: and she returned after days to better state of her affairs.
Therefore I say: that there is no fear in cutting the Epiglottis.
Concerning the cutting of a hernia of the throat.
Chapter 44.
This is called a throat hernia or apostema, a great swelling according to the complexion of the body; and it is very common in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either it is natural: or it is accidental. In the natural one, certainly not a defect.
The accidental one however is in two ways: of which one is similar to fatty knots.
And the other method is similar to the swelling that occurs from arterial constriction.
And there is fear; and one should not make a presumption about it with iron, unless it is small; and you should test it and investigate it with an instrument.
So if you find it similar to a fatty knot, and it is not suspended with any veins; then cut it, just as knots are cut: and remove it along with what contains it from the chest, if it is in the chest; and if not, then examine the whole of it.
Then take care of the place with that which is necessary for healing, until it is healed.
Concerning the cutting above the appearance of knots.
Chapter 45. There are many kinds of knots, and I have already mentioned all their kinds in division; and it is necessary for me to relate here the difference between a knot and an exitura: since it causes doubt. I say therefore that when an exitura is heat, and fever, and severe pains, until the effusion of superfluity subsides and putrefaction is completed: then indeed the fevers and heat cease.
When a knot is indeed not heat, nor fever, nor pains, and contains the contents of the chest which is a sac proper to it, and is according to the complexion of the body: and is an incision of them like cress, and becomes like a boil, and greater or less.
And they are according to two species: either fatty: or containing moisture.
And the colors of moisture are many, as I said in division. Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a Knot, you should test it and inquire into its nature with the instrument that is called the Intromissive, according to what its form will be in the chapter that follows this.
And the method of inquiry into all apostems and knots is, to take this instrument and introduce it into a moister place which you find in the apostem: and then turn back your fingers with it gradually, until you know that the instrument has pierced the skin.
Then use your last finger according to the measurement of the size of the apostem.
Then withdraw the Intromissive and observe what comes out in its wake.
If then fluidity flowing with any color comes out, then cut it off with a superficial incision, as I said in the other apostems.
And if no fluidity comes out in the wake of the Intromissive, then you will know that it is fatty: cut off therefore above it with an incision having the shape of a cross, according to this form as I taught you: and suspend it with sutures, and remove the skin from all around with ease: and preserve the cistern if you can over it, in order to extract the healthy part along with the Knot.
But if the cistern is torn apart during the operation, and it is not possible to extract the healthy part, for often that happens, then cut out the healthy part in small pieces, until nothing remains of it.
For if anything at all remains, a little or much, the Knot returns according to most cases.
And if it prevails over you, and a little remains: then fill the wound at your completion with certain corroding powders: and bind up the wound, and place above it what lies apostematic, hot, and cure it with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
If then there is a great knot, then two lips of it and care for it with what encircles. But if there is a vein to you that pulsates or does not pulsate: then hasten, and fill the place with ground pumice, and let it be tight for two days, or three, until the wound becomes putrid and the bubbling of blood subsides: then return to cutting what remains from the knot.
About the instruments of the outside for incision and piercing.
Chapter 46.
There are three forms of introducers, and they are of three kinds.
Of these there is a large one, and of these there is a middle-sized one, and of these there is a small one.
Let them be made from iron with four-sided ends, having been shaped at the edges, so that they may facilitate entrance into an abscess.
And these are the forms of Probing instruments, and no, that is, piercing ones: and one of them is called Beris, that is, piercing one: and there are three kinds.
Of these there is a large one, and a middle-sized one, and a small one.
They concur so that through them abscesses, and exits, and fistulas, and boils may be investigated as to what is between the bones.
And others are made round, smooth, and soft, like large needles with which seats are upholstered, from citron wood, or from bronze, or iron, or silver. And the better ones of these are those that are made from citron.
And they are also made from black lead, which concur so that through them one may experiment with fistulas, the concavities of which are reflections, in order to be reflected with their own softness against those reflections.
And there are again three kinds. Because from these there are long ones, from these middle-sized ones, and from these short ones, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its constriction. The form of bandages, and there are many species. Because from these [bandages] there are simple ones, namely those with one curve: and there are three species, as you see, Great, Middle, and Small.
And from these [bandages] there are blind bandages: and there are three species.
And from these [bandages] there are bandages having two curves, and there are three species: and from these there are bandages having three curves, and there are three species: and all of these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels, with which one cuts and removes knots, and apostemes: and there are three species: because from them is great, middle, and small.
Their ends with which the cutting is done are sharp, other ends are not sharp: and they are not placed thus, unless it be that with them there may be advantage in removing knots at the fear of incising a vein or nerve: and that the one who is sick may be healed by them, and find tranquility for a brief time after burning which he finds at the removal of an aposteme.
These are Madges, and there are three species.
They are made of bronze, and they are similar to Radii, with which one makes an alloy: and at the wide end there is a hidden point of Spatumilis: and it flows inwardly and outwardly when you will, as you see.
The form of Spatumilis which are hidden between the fingers at the perforation of apostemes: and the sick do not perceive them: and there are three species, great, middle, and small.
The forms of Ventosars with which the flow of blood is stopped: and there are three species, great, middle, and small.
They should be made of bronze or citrine, rounded, for a length somewhat, as you see: and they should be to subtlety.
And it is necessary that these kinds of poultices be with you both great and small: so that you may cut away blood quickly in need, and then when medicine is not present to you.
However, you should not use them for the lancing of blood in every part of the body, and you should only use them on fleshy parts: such as the arms, thighs, shoulders, breasts, belly, groin, and similar areas from fleshy, moist places.
And sometimes instruments are made from them that are small and similar to the rinds of pomegranates, according to their shape; with which blood is cut away when it flows from a phlebotomy, or at the incision of a vein, or artery: and sometimes they are rounded in this shape.
About the care of men's breasts which resemble those of women.
Chapter 47.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men are inflated during sleep (that is, when they start to emit emissions while sleeping) until they resemble those of women; and remain foul and swollen.
Therefore, whoever is disgusted by this, should cut on the breasts in a lunar fashion, according to this shape from line b to line g. Then scrape off all the fatness.
Then fill the wound with medicinal ointment.
Then gather together the two edges of the wound with a suture, and care for it until it is healed.
But if the breast should sag downwards and soften due to its size, as happens with women: then it is necessary to cut along both upper sides of the breast in two sections similar to a lunar shape, each containing the other at their ends, until there is a larger line containing a smaller one, according to this shape from line b to line g. Then scrape off the skin which is between the two edges, and remove the fatness, and administer what we said about suturing and powdering, which is necessary for healing, until it is healed.
If however you do not make the incision that is necessary for you to make it, because of the patient's unrest or because of bleeding: then you must fill the wound with a poultice submerged in corrosive ointment, and let it be until what remains from fatness is consumed.
Then take care of him until he recovers.
About the puncturing of an abscess that occurs under Titillo.
Chapter 48. These abscesses which occur under Titillo are of the type of hard Strophulae, which contain pus, and from these are those which contain humidity.
Those which are from them that contain humidity, ought to be drained by a lunar incision, according to this form, from line b. to line g., and when all that is in the abscess has been evacuated with pus, then fill it with old poultice, and let it remain until another day.
Then remove the poultice and treat it with a suitable ointment until he recovers.
And if the abscess is of the type of hard Strophulae with knots, then cut above it as we said in the section on equal Strophulae.
But if the wound extends so far that it emits pus, then apply a cautery to it, according to what was said above.
About the incision of an abscess that occurs due to the Artery and Vein.
Chapter 49.
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it becomes consolidated, then very often an abscess occurs from this; and similarly with a vein, so that an abscess and inflammation occur in it.
And the signs by which one recognizes that an abscess and inflammation are caused by the Artery and Vein, are: because when the abscess is caused by the artery, it is long and aggregated in the depth of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there is a hissing sound.
And that which is beside the vein is round in manifest body.
And the section above this abscess is an error, and especially that which is under the armpits, and groin, and neck, and in many places of the body: and it is very great indeed.
Therefore, the cure for this should be done with iron, and what is also found at the extremities or head, should also be removed.
Therefore, on that which comes from inflation of the artery's opening, find a section in the skin in length.
Then open the section with a hook, afterwards the artery; and free it from the tunics until it is uncovered.
Then introduce the awl beneath it, and make it penetrate until another side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in time.
Then puncture the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula, until all the blood that is in it goes out and the abscess is dissolved.
Then administer a treatment that produces pus, until the ligaments fall off; afterwards care for it with ointments suitable for it, until it heals.
If the abscess is due to a vein section, then you should hold in your hand as much of the abscess with the skin as possible.
Then introduce the awl under the place you held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be a double thread in it, until you pull it out from the other side.
Then tie with the same abscess good ligament; according to what I told you about the ligament of the grape, from two sides with two ends of the thread. But if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then introduce another awl with another thread under the entire abscess at the cut of the awl; press, and tie your threads in four places.
Then cut away the abscess from its middle until what is inside it comes out. Next, cut off any excess skin and let go of what is tied to it.
Then place over it a poultice that you had soaked in wine and oil.
Then administer the treatment, which is done with liniments and ointments, until it heals.
On the abscess that occurs from a twisting of the Nerves.
Chapter 31.
Just as an abscess occurs in the Artery and Vein, so too does an abscess occur in the Nerve: which occurs through a blow or excessive labor, and similar causes: and it happens most frequently to those in places of assistance, or heel, and in every place where joints move: and it is a grave abscess. Its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it is often found without pain, but when it is constricted with madness, the weak one feels like being struck with a numbness.
And it is not an abscess that forms deep within the body, but rather one that is situated under the skin, and it moves to every part, and does not go towards the front or before, nor behind to the back.
What is located among them in joints should not be cut into with iron.
Perhaps even a contraction may occur.
But in the one that is located in the head or in the forehead, find the skin with a spatula-like tool.
If therefore it is a small abscess, then grasp it with forceps and cut it off at the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and scrape it off: afterwards remove it, and cover the wound with a suture: and care for it until it heals.
On the cutting of an abscess that occurs in the belly.
Chapter 51. Some people have many times in their entrails and in other parts of their bodies a condition that is called Fungalia, which is similar to mushrooms.
The root of these is fine, and the head of them is thick, and their lips are turned inward.
And it is small among them, and it is something that is greatly magnified among them.
And I myself have already seen a man, and in his belly there were two Fungalia that were more like to other things than to mushrooms: there was no difference between them, white and fine roots, and their lips turned inward and ended, and moisture always flowed from them.
I therefore cut into them and found one to weigh about 10 and 8 ounces, and the other about 6 ounces. The operation in cutting into them is this: that you then consider if the patient is damp, and the color of the Fungalia is white, damp, fine roots; then cut into it with a broad spatula, and have cauteries ready to be applied to them in fire.
For often a great deal of blood is expelled during the section: therefore hurry if you are overcome by blood, then cauterize it.
But if you see the patient pale and timid from incision with iron, then take a lead thread made of decent material, and tie it to him with athelum: whose method is what we said, and leave him for two days.
Then add the lead to the wound.
Therefore do not stop tying on the lead as long as it causes trouble in the Fungalia, until it is cut off and falls apart of its own accord without effort.
But if the Fungalia has a thick root, then there is something to be feared and dreaded in its incision, especially since it is in the belly.
However, it is possible for you to cut through its middle.
Then he should cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then take care of it until the wound heals.
And beware lest you presume to cut away that which is of a dull color, little sensation, foul appearance: for it is an apostematic cancer: and I come with the recollection of Cancer after this.
On the treatment of a protruding Umbilicus.
Chapter 52.
A protruding Umbilicus arises from many causes.
Or from fissures of the sheath, which is above the belly: and it comes out from there either the bladder or intestine, according to what happens in other ruptures.
Or from blood flowing from a vein, or an artery, according to what has been mentioned before.
Or from constriction of the belly in it.
But if it is due to a fissure of the sheath and a protrusion there: then it has the appearance of an apostematic color similar to the natural color of the body: and it is smooth, without pain: and appears in a different location.
And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its appearance is as we have described, with a more violent difference.
When therefore you press it with your fingers, it becomes hidden: then it returns, and perhaps makes a sound: and it is greatly swollen at the entrance to the bath, and there is a violent effort.
If it is due to humidity, it is smooth: then it does not become hidden when you press it with your hand, nor is there constriction, nor is anything added.
Which if it is due to blood, then with these signs an apostema appears as a blackening from the swelling.
But if it is due to natural flesh: then there is a grave, thick, hard apostema that fixes itself according to one quantity.
If it is due to constriction, then the touch of it is smooth. And the operation is that you should then consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or vein, or swelling; then it is necessary to prevent its cure.
For in that case there is fear and dread, just as I taught you in the chapter where I said that abscesses are due to an artery and a vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or a tumor; then it is necessary for you to hasten the sick person's breathing and have him stand upright, stretched out.
Then mark with encaustum around the entire navel area.
Then command him to be placed on his back between your hands.
Then encircle with a spatula, wide, around the navel area over the place you marked with encaustum.
Then extend the middle of the abscess upwards with a large hook.
Then bind him around firmly with a cord or with a strong silk binding; and let the knot of the binding be loose.
Then open the middle of the abscess, extended above the binding.
If then you find the intestine caught by the binding; then extract the binding and insert your index finger and push the intestine into the interior of the belly; and if you find a tumor, then take it with a hook and cut off its superfluity.
But if on the other hand there is an artery or vein opposite to you; then surround it much.
Then return to your operation.
And take two needles and insert into them two strong threads; and insert the two needles into the area around the abscess in the shape of a cross, which makes them penetrate.
Then tie the abscess in four places over the needles; and if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place until the extended flesh rots and falls apart by itself; or cut it when it becomes softened and rotten.
Then take care of it with him as is fitting from ointments, until it heals.
But if the swelling of the navel is from flesh or from moisture: then it is necessary to hollow out the abscess as we said.
And you should remove the blood or moisture that you find inside.
Then take care of it with him as is fitting to close up the place.
Of the treatment of CRAB. Chapter 53.
For I myself was unable to heal anyone from it, nor did I see another before me who had succeeded in treating it.
And the operation for it, when it is located as we said, is to proceed and dissolve the patient from black cholera occasionally.
Then bleed it if you find it with a clear filling.
Then prepare the patient for preparation in which it will be placed with the operation.
Then pour into the Crab needles that fit it.
Then hollow out the inside of it from all sides with the skin, according to investigation, until nothing remains of its roots: and let the blood flow, and do not cut it quickly, rather press on the places, and wipe away the thick blood entirely with your hand or with whatever instruments are available there.
If however a contrary flow of blood makes you feel, a thick stream from the cutting of an artery or vein: then cauterize the vein until the blood is stopped.
Then take care of it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
The Cure of Hydrophobia.
Chapter 54.
Now we have described the kinds of Hydrophobia and how water accumulates; and the signs of every kind, and its cure with medicines.
And what is cured with iron is not except for the sole kind of ascites alone; and it does not approach the kind of tympanic nor the kind of hypsarca at all: for that one is deadly.
When you are already cured of this kind of Hydrophobia with medicines and your treatment has not brought relief: then consider.
For if weakness has already ensued in the sick person, or there is another infirmity besides Hydrophobia, such as if cough, or bowel looseness, and similar things are present with it: then beware of treating him with iron, for fear of that.
But if you see the sick person to be overflowing with strength, and there is no other sickness besides Hydrophobia alone, and he is not a child nor an old man: then the mode of operation in him is, that you lift up the sick person standing between your hands, and after him make someone else push his stomach with their hand, pushing water down to the lower part of the chest.
Then take a thorn-covered sponge, in this shape.
Be two sharp points, long and pointed at the end like a sponge.
However, there should be something of brevity slowly present in it, so that you do not penetrate with it all the way to the intestine and cause harm.
Then consider.
For if the Hydrophobia is generated from the part of the intestines, then it is necessary to stretch with a section from the navel to the lower part, directly above the chest, a length of three fingers.
If indeed the generation of Hydrocephalus is due to the illness of the spleen: then let your incision be on the left side from the navel, three fingers.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then let the incision be on the right side: and it is not necessary for the incision to be also on the side where the patient wants to lie down, lest superfluities flow to that weak place.
Then pierce with an instrument the entire skin.
Then insert your hand with a spatula into that incision and lift up the skin, and scrape, as if you were removing it, and let the amount that is removed be the length of a fingernail or about that.
Then pierce and scrape until the spatula reaches a hollow place: and it is the location of water.
Then draw it out and insert an instrument into the opening, which has this shape.
And it is similar to a cannula: made from silver, or copper, or gold, thin and smooth. It has a small opening at the lower part of itself, and three openings on its sides, two on one side and one on the other side: and its end is cut off, according to the shape of a reed, as you see: in the upper extremity of it there is a band.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately the water will flow down over the instrument, therefore evacuate from the water in an hour a moderate quantity.
For since if you evacuate from it more than is proper, perhaps the patient will die in an hour due to the resolution of their animal spirits: or a syncopes occurs that approaches death.
But evacuate from it according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to how the patient's condition signifies to you through the force of their pulse, and through its good quality.
Then draw out the instrument, and retain the water.
What is it, because it will be retained immediately on account of the skin that retains the opening which is above the suture: about which I have spoken, so as to pierce it according to that manner.
Then iterate the instrument on the next day, if you see the patient is able to tolerate that; and extract also a small quantity from water. Do this several days without fear, and guard yourself from error: until there remains no more than a little from the water.
But if you fear for the patient and let out a great deal of water: then cure him with burial in hot sand, and much sweating in a bath and sun, and wait for his thirst to pass: and cure him with medicaments taken away, until he is healed: and cauterize above the stomach, and liver, and spleen, after the extraction of water: according to what I have spoken before.
Concerning the care of infants born in places where their urethra is not perforated.
Chapter 55. When someone is born from his mother's womb, and the head of his monkey is not perforated, or is a narrow opening, or is in an unexpected place.
Therefore it is necessary to help with the perforation immediately at birth with a very fine spatula, according to this shape.
Then place a small pin made of lead into the opening and tie it shut; and keep it tied for three or four days.
When therefore he wishes to emit urine, it should be removed, and let him pass water.
Then return it.
And if you do not put the lead pin, it is already possible that the urine which flows over the place will prevent it from closing.
But he whose opening is narrow is cured with lead, as we said, over many days, until it is widened.
And those in whom the opening is in an unexpected place are hurt.
What is it? Because from those born with it, there is an opening at the end of the rod's head: wherefore it cannot urinate to the front, until it lifts up the rod with its own hand to the higher parts. Nor is there generation in it because, since the sperm cannot reach the matrix according to straightness, and it is a very foul distress.
And the method of treatment for that is, that the weak person should be supported on their back.
Then extend his head of the rod with your left hand, extending it vigorously, and cut off the head of the rod at the place of the priapus, with a point or sharp spathula, as is the cutting of a reed, or as you trim something, so that the middle part of it comes to resemble the head of the rod: and let the opening fall in the middle according to what is necessary.
And beware for yourself during your operation from blood flow.
For indeed it happens many times.
So position something alongside him to stop the bleeding, and care for the wound until it heals.
About things that happen on the foreskin and head of the rod, and corruption, blackening, and sticking.
Chapter 56.
Many such Albarthes occur on the rod, and it is a prominence of foul flesh.
And some of these are malignant, and some are not.
So you should not suspend the non-malignant one with a thin hook, and cut it off until you have cleansed it entirely.
Then place a poultice immersed in Egyptian ointment over it. Then care for the same thing after that with diaphrenic ointment, until it heals.
What if the Albarth is malignant, of foul color, then you should administer a cautery to it after its incision and its burning.
If however the Albather is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised captive, and it is a part of the Albather between the foreskin and that which lies outside: then you should remove the Albather that is inside first, until it has consolidated, then cure it externally: for when you are healing it at the same time, the foreskin does not secure itself but rather protrudes.
And also in the testicles and foreskin, blackness and corruption occur.
Therefore, you should clean out entirely what is already blackened, and what wants to be corrupted, or is already corrupted.
Then draw a line on top of it with honey that has been mixed with ground almond meal and the crushed leaves of plantain.
Then cure that thing with the remaining treatment until it heals.
If, however, bleeding occurs, then apply a cautery with lunar caustic, in this shape.
A cautery is useful for two simultaneous dispositions, namely for bleeding and an ulcer when it becomes corrupted.
If the tip of the penis becomes gangrenous and is destroyed within an hour: then you should insert a lead tube into the urethra of the penis so that the patient may urinate onto it.
In the sticking of the foreskin with the head of the penis, and this sticking indeed does not occur unless in one whose foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required over it: and sometimes sticking occurs due to a wound or abscess: therefore you should scrape it off with a blunt spatula until the ligament breaks and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
What if it is difficult to discern these things exactly, then you should scrape off something from the head of the penis and from the foreskin.
Because the foreskin when it is thin may be pierced quickly due to its own subtlety.
Then separate the foreskin and the head of the penis with a fine linen cloth that has already been soaked in cold water, so that they do not stick together again.
Then treat it with a tincture of wine until it is consolidated. About the purification and cure of infants who have had something happen to them by mistake.
Chapter 57.
Circumcision is not the breaking of continuity, like other wounds: however, since it is our work, by our will, and its use is specifically for children, it is necessary that we mark in this operation a better sign and a way leading to salvation that is easier.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books, because they do not use it in their laws, and we have acquired it only through experience.
Because I have found that most surgeons and bloodletters use purification by circumcision with a lancet and forceps: and they use bandages tied with thread, and incisions made with a claw.
And I myself have already tested all these methods and have not found a better purification with forceps and binding with thread.
Because in the purification with a lancet, the skin often escapes.
Because the skin of the foreskin has two layers: therefore perhaps the upper layer is cut and the lower layer remains: it is compelled therefore to make an incision to cut through the other one, and to suffer future pain.
And with the purification that is done by hand, namely, manual, which surgeons use, the cutting of the edge of the male member does not secure itself: because it may possibly enter into its orifice.
In the purification with a claw, perhaps the iron will slip and ruin your operation: and the skin of the child is naturally short-lived, and many are born in such a way that they do not need purification: and I have already seen this.
The trial of mundification by scraping with forceps and ligating with a thread has shown me to be good: because the forceps are proportional to the incision: therefore, since the sharpness which is above is like the sharpness which is below.
When therefore you place your hand, the two sharpnesses are proportioned, and they incise according to one operation at one time; and a compression is made similar in figure, containing the cutting of the beard from every part, with which there falls no error whatever.
And the proper method of operation is, that you make him think, especially a boy, if he is one of those who understand a little, that you are not doing it, unless you tie the thread only in his beard; and then let him go until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be glad in every possible way that you can, because he receives his understanding.
Then insert your hand into his beard, and blow into it, and pull it upwards until the head of the beard comes out.
Then clean off what has accumulated on it.
Then tie the marked place with a doubled thread.
After that, tie a little lower down another knot in order. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower knot, retaining it well, and cut between the two knots.
Then lift up the cut beard quickly and pull out the head of the beard.
Then let the blood flow slowly (for it is better) and put powder on top: and above the powder, a cloth spread with the yolk of a rosy egg decocted in rose water, beaten with rose oil. Recent good: and let him be on it until another day: and care for it with the remaining cure, until he is healed.
However, the form of a lancet for cleansing is this.
Let the two edges be blunt, and let them converge: lest a branch of the handle protrude from them; and let the length of the two sharp parts be equal to the length of two equally matched arms.
A mistake indeed falls in cleansing is this: because perhaps the inner skin altogether escapes, or part of it at the incision. Therefore, it is necessary for you to stretch it from your hour with your finger before the blistering of the place; and cut it according to equality.
What if you are not able to hold it with your finger, then pull it out with a forceps and cut it.
But if three days have passed and an inflamed swelling remains under the skin's fold, then let it be, until the apostema is cooled and excoriated with ease, and cut it according to how it is prepared for you; and beware of the top of the fold.
For it will not harm him.
Therefore, treat it with the powder that consolidates a wound from the powders we narrated in our treatise on powders; and if it is cut off above the skin's measure, and flows upwards, it will not harm him either.
Therefore, treat it with what we said, until he is healed.
Of the Extraction of a retained Vein in the Wound.
Chapter 58.
The retention of a vein in the wound is caused by an obstruction made from stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or new flesh, and similar things to those which we mentioned in the division of modes of cure.
And if the vein is not loosened and you see the retention of it to be due to a stone which is already in the wound's throat; then it is necessary that he should lie weak on his knees, curved.
Then let his feet be placed on top of his back, and let him stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back, and let the sick person breathe as deeply as possible.
Therefore, it is necessary to squeeze the bladder with the help of a catheter for the removal of the stone at the backside: which is why the vesicle is emptied.
But if it does not pass with what we have said and the matter becomes pressing against the patient: then it is necessary to administer his extraction with an instrument called a syringe, whose shape is as follows. It should be made of silver, and be thin, smooth, concave, like the quill of a bird in subtlety of radius, long similar to the palm of one and a half hands: and its nozzle should be thin at its tip.
And the method of exiting the vesicle through it is as follows. Take a doubled thread and tie a good knot at its end with wool or cotton; and then insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: and cut off any excess wool with scissors, but gently insert the thread into the nozzle with care, just like an arrow.
Then grease the syringe with oil or butter and an egg white; and make the patient sit down on a seat, and have him catheterize, and himself hold the rod with oily moist things, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then gently insert the syringe into the rod until it reaches the root of the rod.
Then double it back on itself above the navel. Then push the syringe into it until it reaches the Vesica, and let the patient feel that he has reached an empty space: and this is not done in this order unless the passage through which it goes is twisted.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually.
For the vesicle will follow the wool.
Then take it out and make the urethra flow through the urinary canal. And repeat the syringe and do not stop doing that until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief. On the quality of catheterizing the bladder with a Clepsydra.
Chapter 59.
For it is mute, that is, closed.
And on this instrument there are three holes, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
And the hollowed-out place where what drives it is located should be proportionate to the quantity that is needed without addition, until when something is drawn out with it from moist substances and attracted; and when driven, it should push out far away: just as a Clepsydra does, which pours forth Greek fire in war against Mars.
So when you want to pour fluids into the bladder, insert the tip of the Clepsydra into the fluid and draw it out with what drives it upwards, for the fluid is drawn into the hollowed-out part of the Clepsydra. Then insert its tip into the urethra, according to what we have described in the syringe.
Then drive the fluid with what drives it, and that fluid will immediately reach the bladder, so that the patient will feel it. The shape of the catheter, subtle, through which the bladder is catheterized.
Then insert a strong thread into those perforations, as they are turned. Then gather the circle together like one gathers an alms-bag; after which you put into it what you wish from moist things, and oils, and waters.
Then bind it in an instrument; and do with it as you did with the urethra using your hand, until the moisture reaches the urethra.
 On the Extraction of a Stone.
Chapter 60. We have already spoken about the division of types of stones, and their cure with medicines; and I said the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys, and one in the bladder, and signs of all that: and I said about a stone where operation is done by hand and section: and it is truly a stone generated in the bladder: and one that is lodged in the penis: and I am telling this with clear exposition and abridgment.
I say therefore, that a stone generated in the bladder, happens most often to boys.
And from its signs is that the urine flows out of the bladder like water in its subtlety; and appears in it white sand, and the patient rubs his penis and labors with it, and hangs around often. Then it is raised and flows out with him, along with diarrhea in many of them.
And it is easy healing of children, as long as they reach fourteen years.
And it is difficult in the elderly.
But in young men it is intermediate, in that it is between the two: and if the stone is larger, healing is easier; and if small, its cure is on the contrary.
Therefore, when we come to the healing, it is necessary at first that we cleanse the sick person with a purgative, which removes all the dung that is in his intestines: for it often prevents the discovery of the Stone during the investigation. Then let the sick person be taken with his feet and shaken and moved towards the lower parts: so that the Stone may descend to the depth of the bladder or pass from a high place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be under the buttocks of himself, so that the bladder may be entirely sloping towards the lower parts.
Then search for him and touch him externally.
If you then feel the Stone in place, hasten immediately with a cut above it.
And if it does not fall entirely under your touch, then it is necessary that you wipe the pointing finger with oil from the left hand of yours, if the sick person is a child; or the middle finger if he is a complete young man: and insert it into his anus, and search for the Stone until it stays under your finger: and turn it gradually towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger and push it towards the outside against the place where you wish to make an incision; and instruct your assistant to press on the bladder with his hand, and instruct another assistant to stretch out the testicles with his right hand upwards: and with his other hand remove the skin that is under the testicles in the part near the place where the incision is.
Then insert the spatula, which has this form.
And find in it what is between the anus and testicles, not in the middle, on the left side of the navel: and let the incision be above this stone, and your finger be in the anus: and make the incision transverse, so that it is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the possible egress of the stone from there not greater.
Perhaps indeed your finger, which is in the anus, compresses the Stone at the incision and it emerges without difficulty.
And know that from the Stone there is one which has angles and edges, wherefore its egress becomes difficult because of that.
And from it is a smooth one, similar to a gland, and round: and its egress is easy.
Therefore, the one with angles and edges, add a notch to it.
But if it does not emerge thus, then you should either shape it above, or bind it above with a cord, whose end is like the Moon which binds over the Stone and does not escape from it: or as you insert under it a thin instrument, curved at its extremity.
But if you cannot shape it above, then enlarge the hole a little bit.
That if something prevents you from proceeding because of blood, cut it off with a saw.
If however the Stone is more than one, then push the first large one to the mouth of the bladder.
Then cut above it.
After that, push the small one behind it: and do similarly if there are more than two.
That if it is very large, then ignorance is to cut above it with a great incision.
Because it happens to a weak person that one of two things occurs, either he will die or frequent dripping of urine befalls him: therefore, because the place is not consolidated at all.
But administer its expulsion until it goes out: or shape the fracture with forceps, until you extract it piece by piece.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with balm, and aloe, and dragon's blood; and bind it tightly, and place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water on top of it, that the hot apostema may be assuaged.
Then prop the patient's weak person against his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
When you have loosened it, smear the place with water and much oil.
Then care for him with diaphanict ointment and basilic ointment until he is healed.
But if it happens that a hot apostema is added to the wound, and one of corrosion, and similar things: just as if the blood should congeal in the stomach, and urine should be prevented from flowing therefrom; and this is known by the emission of blood with urine.
Therefore introduce your finger into the wound and extract that blood.
For if it remains, it provokes the stomach to corruption and the putrefaction of its contents.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, and water, and salt; and apply every kind of dressing that is suitable for healing until he is healed.
And it is necessary during the whole process of healing that you bind two bandages around the hips, and apply them together, as a cause for the medicines that are placed on the place.
For if the stone is small and is situated in the pathway of the urethra, and is fixed there, and prevents the flow of urine: then care for him with what I have mentioned before until you arrive at the point of cutting.
For many times you will be excused from cutting through this cure, for I myself have already tried it. And it is, that you take a perforator made of iron, which has this shape, namely a triangular point, sharp and fixed in wood.
Then take a thread and tie it with him to a staff under a stone so that he does not go back to his urine.
Then insert the piercing instrument into the staff with ease until it reaches the Perforator at the stone; and gradually turn the Perforator with your hand on the stone, and grind away its perforation until you make it penetrate from the other side.
The urine is immediately released.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outer part of the staff.
For it breaks apart and emerges with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not prepared for you because of something that prevents it from happening with him: then tie a thread under the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then cut on top of the stone in the staff between the two ties.
Then pull it out.
After that, untie the knot and cleanse the frozen blood which forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread under the stone except that the skin does not go back to its original place and cover the wound: and the other thread above, except that when you untie the thread after the stone has come out, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound. And because of this, it is necessary for you to do so when you tie the thread above, to lift the skin upwards so that it returns to its complement and covers the wound, as we said.
On the Extraction of a Stone in Women.
Chapter 61.
A Stone is formed in women to a small extent.
But if a stone occurs in any of them, then the cure is difficult and is hindered by many causes.
One of these is that perhaps the woman is a virgin. And the second is because you do not find a woman who will uncover herself to the doctor when she is chaste or has husbands.
The third reason is that you do not find a woman well-versed in this art, especially an operation with hand.
And the fourth reason is the distance from the stone's place: wherefore it needs a deep incision, and there is fear.
But if necessity compels you to do that, then it is necessary for you to take a woman doctor, well-versed; and one is hard to find.
If you do not find those, then seek a chaste and subtle doctor, or a well-educated woman obstetrician knowledgeable about women's affairs, or a woman who is skilled in this art: so arrange for her to be present, and especially instruct her to do everything that you have ordered from her regarding the stone. Firstly, that which is first, to see if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary for her to insert her finger into his anus and search for the stone.
If then she finds it, she should grasp it under her finger and then instruct the obstetrician to insert her finger into the woman's vulva, and search for the stone after placing her left hand on the bladder and compressing it with a good compression. If then she finds the stone, it is necessary for her to move it gradually from the bladder opening down to the lower parts with all her strength, until she reaches its root in the hip socket.
Then she should cut above it at the opposite middle of the vulva at the root of the hip socket, from whatever side is prepared for her, and feel the stone in that part: and her finger should not be removed from the stone, grasping under it: and the incision should be small at first.
Then she should insert a reed above that incision.
If then she feels the stone, then she should add to the incision according to a proportionate measure of how much the stone protrudes from it.
And know that the kinds of stones are many. From these there is small and great, smooth and rough, long and rounded having branches.
Therefore know its kinds, so that it may signify to you through this above what you wish.
So then if blood overcomes you, add to the place zegi pounded and hold it for one hour until the bleeding ceases.
What if the flow of blood overcomes you, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from an artery that has been cut: then put powder on the place, and bind it with a bandage decently tight: and do not move that, and let go the stone, and do not pull it out.
Perhaps indeed the weak woman will die.
Then care for the wound.
When then the sharpness of blood has subsided after days, and the place has putrified, then return to your operation until the stone goes out.
Of the cutting above a watery hernia.
Chapter 62.
A watery hernia is not, except for the gathering of moisture in the white scrotal sac, which is under the containing skin of the scrotum containing an egg: and it is called a scrotum. And sometimes it is in its own sac, which nature has prepared for itself in the part of the scrotum containing an egg, until it putrefies: which is another egg, and it is the skin of the scrotum between the white scrotal sac, which we said: and that does not happen except rarely.
And the generation of this hernia is from weakness which occurs in the testicles: wherefore this material flows down to them.
And sometimes it happens that a blow falls upon the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. For either its color is inclined towards yellowish, or it is red from blood, or it is dark and filthy, or it is white and watery, and that which is more.
For if it is in the white phlegm which we mentioned, then the swelling is round and about as long as an egg figure: and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture surrounds it from all parts.
And if there is moisture in its own sheath, then the swelling is round with a part like an egg, and on account of this man supposes that it is another egg.
And if there is moisture between the skin of the testicles and the white phlegm, then it falls under sensation.
When therefore you wish to know the color of the moisture, then inspect the color of the moisture on the swelling with a square cloth, whose shape has preceded.
Accordingly, then, judge about that which is between the two, according to what appears in the track of the square cloth.
When therefore we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary for you to warn the sick person that if possible it can be done on him, and you see his body full.
Then a brick or stone shall be placed upon his back over a high surface, and many cloths shall be put underneath it.
Then sit you on the left side of him, and command your assistant to sit on his right side, who shall stretch out his rod to one or two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part of the navel.
Then take a broad cloth and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle to the length, until near the abdomen: and make a cut according to the straight line that divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white phlegm surrounding; and scrape off the scab and observe whether there is any bleeding, lest you cut too deeply. And be careful with your excoriation on the part that hangs down like an egg more: and examine carefully with the excoriation according to the quantity that you can manage.
Then pierce the siphon full of water with a wide piercing and draw out all the water. Then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps, and stretch the siphon upwards, and do not touch the skin covering the testicles; and cut the siphon as is possible for you to cut it, either entirely or in fragments, especially its subtle side.
For if you do not examine it carefully, there is no security in the incision, and the water will flow back.
But if the egg proceeds externally from its own skin during your operation: then when you have completed the incision of the siphon, put it back.
Then bring together the two lips of the skin covering the testicles with a suture.
Then take care of it as you would other wounds, until it heals.
And if you find a corrupted egg from another blackness, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels, which are the suspensors, fearing a flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with its suspensor, and draw out the egg; afterwards take care of it as we have said.
If however water is gathered in two parts, then you will know that there are two branches: therefore cut off the other part equally as you did with the first one.
And if it seems good to you, that the operation be one, then do so; afterwards wipe away the blood.
And insert into the incisions a linen cloth soaked in oil or rose oil; and put another cloth which you had submerged in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles and the navel: and place above pannus duplex, and they are poultices; and bind them above with a bandage, which has six by this form.
Then two cloths are taken, and anointed, and filled with the crimsoned linen, according to this likeness: and let the ends be those which press from the navel or damp wool; and let them be gathered together with a tight binding in the loins: and one end shall take up over the anus as far as the back, and the second shall take up to the part of the breast: and two other ends above two lower hipbones, and two other ends above two groin areas, and let the whole bandage be gathered together in the loins.
And when this vein is artificially treated with a cauterizer at the site of the section with iron: and it is, as you take a cauterizing knife, fine and subtle, and cut with it the skin of the testicles; and it is ignited, according to what we have narrated: until when the white scab containing water is uncovered: then take the cauterizer, in this form.
Are assimilated Greek letters.
Then pierce with it that scab and it is ignited until all moisture has gone out.
Then stretch the scab with a hook and scrape it off with a fine burning cauterizer, and cut into it as far as you can until you have removed all of it.
And beware that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is more salubrious and longer-lasting from bleeding, and better than an operation with incision.
If, however, you encounter contrary symptoms in the hour of incision, or in the hour of cauterization, a warm abscess or bleeding, or something else: then it is necessary that you treat what causes contrariety to you from that with the cure that suits it, according to what has been mentioned beforehand.
If, however, the patient is timid and does not look forward to this operation because of his own fearfulness: then administer a perforation according to what I narrate it: and it is.
When you are certain in yourself about what we have said concerning the signs, that this vein is watery: then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat.
Then pierce the abscess at its lower part with a broad spatula: and place the perforation according to the length of the body, and make the opening wide enough until all the water flows out.
Then place a poultice on the spot, and bind it tight, and let it be until the remaining water flows out: then care for it until the wound heals.
If however contrariety is present as water flows out at the hour you perforate it; and this is not so unless because a white cloth makes contrariety in the orifice of the wound, and prevents the exit of water: then it is necessary to put in the wound either a feather or an instrument with which water is drawn off, whose shape has preceded: or add a little in the operation of the wound.
And know that the water returns and accumulates after six months, or around those times.
When it accumulates, then it is pierced through in the same manner, and the sick person will pass their days.
Of the treatment of fatty warts.
Chapter 63.
Know that in the operation on this fatty wart, there is fear leading to harm in many dispositions.
Therefore it seems to me that its removal would be beneficial for healing from it.
And I am recalling the operation on it and the appearance of a pustule.
I say therefore that many pustules occur in bodies from which testicles are composed; and this happens for many reasons, namely. Or from an acute or sharp surplus which flows to the testicles.
Or from striking.
And the appearance of the pustule is according to the complexion of the body, and there is no pain found in it; and it is a grave pustule.
And perhaps it is a stone-like pustule, whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it happens from the constriction of arteries and their swelling; as has been recalled earlier; or from the swelling of veins.
What is caused by them from the constriction of arteries, is recognized by the appearance of the pustule, when you compress it with your fingers.
And it's not necessary to touch it at all.
What is done from inflating veins is not scattered by compression with fingers. And it is also possible to make an incision on this type of case and on the remaining flesh; and it is, as one cuts the skin of testicles.
Then stretch the scrotum upwards and remove it with a white cloth: and free the suspensory ligament from the pubic bone, and tie the vas: and cut the suspensory ligament after you have freed it from all parts of the scrotum.
If therefore the scrotum is consolidated with those natural flesh, then it is necessary that you remove the scrotum and cut it. And if there is an adhesion between something from the spermatic cord or in what is between the vas: then it is necessary that you free all that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
But if there is a growth of flesh on the back of the adhesion: then it is necessary that you cut all of it and remove the scrotum, as we have said. When therefore your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool dipped in rose oil and wine: afterwards take care of it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
Of the Care for Stones which are with Vitriol.
Chapter 64.
Vitiol is a sort of enveloping apostema resembling a boil, with the softening of the testicles; and it becomes difficult over an infirm person's movement and exercise, and walking.
And in the cure of this illness is from fear, because of what was mentioned before as a reminder.
But it is necessary that we say how to operate on it according to what the first ones did. I say therefore, that you should make the infirm person sit on a raised seat.
Then cut with a sharp-bladed knife, making a cross-section in the direction of the vessels, until the vessels are exposed.
Then scrape away from all sides, just as we told you to do with the arteries that are in times.
Then cut them in a straight section in the middle, following the length of the body, and remove what accumulates from corrupted purulent humors.
Then care for the wound with the treatment of other wounds in which pus is to be generated, so that the vessels which nourish one testicle may fall.
For it is not bad by that.
But if the ligature occurs in all the vessels, then it is necessary to remove the testicles with the vessels: so that the ovum may not be deprived of nutrition because of the incision, and waste away or become gangrenous, and may not be helpful along with them.
 On the care of Intestinal Strangulations. Chapter 65.
Therefore, the intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle.
And this rupture is either from the siphacus or its extension.
And these two kinds occur due to many causes. Or from a blow. Or by a fall. Or from noise. Or from the elevation of a heavy object and similar things.
And a sign is when it is from an extension of the spleen.
It occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly: it is an equal apostema towards the deep parts: therefore, because the spleen compresses the intestine.
And a sign of it is when it occurs from the section of the spleen, because it makes occur suddenly at its beginning a violent pain: and it is a different apostema, appearing near the skin: and that is due to the exit of the intestine and its course towards the exterior of the spleen.
And sometimes it exits with the intestine wrapped around it: and this is called Intestinal Flesching and Wrapping: and sometimes it occurs with inflammation.
And sometimes it runs into the intestine and retains excrement there: and it is with him a deathly affliction for the sick: because it makes occur a bad pain, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this disease's symptoms with iron there is fear: wherefore it is necessary to beware of accidents in it.
And the method of treatment is that you should tell the patient to reduce his intestine by hand into the inner recesses of his own swelling, if it obeys.
Then have him lie back on his back with his neck between your hands and elevate his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin to the top and cut off the skin of the testicles entirely along its length.
Then place in the two lips of the incision two hooks, according to your need to open up the incision with them: and the incision should be so that it is possible for an egg to come out of it.
Then remove the skin of the spleen and what is under the skin of the testicles, until when the white part of the spleen is uncovered, hard all around: then insert your index finger into it, between the testicle and the white part of the spleen, that which is under the skin of the belly and also with it the adhesion that is in the posterior part of the belly.
Then move with your right hand to the interior of the skin of the testicles: and as you do this stretch a white cloth upwards with your left hand: and lift the egg with the cloth to the part of the incision: and instruct the assistant to lift the egg upwards: and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind when the solution is complete.
And search with your fingers to see if nothing from the intestine is twisted into the white cloth hard.
But if you find something of that sort, then push it downwards into the lower belly.
Then take a needle with a thick thread, made from ten threads, and insert it into the last part of the cloth, that is, the skin which follows the section, under the scrotal skin that follows the incision: then cut off the ends that project out of the thread until there are four threads.
Then take some of them and place them on top of the others in a figure like a cross: and tie with them the white cloth, as we said, because it is under the scrotal skin tied strongly, until nothing from the vessels that nourish them can reach them: so that no hot abscess may occur.
And put another ligature outside the first ligature, two fingers' breadth away from it.
And after these two ligatures let go from the white cloth, that is under the scrotal skin, as much as a finger's length: and cut off the rest all around in a circular shape, and remove the egg.
Then cut off at the lower part of the skin of the testicles with a section, from which blood and pus flow out: just as we have previously described.
Then apply a lint soaked in oil to the wound: and apply the ligature as we have described.
And sometimes the white cloth that we mentioned is cauterized after its incision, in fear of blood flow.
That often happens.
And let go of the ligament until it falls by itself.
But if its fall is delayed, then let it be fomented with warm water; and place over it what we mentioned, until it falls.
Then take care of the wound with the rest of the treatment for wounds, until it is healed.
About Abscesses.
Chapter Sixty-Six.
In this abscess I have not seen anyone attempt to treat it with iron.
And the first ones indeed said that it happens just as we narrated in the abscess that is with Vine.
Which is to tie the vessels after cutting them above with ease below: then cut in the middle and cure it afterwards with what opens it up, until the vessels fall; and cure the wound, as we said, until it heals.
About the Disruption that occurs in Groins.
Chapter Sixty-Seven.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we said, and the swelling appears and does not descend to the testicles; and if it does descend, it is little and returns in all hours: but if prolonged with time, an opening is added in the scrotum, until the intestines descend into the scrotum.
And this happens from the stretching of the scrotum, which is in the groin, as we said.
Which is because the scrotum stretches: then it becomes soft and an abscess forms, and swells.
And its cure is with a cautery, just as its preceding narrative said.
And sometimes it is cured with iron, according to this method: and it is, that the patient lies on his back between your hands.
Then cut the swollen abscess and swelling of the rupture, cutting through its width, according to the size of three fingers.
Then bind the alsifak and that which is under the skin until what is under the skin is revealed, which follows the white alsifak.
Then take a needle and place it on top of the prominent part from the alsifak, and press it deep into the belly.
Then bind two prominent parts above the extremity of the needle from the alsifak, and sew one to another with a stitch: then pull out the extremity of the needle.
And do not cut the alsifak entirely, nor stretch out a wound, nor anything else, as I have instructed you to know in the cure of intestines. Then care for that with wound treatment.
When therefore you cut the threads, clean it up and restore the wound until it is consolidated.
For sisach is contracted and does not have a prominent rupture.
And cauterization is better here: since it is closer to health.
 On the softening of scrotal skin.
Chapter 68.
The skin of the scrotum is often softened in some people, because of which the flesh between them becomes soft and its appearance becomes foul.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is asked to cure this, to make the sick person lie on his back and to cut off the entire softened skin over the natural skin. Then gather two lips together with a stitch: and if you wish, either on the surface of the softened skin three stitches or four, and make it firm with a stitch.
Then care for the wound with wound treatment until it heals and the threads fall away.
 On Castration.
Chapter 69.
Know that castration is excommunicated in our law and for that reason it would have been permitted to me not to remember it in my book, and it is not necessary to mention it except for two methods.
One of them is that it should be so in medical science when asked about it: and to know its cure for him who suffered from it.
And another method is that we often need the castration of certain animals for our own benefit through them, such as sheep, goats, and cats, and similar animals.
I say therefore that castration is done in two ways. Or through cutting.
Or through splitting and cutting.
In that which is done through cutting, the method of operation is: to make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles become soft and relaxed, and hang down; then cut them off with your hand until they dissolve and do not appear under touch.
In castration by splitting and cutting, it is necessary to hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
And this method of castration is better than the one that is done by cutting: because cutting perhaps leaves something behind from the testicles, so the animal desires copulation.
Then take care of the wound until it heals.
About the Cure for Hermaphrodites in Two Ways.
Chapter 70.
A hermaphrodite from men is according to two ways.
One of them is, because it appears in that which follows the space, or in the skin of the testicles, in that which is between two testicles, a figure resembling a woman's vulva, with hair: and sometimes urine flows from that which is in the skin of the testicles.
In women, however, there is one species, and it is the vulva of a woman over the pelvis just like the small testicles of a man entirely, protruding to the exterior: of which one is like the priapus of a man, and two are like two testicles.
And the cure of three species, two from men and one from women, is: because it is necessary to cut off the added flesh until the impression of them departs.
Then the care is by the same treatment as for other wounds.
But in the second species of men from which urine comes out, which is on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation nor its cure at all.
Of the cutting of the Tentigins and the prominent flesh in the vulvas of women.
Chapter 71.
The Tentigo perhaps is added to the natural part until it becomes foul and its appearance is loathsome: and sometimes it is magnified in certain women so much that it expands like in men, and reaches as far as copulation.
Therefore you should hold the excess of the Tentigo with your hand or with a hook, and cut it off: and do not stop cutting until you reach the root, especially in the deep part, so that there may not be a flow of blood.
Then the care is by the same treatment as for wounds, until it heals.
But the flesh that grows is the flesh that arises in the maternal orifice, until it fills it: and perhaps it emerges to the exterior according to the likeness of a tail: and because of this, some people call the first stage of this condition "caudal suffering".
Therefore you should cut it off like you would the Tentigo and treat it until it heals.
Of the cure of the Alratica, which is the unperforated vulva of a woman.
Chapter 72.
The wound of a woman is not pierced, or it has a small opening.
And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is one that preceded the illness; and it indeed occurs either from flesh added to nature, or from thin, or from thick: and it occurs either in the depth of the womb, or in its sides, or in its upper or lower part: and it prevents coitus and impregnation, and childbirth, and perhaps prevents menstruation.
And knowledge of it is obtained by the sight of the midwife, if there appears to be an obstruction nearby.
But if it is not apparent, then search for it with your fingers or with a probe.
But if the obstruction is from thin tissue and is near two lips, then hasten and break it open.
And it is, that you place a poultice over the two lips.
Then place your fingers of both hands simultaneously, and let the woman be on her back with her legs spread apart.
Then stretch out the two lips with force, until the thin tissue is broken and the obstruction opens up.
Then take a linen cloth, and soak it in oil, and place it on the spot; and let the woman lie each day, so that the place may not harden otherwise.
But if the tissue is thick and coarse, then it is necessary to cut it with a spatula like a leaf of myrtle.
But if the obstruction is from flesh that has grown, then suspend it with a hook and cut it off: and be with medicines that will stop the bleeding without biting, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and agaric gathered with the white of an egg.
Then administer a catheter made of broad lead, so that the wound does not quickly become solidified; keep it for several days: and then apply linen made from dry flax, and then take care of the remaining treatment until it is healed.
And when flesh is born in the womb of other births: it is necessary therefore that they are cut according to this manner: while there is no cancerous apostema, for a cancerous apostema that is in the womb, is not at all opposed with iron.
On the care of hemorrhoids, Athelis and Bothroes in the lips of women.
Head 73.
Hemorrhoids indeed are the opening of the venous openings, until much blood flows out of them continuously.
When therefore hemorrhoids become old, they become thickened; and I have already said in the division of their kinds and signs: and I will say here which receive cure from them, and which do not.
I say therefore that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb and do not appear to the sense: then there is no cure for it with iron.
But those which are on the edge of the opening of the womb and above which sense falls, are those that can be cured.
It is necessary therefore that you insert the woman into a cold house.
Then stretch Athelis with forceps or with a rough cloth, and cut them off from their roots.
Then sprinkle powder on them near the flow of blood from one cut-up powders without biting: such as acacia, dragon's blood, and thyme, and similar things.
Then push her feet against the wall for an hour.
Afterwards, put her into cold water.
For if the flow of blood persists, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, and the bark of pomegranates, and cockerels, and similar things.
Then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice with it on her back.
If therefore the blood is cut off with that, it is good; and if not, make the back ventous and breast-like, without scarification.
Then take wool and submerge it in tarragon syrup, or sycamore maple sap, or the sap of the almond tree, that is, aniseed wine from Pontus, and make it stick to the wound.
When therefore the swelling subsides, then take care of the place with ointments until it heals.
Red barberry is similar to the heads of aloe and has a rough appearance.
Therefore you must cut away what appears from it, as I said before equally in the same way: and take care of it until it heals.
 On the perforation of the exit wound that occurs in the womb.
Chapter 74.
Many kinds of swellings occur in the womb, such as cancer, and stone-like swelling, and ulcers, and thickened, and whitlowed, that is, herpes, abscesses, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and gangrenous swellings, and the like.
And I myself have already said all these diseases and their kinds, and the signs of each one, and their cures in a division: it is necessary for me to say in this treatise about the warm swelling that occurs in the womb, when it results from swellings that gather pus, and you wish to know how it opens with an iron.
Therefore you must consider.
Then if the pain of the swelling in its inception is sharp with percussion and heat and fever: and you see it redden: if the sensation falls upon it, then do not hasten with its perforation: and take care of it with it as it helps for maturation, until when the sharpness of the accidents subsides.
Then you should make the woman sit on a stool that has two armrests, and she will recline, or be supported on her back, and gather her feet towards the lower part of her belly: and her hips should be spread apart, and place her arms under her knees, and bind each one with a suitable ligament to it.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the maternal orifice is opened.
Whose form comes into those that are after.
And it is necessary when you wish to administer this instrument, that you should thrust it with a deep point into the woman's womb: so that nothing enters from the instrument which exceeds the depth of the womb and hurts the sick woman.
But if the instrument is more than the depth, then it is necessary to place small pads above the covering of the womb's depth: so that the entire instrument may not enter into the depth of the womb; and it is necessary to place a whirlpool which runs in the instrument from the upper side: and to hold the instrument and to turn back the servant of the whirlpool, until the depth of the womb is opened.
When therefore the exit appears and is touched by hand, and it is soft and gentle: then it is necessary to cut it at its head with a broad spatula.
When therefore the discharge is evacuated, then it is necessary to place a linen cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil, which has some adhesive property, into the wound; and place the cloth, and draw out the section in the depth of the womb.
And place it outside on the womb, and on the back a clean wool cloth soaked in water where mulberries have been boiled.
Then take care of it for two days with an ointment that is suitable for it, until it heals.
And when the womb and wound are washed, so that it is cleansed with water and honey; then with water in which lily root or long aristolochia has been boiled; then return to the ointment.
Which if the wound is hidden inside the womb, then it is necessary to refrain from its cure with iron, nay, rather cure it with what we said in the division.
Doctrines of Midwives, how they treat living embryos that have not naturally issued according to form.
Chapter 70.
It is necessary for a midwife to know first of all the natural form of childbirth.
Therefore, from these signs, it is known that when you see a woman compressed downwards, and she desires to breathe the air, and is relieved above what is above her in childbirth, and hastens the exit of the embryo; then you will know that this birth is according to natural form, and is its exit over its own head, and with the umbilical cord suspended or hanging from the navel. When you see these signs, then it is necessary to compress her belly so that the embryo may descend quickly.
But whoever has a birth other than this one is unnatural and unworthy of praise.
Because sometimes the fetus emerges over its own feet, and its body emerges before its head, and its feet and hands together, or one foot: or it emerges with its head and hands: or it emerges in the womb: and perhaps it turns over its neck, and similar things from unworthy forms.
Therefore it is necessary for a midwife to be prudent and subtle in all these things, and beware of error and deception: and I am showing every form from them, and how the nature is in each one, and let it be signified by that, and established upon it.
When the fetus emerges over its own head with its natural emergence, and that becomes strong on the woman, and childbirth becomes difficult for her, and you see her strength already weakened: then make her sit down on a seat, or have women hold her; and vapors warm her womb with fenugreek decoction, and with moist oils.
Then the midwife inserts a small spatula between her fingers and finds with it a second finger, and touches it with her own nail, until what is inside from moisture flows out: and presses the woman's womb, until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then it is necessary for the woman to be purged with fenugreek mucilage mixed with sesame oil.
Then instruct her after the purging to be pressed: and make her sneeze with a condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour.
For the fetus will immediately come out.
But if the fetus's hands go out first, it is necessary to pull them back slowly and carefully.
But if it does not obey on entering, then place the woman on a seat and lift her feet up: afterwards shake the seat on the ground: and hold the woman so that she may not fall with the concussion.
So if the hands do not come out and the fetus dies: then cut them off, and extract the remaining fetus: and bind its hand with a cloth, and extract it carefully: for it will come out.
The outcome of the embryo on its feet.
When the fetus emerges over its own feet, then it is necessary to push them upwards: afterwards turn the fetus slowly: and then straighten it.
Then take one of its feet and stretch it out slowly.
When they emerge up to the hips, then instruct her to be pressed, and make her sneeze with a condiment: it will come out, if God wills.
And if it does not come out as we have narrated, then pull the fetus back slowly until you place it in its natural shape.
For it will come out then with easy delivery.
But if it is prevented as we have narrated: then take from alum, and sesame oil, and dissolved gum: and strike the whole thing with good striking in a mortar: afterwards bind it with a woman's cloth, and put it below her belly.
Then make it sit in warm water until hypothermia occurs.
So when you see that its lower parts are already warmed, then make it inhale myrrh and support it.
When therefore the patient has taken the remedy for an hour, then make him sit on a stool.
Then make it sneeze and tighten its mouth and nose, and press the lower part of the stomach with a gentle compression.
For fire will immediately come out.
The exit of the fetus is above the knees and hands.
When it emerges in this form, then guide it by slowly inserting your hands.
Then the woman will be placed on her back over her own pillow, and her feet will hang down below, and she herself will lie on the bed, and wrap her hands around.
Then press gently upon her abdomen gradually.
Then remove what is under her feet from the bedclothes until she is prepared on the lower part.
What if the fetus does not emerge, then take hold of her feet and move them with a violent motion.
Then press what is above hypothermia gradually until the fetus ascends to the upper part.
Then insert your hands and gently guide the fetus, and instruct the woman to press down until the fetus emerges.
The exit of the fetus hanging laterally from the hands.
Guide it in returning her hands.
But if she is unable to return it, then lift up the woman and make her walk.
But if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed: and strike her legs with a violent shaking.
Then administer the ointment that you prepared from the pulps.
What if she receives the birth, then make her sit on a stool.
Then strive to reduce the hand and shape it evenly according to its natural form: and make the woman sneeze, and tell her to hold herself until she goes out.
The exit of the fetus over its mother's shoulder, with arms extended, and its face towards its mother's back.
It is necessary that the midwife hold the fetus in her hand, then slowly turn it around and shape it with ease.
When it is shaped, then place on its surface what we have described before, made from oil and mucus-like substances.
Then instruct her to move it slowly.
When you have done that, then make her sit on a seat and instruct her to lean to the right side.
Then instruct her to compress it: and make her sneeze as you have directed.
The exit of the prepared fetus over the side.
When it descends into the mother's opening in this way with a cord, then cut the cord with your finger until it is emptied of moisture.
If it is suspended over the face and neck of the fetus, then cut it from the navel: so that it may not remain and die.
Then push the fetus inward until you place it as needed: and instruct the woman to hold herself a few times: for it will emerge with ease.
The exit of twins or multiple fetuses.
You should know that twins are often born, and sometimes three, and four are born.
However, that is a rare occurrence and happens infrequently.
But five is a thing against nature, and they do not live at all; and it contains them, although they multiply, with one cord: and are separated by the membrane, distinguishing between each of theirs bound together by the navel.
And sometimes they come out as one fetus exits naturally, easily; and they come out in an unlamentable manner, just as we have narrated. And if some of them are difficult at birth and arrive at what we have described as unnatural forms, then cure them as we have narrated: and let the midwife be subtle, and do what she does with ease and slowness, and shape according to every form with that which is prepared for her by a guiding intelligence towards salvation.
Sometimes one forms in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten: and now it is verified with me, that a woman, having aborted, has expelled seven, and fifteen others, all formed.
What was done by the measurement of a glorious wise one.
Therefore this whole thing ought to be in the knowledge of an obstetrician. Perhaps it will arrive at that similar one: let him therefore oppose it with what is fitting.
A treatise on the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you have cared for a dead fetus according to what I said in the division of medicine, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use an operation with your hand, then you should consider.
So if the woman is of good virtue and is not troubled by any of those accidents from which one fears loss over her: then it is necessary that the woman be placed on a bed, on her back, and her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised: and let the midwife hold her from both sides, or tie her to the bed, so that her body may not be pulled apart during the extraction of the fetus.
Then anoint the opening of the uterus with moist oils mixed with high-quality mucus, fenugreek, and flaxseed. Then the midwife should grease her hand with these oils and mucilages; then she should insert it into the womb with ease.
Then she should seek out the place where she will insert the forceps from the child, and the suitable places for it.
So then consider whether the child is prepared to descend over its own head; then insert the forceps into its eyes, or on its neck, or mouth, or palate, or under its chin, or at the hollow of its shoulder, or in nearby places along the ribs, and beneath the hypochondriac region.
But if the descent is over its feet, then into the flank and middle of its ribs.
And it is necessary that she holds the forceps with her right hand: and places its curvature between the fingers of her left hand: and inserts it with ease, and sets the forceps in one of those places which we have mentioned, until she reaches the empty space.
Then it should be extended with equal extension, and not just straight out, but rather move towards all parts, so that its exit is eased: just as happens when a tooth is being extracted.
And it is necessary to soften the extension in between those things.
And if a part remains stuck, then the midwife should grease some fingers with oil and insert them from that side to turn back what is holding it.
If therefore a part of the fetus emerges, then the forceps should be changed to another place that is higher: do this until the entire fetus has emerged.
If therefore the arm emerges before others and it is not possible to reduce it because of its constriction: then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped over it.
Then take her out until she comes out entirely, cut her either at the joint of the foot or at the arm: and thus you should do on the other hand as well, and on both feet.
But if the head of the foetus is large, or constriction occurs at birth, or water is aggregated in its head: then you should insert a thorn-like spatula between the fingers and cut with it, and draw out the water: or dismember it with an instrument called Almisdac: whose form comes with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows.
He should do similarly if the foetus has a natural large head, then it is necessary to cut off the afterbirth: or draw it out with an Almisdac, as we said.
Then take up the bones with forceps.
What if the head comes out and is constricted at the nape of the neck: then it should be cut, until the moisture that is in the chest is discharged.
But if it does not unwind and does not yield to birth: then cut the head into pieces, as is possible for you.
What if the lower part of the belly is inflamed, or there is dropsy in it: then you should pierce it, until the moisture flows out of it.
If the foetus is above its feet, then its extraction is easy and its direction towards the maternal mouth is easy.
But if it is constricted at the belly or chest: then you should draw it out with the cloth you have wrapped around your hand: and cut the belly or chest until what is in them flows out.
But if the remaining limbs are removed and the head returns: then the Obstetrician should insert their left hand. If then the maternal mouth is open, then insert your hand into the depth of the uterus, and seek with it the head, and grasp it with your fingers up to the maternal mouth: then insert one hook or two hooks into it, and draw it out with that.
If the os matricis is constricted, due to a warm abscess that occurs to it; then it is not necessary to work on it, rather it is necessary at that time to administer an effusion of moist things, fatty substances: and apply poultices: and sit in waters that soften and moisten.
If a fetus is situated above its own side; then it is possible that it will be equalized: then administer what we said for a living fetus.
If it is not possible [to equalize], then cut away bit by bit and extract it.
And you must not leave anything of the afterbirth inside at all.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then administer what we said for warm abscesses that occur in wombs.
If bleeding occurs, then let it flow into cooling waters and administer the remaining treatment.
And I indeed have seen a woman whose womb had a dead fetus: then she became pregnant again with another child in its place, afterwards another fetus also died.
Therefore an abscess occurred to her after a long time in her navel, and it became inflamed until it was opened: and began to discharge pus.
I was therefore summoned to her treatment, and I treated her for a long time: and the wound did not consolidate.
So I placed on it some poultices of strong attraction, and it expelled from its place a bone.
Then a few days passed and another bone was expelled.
I therefore looked with wonder, since there is no bone in the womb.
I then thought, because they were from the bones of a dead fetus.
I then examined the wound and extracted many bones from her, the woman existing in better conditions than before; and now she has lived thus for a long time, and is discharging pus a little from the site.
And I did not strengthen this foreign thing here, except that it has knowledge and aid to what the medical craftsman administers with his hand for healing.
 On the shapes of necessary instruments in extracting a fetus.
Chapter 77.
Here is the shape of the Straightener, by which books are made equal, to which two handles are attached at the ends of two pieces of wood.
However, this handle should be thinner than the straightener; and it should be made either of ebony or of boxwood.
And the width of all wood should be about two fingers; and the edge of each of them is about one finger, and the length of each of them is a hand and a half: and in the middle of the two pieces of wood are two additions made of the same kind of wood, which are already fixed on both, whose length is half a hand and a little more: and the width of each of them is about two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mother's mouth, so that it may be opened with them when you revolve the two Handles.
The shape of the Handle by which the womb is opened.
Another form similar to it, thinner and lighter.
It should be made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the likeness of forceps.
However, at the end of it there should be two additions, like you see here above: and the length of each addition is about a hand: and the width of each is two fingers.
When therefore you wish to open the womb with this, then make the woman sit on a bed, her legs hanging down, with what is between her thighs open.
Then insert those two additions joined together into the womb; and you should be holding the lower end of the instrument below her buttocks.
Then open your hand with the instrument, just as you do with forceps, equally according to the quantity which you wish from opening the mouth of the matrix, until it makes whatever the midwife wants.
The form of the other kind of vertigo which the ancients called the "form impellent" by which the fetus is driven forth.
The form of the Almisdac whereby the small head is crushed. The form of the one-spired binder.
The form of the two-spired binder.
The form of forceps with saw-like teeth, by which the head of the fetus is crushed.
The form of a spatula having two ends for cutting off the head.
The form of two broad spatulas.
All these instruments are exercised and to the extent that their kinds multiply and are prepared with the craftsman, it is swifter in its operation and higher among people due to its quantity.
Therefore do not despise any of these instruments, but rather have them prepared with you.
For there is an inexcusable necessity for them.
Paragraph about the extraction of the second child.
Chapter 78.
When the second child is retained during childbirth, then it is necessary to hasten the weak woman, so that she retains her breath.
Then make her sneeze with condiments; and bind your hand over her mouth, and nose as well.
If it then emerges through this, it is good.
If not: then take a pot, and make a hole in its covering; and put into it herbs that open the mouth of the womb, such as calament, rue, and anise, and camomile, and sassafras, and cassia wood, and centaury. Take all these herbs, or some of them, and submerge them in water, and place them over fire.
Then place the reed's gall on top of the hole in the pot's covering, and put another end into the womb's mouth: and hold it until the vapor reaches the softening of the womb.
Then make her sneeze, as we said.
For indeed the Secundin will come out with ease.
But if it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then command the midwife to dip her hand in sesame oil or a white mucus. Then insert it into the womb, and seek with it the Secundina.
When she has found it, then take it and gradually stretch it out.
But if it is attached deep in the womb, then insert your hand according to what we have said, until you find the Secundina, and gradually pull it out straight, so that the womb does not fall apart due to strong attraction: rather, it should be turned with ease to the right and left sides: then add to the extent of the attraction.
Itself will then obey, and be preserved, and escape from attachment.
But if the womb's mouth is constricted, as we have already said: treat it with sneezing and from the medicine of the pot with herbs.
But if it does not come out with all that we have said, then beware lest you exhaust yourself over her in the repetition of extractions.
But it is necessary to tie what comes out to the mouth of the womb from her to the woman's hip.
Then anoint it with the four-ingredient ointment.
For this will corrupt and break down in her after a few days, and will be dissolved and come out.
But when it corrupts, a bad smell is raised from her to the stomach and head, and harms that sick person.
Therefore, suitable purgatives should be administered to him.
But some ancient doctors have already experimented with a purging mixture of watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument by which a woman is purged during retention of the Secondine and menses.
Let it be made from a similar glass or zircon: and let the broad end be placed over the fire: and let the purging be placed on the coals: let it hold her until that purging is consumed: and then do another.
Concerning the treatment of an unperforated hernia.
Chapter 79.
Many boys are born and their hernias are not perforated, which I have already covered with a thin membrane.
Therefore, the midwife must pierce that membrane with her finger; and if not, she must pierce it with a sharp spatula; and beware the arm, lest it touch him.
Then place linen soaked in wine and oil over him.
Then care for him with ointments until he is healed.
But if you fear it will obstruct, then place a leaden cannula in the opening and leave it for many days, and remove it when the boy wishes to excrete.
And also the obstruction of a hernia can occur through the consolidation of a wound or an abscess.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut open that consolidation, and then treat it with what we said about treatment and lead. Concerning the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Here is the translation:
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are called Nodation and Grossitude which occur near the anus outside or in a space of one part, and there is one fistula, or multiple.
When therefore that Nodation becomes old, it opens up, and watery white fluid, or fine pus, flows out of it.
And sometimes these fistulas are penetrating.
And there are fistulas among these when they are penetrating into the bladder and up to the urethra.
And there are fistulas among these that penetrate as far as the joint of the hip and as far as the knot of the tail.
From that which is known as a penetrating fistula up to the anus, whether it is penetrating or not, is when you insert your index finger into the anus and then insert a fine wire probe into the fistula from air or iron, when there is no bend.
But if there is a bend in it, then insert into it a fine probe of lead or a hair from the manes of horses until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
But if you don't feel it fully and nothing comes out of the opening through discharge or vomiting, nor a worm as I said: then you will know that it is not penetrating: therefore hasten to the treatment.
And when a fistula is penetrating as far as the bladder or up to the urethra: then its significance is the discharge of urine from it, and hindering this so that the place does not consolidate with medicine.
But if it is penetrating as far as the joint of the hip or up to the socket of the hip: then its sign is that the probe will reach there, unless there is a bend all the way to the bone; and the discovery of pain in the surrounding part, and that pus always comes out of it; and that treatment does not succeed in it, nor consolidates with ointment.
And in these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all. And the cure of them is toil and vanity for foolish doctors, who build upon it. But in those that are not penetrating and not old, there is hope of healing with a poultice. According to what I tell you, and I have already tried it: and thus the patient lies between your hands on their back; and lift up their legs as far as above the hips of theirs, and their hips be inclined towards their belly.
Then introduce a lead or air probe into the fistula, if it is twisted, until you know where it reaches.
But if the patient feels it near the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your index finger into the anus.
So then if you feel with your finger that it has already penetrated through to the other side and detected, besides what you feel between your finger and the skin or flesh, then certainly you know that it is penetrating: therefore do not trouble yourself in it, since there is no healing for it, as we said.
However, it is said that the flesh is healed in some people through medication and treatment, which promises relief. This is done by applying a burning cauter to the extent of the fistula, as previously described, and then inserting the burning cauter into the fistula until it reaches the anus.
Then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all the added, filtered flesh is charred and resembles the feathers of a bird's wing.
Then bind the charred flesh with bandages soaked in butter until it discharges; then treat it with ointments that promote flesh growth and consolidation.
If it is healed, it is good.
And if not, then it will not be healed with any other treatment at all.
And if the tract exits and does not reach as far as your finger which is in the anus, and is between it and the tract or a thick membrane of flesh, or even: and you see a fistula on the surface that follows the skin, then cut the skin at the beginning of the fistula, and you go cutting with the tract as it is in the fistula, until the incision reaches where the end of the tract ends, and the tract is freed and falls.
Then cleanse those filtered meats, which resemble a bird's feather, so that nothing remains from them.
But if blood overflows and prevents you from cutting those meats between yourself and the operation you are doing: then what is done is better, and hastens more to one's advantage, to cauterize it with fire or with sharp medicine.
Because the cautery with fire gathers good qualities, adds dryness to those added flesh, and brings about drying of blood and moisture.
Then care for that with bandages wrapped in lard or crushed calfskin, until the place discharges pus, and those charred flesh parts emerge into pus.
Then care for the wound with consolidating ointments, which generate hard flesh: and there are medicines in which are astringency and drying.
For when it is restored, then it is already healed: and you do not fear repetition. But if the fistula has reached as far as the depth of the anus, and is separated from the excess of the body: then insert your finger into the anus and explore with it.
So if you feel the tract, and between it and yourself is a membrane of fat or flesh, and it is near penetration: then there is no operation there, unless according to the way of faith and hope.
Which is one of the three ways it is administered there: or that you cauterize it as we said: or cut it, until you achieve its concavitation, so that it is possible for you to insert a linen and effect a cure nearby.
And do not proceed with a lot of cutting so that you don't cut the arm containing the vein, and there occurs on the weak person an exit of evacuation without consent. Then take care of that which we mentioned. Perhaps it will heal; or you should draw out the cloth, and cleanse it after you have cut it up to the vein, as we said, or with a sponge, or with another sharp instrument.
Then cleanse those filtered meats that are in the incision, as far as you can with probing.
Then try to restore the wound as a whole with the incision, and at the upper opening where it is consolidated; and there will remain an open fistula in the inner part of the anus, and it will be easier on the weak person.
And sometimes the fistula follows this shape: and it is when you insert the sponge into the fistula; and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with the skin and margin of the anus: then take the perforated end of the sponge, which is like an awl for preparing skins, according to this form.
And insert into it a thread wrapped around five threads, and about that size.
Then insert the sponge with the thread into the fistula, until you reach its hollow.
If therefore it is penetrating inside the margin of the anus nearby, then withdraw the thread from that hole: thus insert your finger into the anus, and draw out the end of the thread, and tie both ends together; and tighten one end a little, and leave it for one or two days: and as much as the thread goes into the flesh, tighten it well, until the flesh between the two ends of the thread falls away: then care for the wound until it consolidates and heals.
It is not necessary for you to do that because of your elbow so as not to cut it.
Then do with it as we said, until it heals.
The form of a spiny thorn that is stuck in a fistula, whose curvature is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not cut what is unnecessary, as you see.
Of the stitching of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows after they are cut: and of the care of fissures.
Chapter 81.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways.
Either they are inside the anus, similar to charcoal warts or prunes: or as if they were grape seeds themselves.
And from them are small ones and large ones: and blood flows from them always, and it is one, and there are many.
And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are for the most part few in moisture, from which clear water or a little blood flows with steady course: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the cure for what is inside the anus is, that you should have someone assist the patient to sit down: and let it be expressed, until it exits the anus, and appear to you as pure.
Therefore, also use a hook to suspend them: or hold them with your finger.
Then cut them at their roots.
But if they are not held in place by hooks, due to their moisture and softening: then take them with a rough cloth, or with a piece of coarse linen, and extract them with your fingers.
Then cut them, and powder some hot powders over them after the cutting, so that they may serve as a cauterizing agent.
Or cauterize them according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterization.
Then take care of them with the rest of their treatment until they are healed.
If the patient does not obey evacuations, then treat the patient with an enema containing a small amount of medication, so that they may be cleansed along with what is in their anus, and will soon obey evacuations when the patient expresses themselves.
But if the stones are external to the anus, then their fate is light, easy; and it is as if you were to take them with your finger, or take them with a hook, and cut them.
Then take care of them with what we said, until they are healed.
And whoever shrinks from cutting with iron, then it is necessary to apply their stitching according to this method.
Take the wound thread and insert it into the needle.
Then pull out the stone to the top, and make it pass through with the needle into its root on one side; wrap two ends of the thread around the lower part of the needle, and be transverse; and tie the stone tightly.
Then knot the thread, and pull out the needle.
Do that with all the stones, and leave one behind; do not touch it, so that any excess blood may run out from it.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or safflower oil on top of the anus and over it; and order the patient to rest.
Then let it be, until it falls.
When the stones have fallen, take care of them with ointments and the rest of their treatment, until they are healed.
Of the Treatment of Fissures.
For indeed many times fissures occur due to excessive stool and natural constriction.
When they become old and medicine does not help in them: then it is necessary to scrape with a spoon-shaped instrument, or with your finger, until they become soft, and the upper crust that prevents their consolidation is removed.
Then take care of these things until they are consoled as needed.
But if they do not consolidate: then repeat them with a stronger reason than the first, until they bleed much, and afterwards take care of them until they heal.
On the cure of inverted ulcers, both those that are not inverted and those that are; and on Attila's stumps, and those of Formica.
Then take care of that thing; and if you wish, cauterize it as described in its own chapter.
From Attila's stumps one is a small, rough, filtered, rounded prominence above the surface of the body.
And very often they occur on the hands of boys.
And its cure is to stretch out the Attila, and cut it; or tie it with a silk thread; or with a hair, until it falls.
And if you wish, cauterize it as described above with fire or with sharp medicine; and now the inverted Attila stumps, both those that are not inverted, will be uprooted with the tool which I shall mention. Formica is also a small, filtered, rough prominence above the surface of the body, going deeply into it; and when cold finds it, there is felt in it something similar to a Formic bite, and it occurs throughout the whole body; and most of it occurs in the hands.
And its cure is to take a pipe made from the feather of a goose or a strong eagle's wing: and place that pipe over the Formica, until the circle of the pipe encompasses it.
Then revolve your hand with a cannula, until you cut out what is in the circuit of the ant; and put it in the depth of the flesh, and root out the ant from its root. And if you wish, do that with a cannula of air or iron, according to this shape.
Let the cannula be placed above, drawing out a deaf man wrapped up, so that relief may be given to his grasp of it and its rotation.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant according to what was previously mentioned in the cauterizing of Attila in the chapter on cauterizing.
 Of the forms of Instruments which are administered for Enemas in Ani's diseases, and solutions of the bowels, and colic.
Chapter 83.
Sometimes an enema is made from silver, or golden gall-nut, or air blown through a pipe, or hammered metal.
And sometimes it is made from these instruments, small and large, according to those in which they are administered.
Therefore, what is administered in the cure of small children, should be small: and for those whose anus is weak or painful, so should their enema.
Great Enema.
Small Enema.
The tube of it, that is, the upper part in which the uterus is tied up, should be broad according to this shape; and there should be a distinction so that the uterus may be tied like you see, and its lower extremity which is inserted into the anus, should be deaf, that is, not open, gentle, very, drawing towards subtlety: and on one side of it should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the roots, and a little thicker, and it should be like the uterus in which medicines are placed from animal bladder: or from sheep parchment, which is shaped like a small asparagus: whose root is one palm.
When therefore it is placed in the uterus, tie it at the head of the catheter between two distinct constrictions with a strong knot.
Then inject with him.
And this is the shape of the circle of the uterus here depicted, and the openings. The quality of injecting with him is that you should fill the uterus or bladder of medicine, which is warmed according to the tolerance of the sick person; and beware lest it be very hot or very cold.
Then the patient will be lifted up onto his back, and he will elevate his legs to the upper parts; and place under him an inthan, that is, a hide or cloth on which people lie.
Then grease the extremity of the catheter with oil, or with white of egg, or with fenugreek mucilage, or similar things.
Then insert it into the anus with ease.
Then let the attendant take hold of the catheter with both his hands at once, and express it with vehemence, until all that is in the catheter is emptied into the intestine. Then draw out the catheter, and let the patient lift up his legs to the wall. But if medicine urges him to evacuation, then hold it as long as you can.
And if he sleeps with it all night, it is more beneficial for his recovery.
But if you catheterize him in the troubles of intestinal colic, and hasten his evacuation: then iterate the catheterization until he is healed.
What if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus: then let the catheter be very fine, soft, from those catheters with which children are catheterized.
And this is the form of a fine clyster above which the skin should be tightly stretched.
On the treatment of head wounds without bone fracture.
Head 44.
Now I have spoken about the division of wound treatment which was fitting for the book, and I will say here the treatment of these wounds with the hand and with medicines according to their complement.
Therefore I say that wounds are differentiated according to that by which they are caused and according to the place upon which the wound falls.
Therefore, the things by which wounds are caused many times are like a thrown stone: either a cut from a sword or knife: or a blow with a lance or wood or arrow: and similar to those things from many other things.
However, wounds that are caused according to the parts of the body are like a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the belly, or the flank: and similar ones from these members.
And I am recounting treatments for some wounds, in order to set forth a reason and rule for the remaining wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds: because the recollection of composed ones will come at the beginning of chapter three.
I say therefore.
I say therefore. When a simple wound occurs in the head and is not accompanied by bone fracture: consider then if it was caused by a thrown stone or something similar, and only the skin has been broken: and the wound is large, and there is fear of a hot aposteme: then hasten and perform phlebotomy of the cephalic vein immediately: and do not delay it: and extract from his blood according to the quantity of its virtue: if nothing prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood flowing out of the wound is little.
And let the phlebotomy be on the contrary side from the wounded part.
And let the sick person beware of fullness, and wine, and heavy foods.
However, if something prevents cutting off, then reduce from food, and do not approach meats or wines.
And put on the wound if a warm abscess happens to him, a poultice infused with rose oil alone, or with wine that has purgative properties.
But if you are sure there is no warm abscess, then put on the wound, if it is fresh with its own blood, and has not been changed by air, the powder that I will tell you later: and if already the air has changed it, then put on it some ointments until it heals.
But if the wound is large, or is from a cut with a sword, and similar cases: and its edges do not come together through swelling, then bring them together with a suture, according to what I will tell you about the sutures of abdominal wounds.
But if the wound has already been detected by bone and is hanging, and there is no retention of it except in a small sling: then cut it.
Then take care of the wound with medicines and restore hard flesh to its place in the cut skin. And instruct the sick person to eat foods that are heavy, such as bread and cooked wheat, until they have a pulse, and similar things.
And if you find putrefaction in the cut and it does not stick to the bone: then cut out the putrid part entirely and throw it away: then take care of that.
But if there is an artery or vein in these wounds from which blood flows: and it does not stop with medicines, then search for the artery.
So if you find it not severed, then cut it off with a Scalpelium, or tie it.
What if necessity forces you when that which we said does not help; then cauterize it until the blood is cut off.
The Method of the Fleshy Powder.
Recipe one part of olibanum, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished lime. Grind the whole together much, and sift it. Fill the wound with this mixture, and bind it tightly until it adheres well to the surface and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind it over with wool, and let it be, nor loosen it as long as it remains, so that it may not suppurate.
For the medicine is not removed from this wound until it is healed.
Then take care of the remaining cure, until they heal.
The Wounds of the Neck.
Chapter 85.
If a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference between it and the wound of the head in terms of treatment, when it is simple.
If the nerve of the neck has already been cut, or an artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no skill in treating it unless treatment is done with great tourniquet, such as with ziniar, and zegi, and similar things.
Because they harm the nerves, and draw them together.
And you should not put anything completely cold on the wound: because the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuity is with the brain, which is a more elevated part of the members: and let what is used to treat it be gentle medicines, such as lime washed with sweet water infused several times with oil or with rose oil, and tuthia, when it is also washed with sweet water: and the remaining mineral stones, in this way, and wet ointments.
If the wound is large, then apply a suture; or close its edges with sawdust.
Then care for it until it heals.
If the wound has depth or occurs on the lower part of it where pus is already accumulating, then puncture it in a more depressed location.
If the artery has already been cut in the wound and its flow of blood has resulted: then separate it, or cut it off, and bind it; or cauterize it if necessity demands that.
If the vertebrae of the throat have already been cut, or the whole thing, and the ligaments are saved: then bring together the edges of the skin with a suture over the cane of the throat, and do not touch the throat, rather make it even, and restore it to its natural shape.
Then tie it tightly with a decent bandage, and leave it for several days.
Then care for it with ointments that have tourniquet-like properties and drying effects, until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then explore it; then if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all of them, or as much as you can: and what is not prepared, leave it until the wound putrefies and its discharge separates and subsides.
If the wound is recent, then apply powdered [substance] on top of it, which I mentioned earlier.
But if a bone appears in the wound and a fistula forms: then treat it with the remedy mentioned in its own chapter.
Chapter 86.
So if pus is discharged from the wound, and a sick person breathes out through it, then you will know that the wound is mortal.
That if it is not deep and the wound is recent with its own blood: then do not put powdered [substance] on it from the first hour, nor bind it, lest the blood retained in its depth returns to the heart and kills the sick person: but place an attractive ointment on it and wash it twice a day.
But if you do not have the ointment present, then place an old cotton swab in the wound's orifice, so that it sucks up what emerges from it due to moisture: and make the sick person sleep on top of the wound, so that what accumulates there can flow.
But if already three days or more have passed since the wound and the sick person has not experienced spasms, nor a bad heart tremor, nor constriction in breathing, and you see his other conditions good: then you will know that the wound is sound.
So therefore care for it with lint and other healing remedies until he is healed.
But if his healing is hindered and an opening always appears, then you will know that a fistula has formed.
So therefore care for it according to its own chapter.
And if the wound is from a cut made by a sword or knife and is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then care for it with suturing if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
If however he has already made an impression on bone and cut off fragments from it; then investigate the wound and hasten to remove those fragments if they are separated.
But if they are not separated, then leave them alone until the wound becomes putrid, for the removal of them is eased by their decay.
However, as for other accidents of wounds on other limbs, the judgment for healing is that which we mentioned.
 On Wounds of the Belly and Exit of Intestines, and their Issues.
Book 87.
The disruption that occurs in the belly is great, moderate, and small.
Therefore, a large disruption sometimes produces an intestine or several intestines.
Wherefore their insertion and stitching are more violent and difficult.
And a small disruption also becomes difficult in another way.
Therefore, it is necessary to reduce them with difficulty if you do not hasten their insertion into its place immediately: since it becomes swollen, opens up, and grows larger: therefore, its entry becomes difficult.
Therefore, a moderate disruption is better on account of this: because with it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in these two species.
Know that the stitching of the belly is according to four modes.
Two kinds of stitching are common to the stitching of the belly and the stitching of other wounds of the body; and two other kinds of stitching properly communicate with other wounds.
However, they are more proper to the stitching of the belly; and I will tell you each one with explanation and declaration. I say therefore, because when the wound is small and something emerges from the intestine, and it becomes difficult to reduce it; then it is due to one of two modes.
Either because of the smallness of the disruption, as we said; or because there is an inflation within the intestine due to the cold air.
When therefore that is so, then it is necessary to warm it, so that you may soak a sponge or a damp cloth in lukewarm water only.
Or you may boil in hot water, and then mix with it the juice of squinanthus, and of cypress, and of rue, and use this mixture to fill the intestine until the swelling subsides.
Sometimes it does good with that wine which has a purging quality: and this is better than water alone for resolving the swelling.
When therefore you see the swelling now resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which althea or mulberry has been boiled.
For through this it is alleviated the entrance of that thing with a small discharge.
But if however the return of that thing is impeded after this cure, then search for a slight fissure, with the instrument by which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first cure is better when it is prepared than when one cuts; and there is no need to force oneself to cut after necessity and deficiency of instruments.
Let the part of it be one that is twisted, sharp, and the other part not sharp, and let the extremity be slightly blunt, rather than very fine: and it is like a caecum, as you see.
When therefore the wound is enlarged and enters the intestine, then it is necessary that its reduction be made according to its natural shape in its proper place, if possible above it: for this is better.
When however the disruption is wide at the lower part of the belly: then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head.
And if it is at the upper part of the belly, then place his head and chest higher than his lower parts.
And similarly if there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the belly, then place your intention and attention always on this, that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other part.
And thus it is fitting that you anoint it on great wounds and on medium-sized wounds.
But in small wounds, apply it according to how it is prepared for you.
Then have a devout and pious servant present, who holds the entire wound with his hand and brings together its edges.
Then remove from it a little bit to the one who is about to sew, and this is the common method of sewing one thing after another.
And it is, that you take an awl or a number of awls according to the size and breadth of the wound.
Then release from the edge of the disruption a quantity equal to the width of an annular finger, that is, of a doctor: and place one awl outside what you insert into it a thread on both sides of the skin, with two strips of sifac on either side, as far down as the skin's natural layer from within, until it penetrates from the other part; and you have already brought together the two edges of the skin, and the two edges of sifac: and four orders are formed.
Then tie with a doubled thread around the awl several times from both sides at once, until the two edges of the wound are brought together in a decent union.
Then release the thickness of the finger and place another awl in it; afterwards tie it with a thread, just as you did with the first awl.
Therefore do not cease to do that with each one as you need it from the awls, until you complete the entire closure of the wound.
And let the awls be of medium thickness between coarseness and subtlety, because very fine awls quickly pierce flesh, and coarse ones are difficult to introduce into the skin: for that reason it is necessary that they be of medium thickness in subtlety and coarseness.
And it is not necessary to place the awl in the two edges of the skin that are very close together: lest the flesh be quickly pierced and the wound opened before its own closure, and also stretched during the sewing, so that the wound may be hindered from consolidating.
Then cut off the ends of the wounds, so that they may not hurt the sleeping patient; and put small pieces of linen around them from all sides, which hold the ends of the wounds: and leave them until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this kind of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds.
Because one, or two, or about that many needles suffice for their stitching.
But the second stitching is common, to gather together with one stitch four edges: two skin edges and two sinew edges on one side, with a needle having a thread wrapped around it of equal fineness and thickness.
Then when you have penetrated with the needle these four edges, draw the needle back from the part where you began, so that the thread falls down from the upper part of the wound: in order to be a stitch, just as stitches are in cloth which are sewn together, and put between every stitch the thickness of a small finger.
But this stitching is known to people.
And with this stitching I stitched up the wound that had occurred to a man in his own belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and there was a greater disruption of the wound than one palm: and something had come out from the intestines about two palms from the middle of the intestine, and there was a disruption in the midst of the belly.
So I reduced it after his intestine had stood outside the wound for 24 hours.
The wound was therefore consolidated after a period of about 15 days: and I cared for it, and he recovered: and he lived after that for many years, living according to his habits.
And the doctors had judged that he would not recover.
And it was a miracle, since I did not treat it with an ointment.
Because I was in a place where no ointment could be found, nor anything from medicines.
I therefore placed an old linen cloth over the wound twice a day, and attended to its constant washing with honeyed water until it was healed.
However, I will describe two proper types of suturing according to the narrative of the conversation.
And it is that you should begin with sharp suturing: and insert the point from the outside towards the inner part.
When therefore the needle penetrates the skin and into the vein that follows along with the length and breadth of the entire body: leave the extremity there where you inserted the needle, and make it penetrate to the other extremity from the inner part to the outer in another mirror-like manner.
When therefore you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate thus in the same mirror-like extremity from the outer part to the inner: and leave the extremity there which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inner part to the outer: and make it penetrate with your penetration as you make it penetrate in the mirror-like extremity which is on its part, until it penetrates entirely.
Then begin also from this same side, and take hold of the part itself with the extremity which is from the sifac on the other side, and pull out the needle from the skin that it has penetrated.
Then return it to that skin and take hold of the part itself with the extremity which is on the other side, along with this mirror-like extremity: and pull out the needle from the skin that is from its part, and make it thus once and again, and so forth, until you have brought outside all the parts according to that example.
And the sum of this suturing is that you should make your sutures like those of a pellipariorum who sew skins: thus as to sew sifac one by one from one extremity of the skin: and leave it off one side and take up the other, until you have completed.
The second kind of suturing proper is what Galenus said.
This is his saying, that he likened it to the way some physicians join certain parts together according to their natural similarity, so that they bring together all a part with its corresponding part by nature: and apply one end of a suture to the other end of another, and the end of a ligature to the end of another.
And this is done according to what I am telling you.
You should insert the needle into the end of the ligature that is nearest to you from the outer part, and make it enter only into the inner one; and then let go the two ends of the suture.
Then turn back the needle and make it enter from the outer part into the inner one in both ends of the suture, that is, on both sides.
Then turn back the other end as well, and make it enter from the inner part to the outer one in both ends of the ligature again, into the two ends of the mirror image which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suturing is a better and easier common suture, and it is the one whose description preceded.
This is therefore Galen's saying as well.
And some people said.
The suture of the belly is corrected with two needles.
Which is to say that you should introduce one thread into both of them: and begin with the introduction of the needle from where it is at your side, and make it enter up to the other side, according to the suture of those who sew skins equally.
And know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the belly: then the suture of it is more difficult than those of other places in the belly.
The judgment of wound treatment is the judgment of all wounds.
Which is to say that when you dress a fresh wound with its own blood, before it has changed by the air; and reduce the intestine, and restore it, and make it fit again; then place it on top of powdered flesh.
If the air has altered the wound: then place on it certain ointments that are present to you until they make pus: and let the strings fall, and be consoled with a sponge, and myrrh.
Then take care of it as is the treatment for other wounds, until it heals.
But if you don't have medicines available to you, then place on it immediately the old poultice from which pus begins to emerge: and change it twice a day, as I taught you, until it heals.
But if you fear that the wound will spread to the principal members by its location, then it is necessary to immerse a woolen cloth, gentle and tempered with warm oil or rose oil: and place it in the area between the groin and armpits.
If it feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in his intestines (for that often happens) then fumigate him with a stiptic wine, black and warm: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and has become an exit that penetrates to its hollow.
And know that what comes from the large intestine is easier to heal from: and what comes from the small intestine is harder to heal from.
However, the intestine that is called Jejunum does not admit healing from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is due to its multitude, which comes from veins, and its great size, and the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the wound is a liquor, and you follow it immediately: reduce it according to your own reduction, by which you reduce the intestines equally.
But if a period of time has passed and it has already become green or black: then it is necessary to tie it with a thread above the spot where it was discolored, so that there may not be a flow of blood.
In the groin there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place two ends of a thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it, so that its attraction to you may be relaxed, and its extraction at the time of the groin's case, and the discharge of pus from the wound.
A reminder of a wound that occurs in the intestine.
When a disruption occurs in the intestine and is small: then it is possible for it to be restored in some people: therefore, because I have seen someone who was wounded in his abdomen with a lance blow, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the old wound had become a fistula, and there was a discharge and a blowing out.
So I applied the treatment until I was no longer confident about his recovery; nor did I cease to intervene with him until he was healed and the site had consolidated.
After I saw the place had been consolidated, I feared for the weak person, that some other bad thing might happen to him in his abdomen; and it did not happen to him from then on.
And he remained in better physical condition, eating and drinking, and having sexual relations, and entered the bath, and exercised himself according to his regimen.
And now certain practitioners have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and is small: then it is necessary to bind according to this method.
And it is, as if you were taking ants of great heads.
Then gather two lips of the wound, and place one ant with an open mouth on top of the two lips of the wound.
When then it closes over them and tightens its mouth, cut off its head, for it sticks and does not come loose.
Then place another ant nearby the first one, and do not cease to do that with each ant after the next according to the size of the entire wound.
Then reduce it to itself and bind up the wound.
For those parts remain joined to the intestine until the intestine is nourished and heals, and no harm at all comes to the sick person. And it is now possible to tie the intestine with a thin thread: which has been taken from the intestinal membrane of an animal and attached to it after being introduced into the acute angle.
And it is necessary to take the end of this thread from the intestine and to scrape away much.
Then bind a thin linen thread around its end.
Then introduce that thread into the acute angle and tie it to the intestine.
Then reduce it back into its natural state. And this method of suture with ants and intestine is only according to the way of confidence and hope.
Know that a wound which is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then there is no skill except to cut away gently, nor is its healing at all.
Of the treatment of Zuchemen and Fistulas.
Book 88.
Know that every wound or apostema when it becomes old and worn out, and forms an ulcer, and does not consolidate, and always discharges pus, and is not healed: then it is universally called a Fistula, wherever it may be in the body, and we call it Zuchemen.
And a Fistula indeed is a hard, white, and tough knotting, without pain, like the concavity of a bird's feather; and for that reason some call it Risati, that is, the feather.
And it is damp in certain hours, which discharges pus.
And perhaps the moisture breaks apart in certain hours.
And sometimes this moisture is abundant, and at other times it is scarce; and sometimes it is thick, and at other times it is thin.
And I have already spoken about division, then when I said wounds, because every ulcer that is not healed and does not produce flesh, it is none other than for one of nine causes.
One of these is because there is a lack of blood in the body; or because of bad blood itself; or because there is hard flesh between it and its edges, preventing the formation of new flesh; or because it is covered with many stains and scabs; or because the ulcer itself is putrid and the material sent to it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used for its treatment is unsuitable; or because corruption falls in that region as a kind of pestilence, or due to the nature of the region, just as happens in Caesaraugusta, where digestion is difficult and healing is slow by nature; or because there is one bone or a number of bones involved.
And I have already shown all these causes and signs of them, and their treatments along with medicines in division; and it is necessary for me to make you know the treatment of a fistula and a zuke, which occurs through an operative procedure by hand.
Know therefore that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body.
For some of them are fistulas that reach the major veins and arteries, or nerves, or sinews: or to the intestine, or bladder, or to some part of the ribs: or to some part of the vertebrae, or joints composed in composition: such as the hands and feet: and among these are those that go to the proximity of the main member and similar.
Which of these fistulas is according to this manner, is from difficult-to-heal illnesses and does not receive treatment, and preoccupation with it is labor and ignorance.
For if it is from some fistula whose depth does not reach the places I said: and you hope and trust in its treatment, and wish to come to know it, then take a test with air or iron, if the fistula inclines straight, and examine it along with itself.
If however there is tortuosity in a fistula, then investigate it with a thin lead probe.
Because lead is tempered by the softness of its own body and is curved around the tortuosity.
For if a fistula has many openings, it will not be possible for you to signify upon it with a probe.
Therefore, cleanse one of its openings from among its own openings.
For the moisture with which you cleanse it flows towards other openings and runs out from them.
Then, with great care and attention, investigate the situation according to your ability: so that you may know what is present there, whether an opening or a nerve, and whether it is a distant or nearby constriction of the fistula, or whether it is one fistula with many openings, and be positioned above all that, with the utmost strength of your hand: with your questioning of the patient, and the discovery of pain upon compression with your hand on the spot, and similar signs and causes of apostemation.
When you have therefore taken your position above all that, then go to the cure according to your confidence: and it is for you to consider then, if there is a fistula appearing nearby, or in a distant place from the junction, or near a nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places I mentioned to you: then cut the fistula as described above from my narrative, and remove what is within it by filtration, and corrupt flesh, which originates in its opening from the flesh, or thela, and similar things: and care for it until it heals.
If however the fistula is of great depth and straight: then it is necessary that you cut it as deep as possible.
Then cleanse it from all the corrupt flesh within it.
Then apply a poultice wrapped in sharp medicines and insert it into the constriction of the fistula as far as you comprehended with your iron. Make it so with that several times, until the sharp medicine eats away all that remains in the constriction of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that produce healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it does not heal by that means, then cauterize it according to what we have narrated.
And if the cause of the fistula is a bone, and you are certain of it in your own judgment: then investigate that bone and cut it according to what I have told you; but if nothing prevents you from doing so due to a vein, or nerve, or main member, as we have said.
And if you find a bone and there is something rotten and blackened in it: then scrape it clean until all the corruption is removed.
Then care for it with what covers it, until it heals.
And if it does not heal and discharges pus as before: then you will know that you have not succeeded in the complete eradication of the corruption.
Therefore, scrape over it again and make a thorough cleansing of it, and purify it with your utmost strength.
Then restore it.
And if it heals, that is good; and if not, then you will know that the corruption is in a deep-seated part of the body, which you have not reached.
You do not have skill in that matter except to leave it to nature.
And if the small bone is corrupted and you can manage it, then draw it out with fine forceps that are suitable for it.
And if there are many bones, then make a precise extraction of all of them, and do not leave any behind with your strength.
But if something from the moistures is opposing you, and there is no fear or error in cutting them out: then cut away those moistures and flesh, if it is present, and free the bones.
But if you do not have preparation for removing bones from your own time, then place over the wound that is corrupting it a poultice: and let it alone until it corrupts what is surrounding those bones from flesh and moistures.
And guard the wound so that it does not consolidate.
And be constricted by the incision which you made in your operation.
In fact, place over it, if you fear, an ointment submerged in powdered sulfur with oil; or an ointment submerged in Egyptian balm, or some green ointments.
For when those humors decay and the bones are separated from them, the removal of these things is alleviated and their attraction.
But if it is a large bone, such as the tibia or femur, and something like that is corrupted from it, and it is a great part: then scrape it off with the last scraping until the blackness and corruption are removed.
Then restore the wound.
If what is corrupted in it is a great part, and corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it off and cut it all the way down to where the corruption has reached: then care for it until it heals. And I tell you of Zukan, what happened to a man in his leg: so put it as an example and aid on your operation.
There was a young man of about thirty years old, to whom it happened that he had pain in his leg, due to something moved over him within the body, namely from inside, until the matter reached his leg and became a large abscess: and there was no external cause.
So it was prolonged with him over time with the mistake of physicians, until the abscess was opened and many materials concurred with him.
And his treatment was delayed until the leg became a fistula and many openings were made in him: which all discharged pus and bodily humors.
So a multitude of doctors treated him for about two years, and there was no wise hand in the art until I was called, and I saw his leg, and the matters that were flowing from those openings with great flow: also the whole body of the man had already decayed, and his color was yellow.
I therefore inserted a thread into one of the openings in the wound, and the thread reached the mouth.
Then I examined all the openings: and I found them to reach each other from all parts of the leg. I hastened therefore and cut above one of those openings, until I uncovered a part of the bone; and I found it corrupted: which was already eaten away, and denigrated, and putrid, and perforated, until it had penetrated to the marrow.
I therefore cut what was shown to me, and prepared from the corrupted bone.
And I removed what was not in the bone except for that corruption which I cut away.
And I had already pulled it out.
Then I applied the wound restoration with consolidating medicines over a long space.
And it is not consolidated.
Then I tried to restore it.
And it is not restored.
Then I restored it with medicines, and it was quickly consolidated and healed; and this iteration was not necessary for its operation and section, except on account of the debilitated patient's weakness, his lack of tolerance, and my fear for him regarding death: because it was happening to him in every hour from excessive evacuation.
He was therefore healed with complete healing: and firm and good flesh grew in the place of the bone, and a good arrangement was made in his body, and his strength returned: and he reverted to his usual habits: and he did not experience any harm or inconvenience at all in his walking.
If the prominent bone is already broken in its place in the body: then it is necessary to repair it, in this manner: and is: take a ligament, and tie it at the extremity of the prominent bone: and order someone to stretch it upwards: and place another ligament made of coarse wool from the first ligament. Then bind it above the flesh which is under the bone: and stretch the extremity of it, so that you draw the flesh down to the lower parts: and you take away the flesh from the place which you want to sew, so that the suture does not hurt the flesh.
Place a piece of wood or a board under the bone below moderately: because when you do this, it does not prevent the corrupted flesh from being cut.
And it is necessary for the suture to be over the corrupted place a little bit, so that the corruption of the bone does not occur in concavity; and it should not appear in its appearance to the sense, and make another suture in its place. What if the bone is corrupted and is not prominent, but rather continues with its part; and corruption is in the middle of it or in a part of it: then remove all flesh from around the entire area.
Then place wood underneath.
Afterwards sew that from the first part where there is corruption, until the suture is continued on the other side; and let the suture be according to the length from the corruption a little bit, as we said.
What if the corruption is at the joint, cut off the corrupted joint and sew the bone where it continues on the other side.
If however the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no skill except abrasion.
What if the corruption is in the pit of the hand or in the pit of the foot: then the matter in that case is very difficult.
But it is necessary for you to inquire into the corruption and see how it appears to you.
And smooth it out, and clean the same according to whatever arrangement is possible for you, and with whatever skill you have; when it does not make opposition to you, Vein, or Nerve.
And know that the saws and files for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and subtlety, and magnitude, and smallness, and hardness, and rarity.
Therefore it is necessary to prepare the suitable instrument for every kind of operation.
And know that these operations are significant to you according to the type of instrument you need, when with you is a long study.
And knowledge of the methods of this art is a testimony to the methods of illnesses: then indeed you will find through yourself what fits each weakness from instruments.
Saw shape.
Shape of another saw.
Shape of the other saw.
Shape of another saw.
This shape of a saw is depicted, let it be well-made. Let the upper part of its bow be made, and its edge sharp from iron: and its handle from boxwood, and let it be well-made pyramidal.
Shape of a file for joints.
Let the head of this file be, according to the shape of the head of a star-shaped awl; and its points, according to the shape of the points of an emery stone.
And it is not suitable except that they rub against this file when the joints are worn out, or a large and great bone.
Shape of a larger file.
Form of the Middle Razor.
The shape of a broad razor.
The shape of a razor in which there is hollowing.
The shape of another, thin razor.
The shape of another, curved-tipped razor.
The shape of a small, thin file-like razor.
The shape of a razor with which bones are cut.
The shape also of a large razor.
This resembles a saw, and the end is like a file: it is shown in many places for scraping bones.
The shape of a razor that is suitable for scraping what has been pierced from bones.
Its end is triangular, with sharp tips.
It is made in India.
And similarly all that we have said should be made from Razors, Files, and Sawblades.
Of cutting off extremities and sawing bones.
Head 89.
They putrefy because of an external cause or an internal one.
Therefore, when you have treated the corruption with medicines and the treatment does not help: and you see the corruption occurring in a member which does not respond to anything: then it is necessary that you cut off that member up to where the corruption follows, so that the sick person may escape through that member from death or from the greater defect of the member.
And the sign that this occurs is that the member turns black until it becomes putrid: which fire has consumed, or has rotted after becoming black: until the putrefaction is cut off up to where that member follows, and spreads throughout the entire body.
Therefore, proceed with the cutting off of that member, and similarly if the cause of corruption is due to the striking of certain venomous things, such as the sea scorpion, viper, or adder, and similar ones.
If therefore corruption or striking is at the tip of the finger, then cut off the finger and do not give space to corruption to spread until it reaches the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut off the hand from the wrist and do not give space to corruption until it reaches the forearm.
And if it spreads into him, then cut off the arm at the elbow joint. But if corruption passes through and you see him around the elbow: then death is at hand for that person.
And to apply something beyond that in healing is a quantity of power.
And similarly do this for the foot, when corruption invades the toe; then cut it off at one of the joints. And if it reaches into the instep of the foot, then cut off the entire foot.
But if it ascends to the knee, then cut off the leg at the knee joint.
And if corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no skill in it except giving up and leaving the sick person to death.
And the method of cutting off a limb or cutting it is to tighten the ligament on the lower side that you wish to cut off: and then tighten another ligament above the place.
And have the assistant stretch one ligament down lower: and have the assistant stretch another ligament up higher above.
And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments with a broad spatula, until all the flesh is exposed.
Then it should be cut off or cut.
And it is necessary that you place a linen cloth around all parts and not touch the healthy area with the saw: and the sick person will suffer added harm and a warm abscess.
If bleeding occurs internally while you are working, then cauterize the place quickly: or place some powder on top that absorbs blood.
Then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable ligament and care for it until it heals.
And I will tell you what happened to a man on his foot, the same thing that is happening to him.
What is this? Because a blackening occurred on his foot, similar to a burning by fire, and that corruption first affected his finger until it spread throughout his entire foot.
Therefore the man took care of himself after he saw the corruption affecting his member with its madness, which he discovered through pain and burning; and it happened to him at the joint, and he was healed.
And after a long time had passed, the same corruption occurred on his index finger of his hand. So he came to me, and I attempted to remove the excess with him by applying medicines after purifying his body; and the excess was not removed, and it began to move to another finger: until corruption spread throughout his hand.
So he called me to cut open his hand; and I did not want to do it, hoping that the excess would be removed through itself; and I also feared death for him during the opening of his hand.
Because the man's strength was above his condition.
After that, he lost hope in me and returned to his land; and he came back to me about it because he was advised, and cut open the entire hand of his own accord; and he was healed.
And I did not bring this story forth except to be a help for what falls under the category of this kind of illness; and so that it may be a signification by which one may signify and according to which one should act.
Chapters on the treatment of sinuses, and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
Chapter 90.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus: then it bursts or perforates and what is inside it comes out through the pus, and the location remains empty as if it were a vessel; and the skin that covers it is like a piece of cloth that has been worn thin. And it does not reach its final state of corruption nor imprint on bone, muscle, or ligament: it merits being called a Sinus; and it is not called Fistula. However, if the space of this abscess is prolonged until corruption imprints on one of these members, then it is called Fistula, or sinus.
And the treatment for it is to cut off that skin entirely as it has rotted; and especially when it has been worn thin and made like a piece of cloth. And you may rely on this because it will not adhere to the location due to its own corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and does not result from that last stage of corruption; and if there is a thickness on the skin from flesh, then treat it with a clyster, and it is to consider it with respect to the sinus.
Then if it is large and the pus that is emitted from it has a foul odor: then clysterize it with a medicine from Egypt, which is a mixture of vinegar, oil, and zinc powder, with equal parts, gathered in a vessel: and let them be decocted over fire until the medicine turns red: and come to the thickness of honey.
Then take from it what you need: and dissolve it with water and honey, and clysterize it with that into the sinus: and tie off its opening, and let the medicine stay in it for a period of two hours.
Then extract it with expression: make it that way for days until the sinus is cleansed and the foul odor is removed.
And sometimes clysterize it with ash water when this medicine is not available to you; and it is, that you take the ash of vine wood or ash from ilex trees: and throw it over her.
Then smear it on and cover it with a poultice until you are confident that the sinus has been cleansed.
If the patient is not tolerating the Egyptian remedy nor water of ashes, then cover him with a poultice made from water and honey to which some crushed ziniar has been added.
Or cover him with a poultice made from honey and wine mixed together, since it is known that the property of honey is to cleanse and purify: and wine makes the sinus stick together, especially when there is an excess of dryness and bitterness.
When you have done this a few times and are confident that the corruption of the sinus has been removed: then cover him with a poultice made from what produces flesh growth in it.
And it is, as you take from the plaster a diaphanizing substance; and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine: or cover him with a poultice made from certain medicines and other ointments, whose properties I have written in the treatise on ointments.
If the orifice of the sinus is narrow and does not admit a catheter for a poultice: then dilate it with a iron instrument for a little while: or place in it a linen cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilikon ointment, until it has been dilated.
And similarly if the orifice is also large, then gather up its lips with a suture and let go from it as much as the catheter can enter without addition.
And similarly if the orifice through which pus flows is elevated towards the upper parts: then cut it at a lower point which is in it, so that the pus may flow from it downwards: because when the pus is compressed in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from growing in it.
If it is not possible for you to cut the sinus around its lower part as you wish: then try to prepare the limb with a preparation by which the pus may flow from it with ease, according to what is prepared for you.
To prevent anything from sticking to it from pus entirely: and receive medicinal congees placed on the mark, suitable for what you wish.
And stretch them over a linen cloth.
And let the cloth be of such a size that there may be communication throughout the sinus.
Then cut with forceps directly into the orifice of the sinus, making the opening a little larger than the orifice of the sinus.
Then spread a soft ointment on another cloth, according to the size of the opening; and place it over it, far from the orifice of the sinus, so that the discharge of pus may be alleviated from it: and do not remove the cloth until after several days.
But the one that is on the orifice of the sinus, you remove at every hour, so that what has accumulated in it from pus may flow out; and to know whether the flowing substance is much, a little, digested, or undigested.
And when you have done this again, examine the site of the sinus itself, whether its lord feels pain in it or not; and whether there is abscess in it or not.
When therefore your treatment proceeds thus, and you see the material that flows out on the orifice of the sinus, then you will know that the sinus has already adhered or is approaching adhesion: then therefore dissolve it in the morning, or on the third day; and when you dissolve the wound, then change the cloth to another one and renew the ointment. But if a subtle pus flows out from the sinus after a long period, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, since there are people who delay the formation of flesh in their wounds, and there are those who act contrary to that.
But if a undigested pus flows out from the sinus after many days, then you will know that the sinus does not adhere.
If therefore the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its substance is prolonged: then add to the drying remedies what physicians truly make, so that they are humid in their substance and dry in their power, just as diaphoretic ointment when an excess of addition is made from aloes.
And from the last part of the treatment is this: that you take diaphoretic ointment and dissolve it with rose oil, and sprinkle it over old wine equal to its substance.
Then mix it with that, and use it.
And now this makes a similar action when you do not have diaphoretic ointment, honey, by cooking it until it thickens, and using it.
Or take myrrh, and aloe, and frankincense: grind all together, and powder it over honey while it is still warm.
Then spread the mixture over the cloth, and tie it over the sinus: and then tie with honey that you have cooked until thickened: and powder over it the kind of powder, and put it on the cloth, and tie it.
And sometimes administer it with Aristolochia longa, and the roots of the Heavenly Lily, and is Lily: and the flour of a herb, and Centaury.
Use them simple or combined, grind them together, and sift it: and powder over the honey that I narrated, and use it.
But if the sinus's condition prolongs and is not healed by this treatment: then you will know that there is corruption deep within it: or already making an impression on the bones, or in other hard members, or ligaments: then cure it with Fistula treatments, as was previously mentioned. About the treatment of Panaritis and worn-out nails, and the addition of finger cuts and sections.
Chapter 91.
Painful swelling is a pustule that arises under the nail of the thumb or foot: and perhaps it arises in other fingers.
When therefore the condition of this thing is prolonged and its cure is neglected, and a pustule arises with heat: or it becomes corrupted and emits pus, until it corrupts the root of the nail: and perhaps it corrupts it entirely, and perhaps the corruption reaches to the bone, until it has a foul odor: and the end of the finger becomes wide, and its color becomes dark.
When therefore you are treating it as we said in the division, and your treatment is not effective: then it is necessary that you cut off with iron all the excess that remains from the nail.
Then cauterize the wound afterwards.
For cauterization is very helpful.
If however the bone is sound, and the nail also sound, and the added flesh of the nail already compresses the flesh to the inside, and begins to pierce it, and hurt it: then it is necessary that you place a subtle Radicum under the angle of the nail which pierces the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut through the flesh with ease, and put over what remains of the flesh from medicines that burn and corrode, until the whole thing is removed.
Then care for it with ointments, until it heals.
If however the corruption has already taken root in the bone, then it is necessary that you cut off that bone and remove it: for it will never heal as long as the corrupted bone remains.
What if you see a corruption and gangrene spreading to the finger, then cut it off at one of the joints, according to what has been previously remembered about it.
Then care for it, until it heals.
If however fingernail attrition or percussion occurs, and severe pain accompanies it, then it is necessary that you bleed the patient first.
Then cut the nail with a sharp Spathiumuli cross-section from above downwards.
And take care that the cutting does not reach the flesh which is under the nail, for you would cause severe suffering to an innocent person through that above, and it will be a reason for adding flesh to the place.
Then care for the place with what calms pain.
The added finger that is born on some hands of men, perhaps is all fleshy: and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps there is a nail on it: and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or its birth is in certain knots of the finger.
Therefore, the one that is born in certain knots of the finger does not move: and the one that is born at the joint of the finger, perhaps moves.
Therefore, the fleshly one among them is easy to cut.
Which is, that you should cut it at its root with a broad Spathium.
But the cure of one whose birth is at the joint of the root is difficult.
Therefore, abstain from cutting it.
In that one who is born at the end of the fingers, then it is necessary to cut into its first flesh with a rounded incision up to the bone.
Then saw through the bone with one of those saws that are suitable for it.
Then care for it until it heals.
However, the union that occurs between fingers one against the other, often happens either through the birth of a person, that is, it grows with him, or from the consolidation of a wound, or from burning by fire, and similar things.
Therefore, you should cut that union until the fingers return to their natural shape.
Then place between them linen or cloths soaked in rose oil: so that they do not consolidate quickly, and separate between them: or place between them a thin plate of lead, until the place is consolidated as it should be.
And similarly if consolidation occurs in some fingers with the palm, then cut off that consolidation, according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the member.
Chapter on Cutting Off Defects.
Head 92.
There are swollen, thickened, and distended veins which occur from excessive melancholic humors that happen in many parts of the body: and most often they occur in legs, especially in those who walk or work a lot, and carry heavy loads.
Therefore it is necessary to administer a purgation of the body with black chalk several times with strong scratching.
Then let bloodletting be done on the patient's basilica vein.
However, their treatment with iron is according to two methods.
One of them is that they should be cut and the black blood drawn out.
And the other method is to elevate the vein and draw it all out.
The cutting of it is according to this method.
Wrap the leg first with hot water a great deal, until the thick, clotted blood dissolves.
Then bind the lame leg with a bandage from the upper part of the hip down to the lower part of the knee.
Then cut the vein at one place, or two places, or three wide incisions.
Then cut off the nail right down to the bottom: until a quantity of blood emerges that you see is sufficient and which the patient's strength can tolerate.
After that, bind it up and advise him to abstain from foods that produce black bile: and repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full and it harms the patient.
The elevation of it is according to this method.
Remove the crippled man's crutches if there are many hairs in them.
Then introduce him into a bath; or immerse his leg in hot water with him until it becomes red and the veins are filled: or exercise him in strong exercise, if there is no bath present, until the limb warms up.
Then cut the skin along the straight course of the vein throughout its length: or at its end near the knee, or at its lower part near the heel.
Then open the cut with forceps and scrape the vein clean from all parts until it is visible to the sense; and at its appearance, you will see it becoming red, then declining to blackness.
When it comes out of the cut, you will see it white as if it were a cord.
Then introduce Radix under it until when it is lifted up and emerges from the cut: suspend it with a blind forceps, gently.
Then cut another section near that section three fingerbreadths away.
Then scrape the cut from the upper part of the vein until it appears.
Then lift it up with Radix as you did, and suspend it with another forceps as you did at first.
Then cut another section, or multiple sections if needed.
Then lift it up and cut off the last section at the heel.
Then pull it out to the section that is above it.
And do this until you pull it out from the upper or higher sections altogether, when it emerges entirely: then cut it.
If it does not obey you to pull out and lift up: then introduce a needle with a strong thread twice as long, and bind it, and pull it out: or introduce Radix under it: and turn your hand in all directions until it emerges.
And beware, lest it be cut.
For if it is cut, it will be difficult for you to lift it strongly, and harm from it will come upon the patient.
When therefore you have taken it all out: then place a soaked cloth of wool on the wound site, submerged in wine and rose oil, or oil: and care for it until it heals.
And if it is a vitiligo that has contracted and has twisting and turning to parts, and it is not as we said according to straightness: then it is necessary for you to cut into it on all sides of its twisting and the places of its encircling.
Then suspend it with a hook until you lift it all out: and beware not to cut into the vein or wound on it: for it will be difficult for you to lift or pull it out.
Therefore, conserve your prudence.
The Form of Cutting by Which Vitiligo Heals.
The Form of the Blind Knot.
It is not curved like the other knots, nor is it sharp at its extremity, so that it does not cut a vein: and it has a large, gentle curvature: because if it were thin, it would cut a vein with its thinness: indeed let there be excessive thickness, as we said.
On the Extraction of the Vein of the Thigh. Chapter 93.
This Vein is generated in the thighs of people living in hot lands, such as Alizegi, and Arabian land, and in dry, hot lands with little vegetation, that is, where no grass or tree grows.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
And its generation indeed is from the putrefaction that occurs under the skin, just as it happens to serpents and ascaride worms inside the body, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein's outcome is that a violent inflammation occurs in the leg.
Then the place is irrigated.
Then the vein begins to flow out from that area of irrigation, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
So when its end appears from it, then you must wrap around it a piece of lead, whose weight is one and a half drachmas to two drachmas, up to the node, and let the lead hang down from the leg.
Whenever then something emerges from it to the outside, wrap that in lead and tie it off.
But if it is prolonged greatly, then cut off a part of it and wrap up the remainder.
And do not cut it at its root before it has emerged completely.
Because if you cut it, it contracts and enters into the flesh; and causes an aposteme, and putridity in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary to handle it gently and draw it out gradually, until it emerges from its last part, and nothing remains of it in the body; and from this very Vein, in some people, there flows a matter which is five palms and ten digits long.
And now it has reached me, because it flowed out of a man for twenty palms.
But if you are cut on the hour of your medical treatment: then insert a catheter into its orifice and pierce it with a long instrument, along with the body, until all that is in it is evacuated from the material: and administer putrefaction to the place with medicines for several days. Then cure the wound by curing the apostemes.
And this Vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot, or on the foot itself: and it has many openings, and a branch emerges from every opening.
Therefore, treat it as we have said in division, and with what has been added before.
About the removal of worms generated under the skin, and it is called Ox-like Distress.
Chapter 94.
This Distress is called Ox-like Distress in a certain land among us; therefore, because it often happens to oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it wanders throughout the body, ascending and descending; and it is revealed to the sense during its movement from member to member, until it breaks wherever it breaks through the skin, and emerges.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of some humors.
Just like worms and serpents, that is, earthworms, and roundworms in the belly.
And be feared from its evil.
Because when it goes through the body and ascends to the head, and reaches a place: then perhaps it opens there, and emerges, and destroys an eye: and that happens many times.
When therefore you wish to cure it and extract it, then that is not done except through its wandering and the appearance of itself to the sense.
Therefore, you must bind what is above it and what is below it with a strong constricting bandage.
Then cut above it, and extract it.
And if it burrows into the flesh and you cannot find it: then place a cautery above the place with fire, until it dies.
And what is feared most is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we said. If however you see it has already reached the head near the eye, then bind below it the eyebrow with a good constriction.
Then cut above it, and extract it.
It is necessary that the sick person uses cleansing of his body with medicines dissolving foul bad humors.
And he should beware for himself against foods causing corruption.
About the treatment of Nakir's illness.
Chapter 95.
This illness is called Nakir in our land; and it is a pain that occurs in some members, then it changes from member to member.
And I myself have indeed seen him, according to how I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman in certain villages.
And she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
And after staying for one hour, I saw a swelling moving with the pulse, like a worm, ascending to her shoulder more quickly than it can be, so that it is like living silver when it runs from place to place.
Therefore the pain departed from that place and was fixed in the shoulder.
Then I sat for one hour, and it ran through the rest of the body until it reached another arm.
Then she told me that it was revolving throughout her entire body, according to what I saw.
I was amazed therefore at the speed of its changes from member to member.
And I myself had not seen this illness with my own eyes in such a way before that.
However I have seen many who find pain changing from member to member, and I did not see it with my own eyes as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think that it is not, except that the woman was one of those who are from dry and arid bodies with detected veins: hence it appears to my sense that this windiness has been changed.
And it is necessary that they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with hidden veins.
When you wish to treat it and the patient feels that pain: then if it appears to your eye, as we said, then bind above it quickly and beneath it swiftly: and cut above it until the swelling subsides: and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes: then treat it by excision of the body and by that which drives out swellings, and expel them with fetid poultices and with poultices made from serapium and similar things.
On the Extraction of Arrows.
Chapter 96. Arrows are distinguished according to their kinds and according to the places where they fall from the body.
And their diversity is this: because some of them have large points, and small; and hollow, and blunt.
And some of them have three angles.
And some of them have tongues.
And some of them have stars.
Those that fall according to the members are two-fold.
Or else the members are from the main concave members, such as the brain, and the heart, and the liver, and the lung, and the kidney, and the intestines, and the bladder, and those like them.
When therefore it falls on one of these members and you see signs of death which I will tell you later, then it is necessary to remove the arrow from that member, for death follows him who has it in many situations.
And when you do not see those bad signs and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then remove it and treat the wound.
For the signs of the brain are: when an arrow falls on it and pierces the skull, and the siphac that is above the brain comes out; namely, because there occurs a sudden faintness, and dimness of vision, and vertigo, and redness in the eyes, and inflation, and redness of the tongue, and spasm, and a mixture of intellect, and vomiting of bile.
And perhaps blood will flow from the nose, or ears.
And perhaps speech is cut off, and voice is destroyed.
And moisture like whitewash comes out from the place of the wound.
And pus like fatty meat juice flows out from it.
If then these signs appear to you, then refrain from treatment, and extract the arrow if there is no discharge.
The signs of the arrow when it falls in the heart are: that it is near the left breast; and it feels as if it were fixed in a hard substance, not in an empty space.
And perhaps the arrow's movement is similar to the pulse; and black blood flows from the wound.
And then follows numbness in the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting.
Know therefore that death is surely approaching.
And the sign of the arrow when it wounds the lung is: that foam-like blood flows from the wound; and the vessels that follow the neck, become inflamed, and change color to a sickly hue.
And he expires with a great, deep breath; and seeks the support of cold air.
Which if the arrow falls in the membrane that is in the chest: then it is near to the small ribs; and a great panting occurs with violent pain, with a sigh: and all the upper limb members are moved.
And if the arrow falls in the stomach, then perhaps something undigested from food will flow out from the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the Womb and is stuck there: something like dung will flow out from the wound, or a yellowish discharge, or an intestine that has already been torn.
Therefore there is no hope for its cure, nor for extracting the arrow.
Which if the arrow falls into the Bladder and urine flows out: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is more severe over the sick person: then you will know that it is mortal.
The remaining limbs, such as the face, neck, and throat, and the scapula, and the assistant, and the thoracic vertebrae, and the cruris, and those similar to them from limbs are saluted according to many dispositions: when an arrow does not find an artery or a nerve; and it is not a poisonous arrow.
And I will tell you what I saw to be about these arrows, so that you may signify it for your cure.
What is this? Because a certain man had an arrow fall into the root of his nose and the lacrimal gland of his eye.
I therefore removed it from him on the other side, under his ear fat; and he was healed, and no harm befell his eye.
And I removed another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into the fatty part of his eye below the lower eyelid; and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not manage to remove anything from it except for its small tip with which it was stuck in its wood: and the arrow was a large one from the bows of the Turks, with a gentle iron, without ears.
And therefore the Jew was healed, and no evil befell his eye. And I removed another arrow from a Christian's throat.
And the arrow was Arab, and it is that one with ears.
So I followed above it between two gullet-ribs; and already it was submerged in his throat.
I therefore worked carefully with it until I removed it: and the Christian was healed.
And I removed another arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly; and we thought that he would die from it.
Afterwards, then, thirty days had passed for him and nothing had changed in his condition; I followed above the arrow: and I worked carefully on it, and removed it: and he was healed, and no evil befell him.
And I saw a man whose arrow had fallen on his back, and the wound had been closed over it.
Afterwards, therefore, seven years having passed, the arrow was discharged from its root in his hip joint.
And I saw a woman whose arrow had fallen into her womb, and the wound was closed over it, and the arrow remained within her; and nothing of her physical functions was changed, and the woman did not find any harm in her natural bodily processes.
And I saw another man whose arrow had fallen on his face; and the wound was closed, and it remained without causing him much pain; and similar things are numerous.
And I extracted the arrow from a man who was one of the king's chief men, which had fallen into his nose and had already begun to incline towards the right side; and the arrow was entirely concealed.
I was therefore summoned for his treatment after the arrow's fall, until three days had passed.
I found then the wound of the arrow to be very tightly bound.
I therefore questioned him with a fine probe, and did not feel it; but he himself found a puncture and pain under his ear on the right side.
I therefore hoped that that puncture was from the end of the arrow.
I therefore applied a dressing to the place with a dressing that had drawing and digestive power, trusting in myself that the place would suppurate and I would see a sign of the arrow appearing for me to cut above it; and nothing happened in the place that would indicate that the arrow had reached there.
I therefore applied the dressing to him day after day for many days; and nothing happened, and the wound was closed in the meantime: and he remained weak from its extraction for a space of days, until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose.
And he told me this.
So I put a sharp and corroding medicine on it for many days until it was opened; and when I probed it gently, and felt the tip of the arrow subtly attached to the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow appeared visibly to us; and after this time, a period of about four months passed.
Then after the wound had been enlarged and it was possible for me to insert a forceps into it and move it, but it did not yield to exit: then I did not cease to subtilize and engineer over it with various methods, until on a certain day I extracted it with well-made forceps, according to their shape at the end of the chapter.
Then I restored the wound.
And doctors indeed judge that the nasal cartilage is not restored.
So I restored it and the wound was consolidated and the patient recovered with entire health, nor did anything harm him at all.
And I tell you the quality of extracting some arrows: so that you may put it as a rule and signification for what I did not say.
Because the parts and distinctions of this art are not comprehended by narration: nor does that book comprehend it, and a wise craftsman compares little with much: and with what is present, about what is absent: and he finds a new operation and a new instrument in the descents of external things of this art when they occur.
I say that arrows do not exit from the members in which they are fixed, unless according to two modes. Or by attraction from the place where it entered.
Or by the contrary part of the other side.
And that which exits from where it entered is either an arrow proceeding into a fleshy place and is attracted and exits.
If it does not obey the exit at the hour when it falls: then it is necessary to release it some days until the flesh surrounding it becomes rotten: and let its attraction and egress be eased.
And similarly, if it is stuck in bone and does not obey you at the exit, then release it also some days: and repeat it with attraction and motion every day, until it exits.
If it does not obey you at the exit after days, then it is necessary to pierce in the surrounding bone with a fine awl from all sides, until the splinters are widened.
Then draw it out and extract it.
But if the arrow is fixed in the skull bone and has already entered one of the cerebral ventricles, and some of those symptoms I mentioned appear from the patient: then abstain from drawing out the arrow and release it, until its aftermath subsides after days.
For if the arrow reaches the sifach, then death is not prolonged for him.
And if the arrow is not fixed except in the body of bone only and does not penetrate as far as the sifach, and the patient remains weak for some days and nothing from those accidents happens to him: then attempt at drawing out the arrow and extracting it.
But if it is fixed very firmly and does not obey you at the drawing out: then apply a file to the surrounding area of the arrow, as I told you before: then take care of the wound, until it heals.
But if the arrow is already concealed in the body and hidden from sense perception: then search for it with probes.
But if you feel it, then draw it out with certain instruments that are suitable for drawing it out.
But if you cannot pull it out over it, due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow deep inside: and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein nearby: then find a way over it, until the wound opens up and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
If the patient has ears that are affected, then free the fixed flesh from all parts of those ears, by any means you can manage to do so, and if it is not possible to lift the flesh above the breaking point of the ears and their twisting until it goes away.
And when you are extracting the arrow, wherever it is located, then use a twisting motion with your hand and forceps to all parts until it comes out: and with very fine subtlety, so that the arrow does not break and its extraction becomes difficult for you.
If you cannot extract it within an hour, then leave it for a few days until the decayed matter surrounding it has rotted.
Then reiterate the extraction: for it will be relieved by means of a poultice. If, however, it causes bleeding contrary to your expectation, then administer what we have said in its own chapter: and preserve your strength from incision of the vein, nerve, or cord.
And administer your skill in any way possible for the extraction of the arrow: and let it be with ease, and quietness, or slowness, and firmness, as I have told you.
And it is necessary that you make the arrow pull weakly as if an invalid was pulling, according to the shape and form of how the arrow was situated at the moment of its being shot.
Because it is more beneficial.
If however it is not possible for you to do that, then administer what is possible for you according to the shapes.
However, if the arrow emerges from the opposite part of the other side, or already something has proceeded from it to the outside, or the extremity of the arrow makes a swelling at the sense through the upper part of the nearby skin, and you see it protruding: then cut above it, and let the incision be according to the quantity that the forceps can hold in it.
Then draw it out; for it becomes easy to exit.
If it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness, until the arrow impresses on the bone and makes itself larger: then draw it out.
And if not: leave it for a few days: then repeat it until it comes out.
If the arrow is stuck in her, then push her with it.
But if the wood has fallen and you wish to administer a push: then introduce into her a concave instrument, so that it enters the hollow of her backside into the arrow; then push her with it.
But if the arrow is hollow, then push her with the instrument entering into it.
For the arrow is eased by that.
Since if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to remove the flesh entirely, where the venom is, if that is possible for you.
Then take care of her with what is fitting for that.
Since if the arrow is falling in the chest, or in the belly, or in the spleen, or on the side: and it is close to what you touch with your probe, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and beware of cutting into a vein, or nerve, and draw her out.
Then clean the wound, if you see it, and take care of it until it heals.
And this is the shape of forceps by which arrows are drawn out.
Let the extremities be like the beak of a bird, which are made of iron: when they take hold above the arrow, they do not let it go.
And they are made in many forms, great and small and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow, its length, and the magnitude of the wound, and its constriction.
The shape of a concave impeller.
And the shape of a deaf impeller.
This is the form of the deaf extremity like a radius, so that its entrance may be opened into a concave arrow, and impelled with it.
The extremity of the concave impeller is concave like a bird's wing: so that the entrance of the arrow may be opened into it and its impulse.
Chapter on venesection of veins.
Head ninety-seven. The veins that are accustomed to being cut in the body are thirty.
Of which sixteen are in the head: two pulsating veins that are behind the ears and are called two Herbae; and two arteries that appear in both temples; and two veins that are in both tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called Aspicientes; and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein that is at the tip of the nose.
And two Guidigi that are in the neck.
And two veins that are on the upper lip of the mouth.
And two veins that are on the lower lip.
And these are the veins which are called Algecherich.
And two veins that are under the tongue.
However, the veins that are cut in the arms are five in each arm.
One of them is Cephalica, and it is from the outer side of the shoulder: and the people call it the vein of the head.
And Fusca.
And it is the Median vein, and it is composed of a branch of the Basilic and a branch of the Cephalic: and the people call it the vein of the body.
And Basilic, and it is situated on the inner side: and it is also called Titillicaris.
And it is called by the common people a "vein" of the belly.
And it is called the arm cord, and it is placed above the elbow: and it is that one in which blood-letting is done, and it is that one which appears above the wrist with a clear indication.
And Salvatella: and it is a vein that is between the ring finger and the smallest [finger]: and it has two branches.
And there are three veins in the leg and foot.
One of them is which is located beneath the curvature of the thumb on the outer side.
And the second one is Saphena: and its location is at the heel from the inner side.
And the vein of Ness: and its location is at the heel from the outer side.
And on the other leg there are three veins similar to those.
On bloodletting of two veins after the ears.
The bloodletting of two veins which are after the ears is beneficial for old catarrhs, and headaches, and sahafati, and bad old head sores.
And the quality of bloodletting on it is according to what I say.
And it is that the head of the sick person is shaved: and his occiput is rubbed with a rough cloth on the spot of the two veins with good friction.
Then the sick person should bind his neck with a cord until the two veins appear.
And their locations are after the ears in two depressed places on the head.
Therefore search for them with your finger and where you feel their pulse under your finger, mark it with encaustic.
Then take the bloodletting knife, which is called "Incidens".
Then introduce it under the vein in the skin, until the bloodletting reaches the mouth.
Then elevate your hand with the vein and skin towards the upper part, and cut the vein with a skin incision that meets it.
And let the length of the incision be equal to the distance between two joined fingers, or roughly that, and make as much blood flow out as you like.
Then tie it with ligatures, and let it be, until it heals.
And now precedes in the beginning of the book, the cutting of those and their cauterization.
Of Phlebotomy of Two Arteries at Different Times.
The benefit of the two arteries which are in two phases of phlebotomy is against an old headache, and a bad fever, and a persistent eye disease; and to remove the course of overflowing and sharp fluids to the eyes. And the quality of phlebotomy for them is according to what I will tell you.
A weak person should tighten his neck a great deal, until the two veins become clearly visible to the sense; and it should be shown that their pulse beats under your finger.
Then mark with encaustic.
Then elevate the skin above the vein towards the upper part with your finger as a guide, and insert the phlebotomy instrument below, and elevate the vein towards the upper part.
And cut it as you did with the two other veins, and make flow from the blood according to the quantity of your need. Then loosen the constriction of the patient, and place your finger on top of the vein for one hour.
Afterward place a cauter and ligatures on top of it, and tie it securely with strong constriction; and let it be, until it heals.
And now precedes the reminder of those, and their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of the book.
Of Phlebotomy of the Forehead Vein after Phlebotomy of the Cerebral Vein.
The application of blood-letting to the vein on the forehead is after cephalic blood-letting, for old ailments of the face, and for headache, and redness, and foul ulcers.
And the quality of this blood-letting is, according to what I shall tell you.
Bind a weak person with a bandage around his neck until the vein appears.
Then take the instrument which is called the Fossorium.
Whose form is this.
Place the prominent point that is at the top of the Fossorium on top of the vein, and strike it with a spatula or another instrument of its kind; and let the blood flow as much as you desire.
Then loosen the puncture of the sick person, and bind it until he is healed.
And sometimes it opens with a broad blood-letting.
However, it is not necessary for the blood-letting to be sharp at its end, like the other blood-lettings, but rather broad.
And perform the blood-letting according to the passage: since it is near the opening: and perhaps the blood-letting will be broken when it is thin.
About the blood-letting of veins in two tear ducts.
The application of blood-letting to the two veins which are in the two tear ducts of the eyes is for an inflamed eye and redness: and for a boil in the eye, and for ailments of the face.
And the quality of this blood-letting is, that the sick person binds his neck with a bandage.
Then perform the blood-letting on them; and you be standing above his head.
And let the blood-letting be performed transversely across the length a little, with a small broad instrument, and not too deeply, because there is no flesh.
If a vein is cut at a delicate extremity, it may break.
Then let blood flow from the blood as much as you need.
And bind a linen cloth over them and tie them at night once, and loosen them.
On the Bleeding of Veins of the Nose.
The bleeding of the nose's veins is useful against acute fever and violent headache, and troubles of the face, such as hemi-granum and redness which occurs on the face, especially when it is old.
And the quality of this bleeding is that it tightens a weak person's neck.
Then take the nose of that person with your left hand and receive a thin, long bleeding; and insert it into the middle of the hare itself, between what separates the nose according to straightness.
Because the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary for you to hold your hand with the bleeding a little while and make blood flow according to your need.
Then bind it at night once.
For it is restored quickly itself.
On the Bleeding of Veins of the Gullet.
The benefit of the two Guidegi bleedings is for constriction of breathing, and onset of leprosy, and melancholic troubles, and impetigo and bad ulcers, and corroding sores, that is, herpes-like sores.
And the quality of these bleedings is that it tightens a weak person under both on their neck with a bandage; and let the artist stand over the head of the sick person, and the sick person be seated on a seat.
Then take a vein for a wide bleeding a little while.
Then draw out a tempered quantity of blood or according to what you see is necessary for that purpose.
Then make similarly with another vein.
Then loosen the ligament and tie the two veins together in the middle, so that the weak one may not be choked off.
And leave it until morning.
For the wound is healing.
A section on bloodletting of veins by Algeberich.
The veins of Algeberich are the seat of bloodletting because they conduce to the mouth and the corruption of gums; and bad ulcers; and fissures of lips; and also bad ulcers which are on the nose, and around its circumference.
And the quality of bloodletting from them is that you make the patient sit before you and tie his neck with a cloth.
Then turn back his lip and look at the two veins: one is on the right side of the lip, and the second on the left side of it; and the indication of each is by the discoloration of both.
And that is true: because around them are small dark veins.
Therefore cut both with a cutting cut. But if you are in doubt and do not know which one it is: then direct your cut to the larger of the two and the more obvious one.
And similarly do the same with the two veins that are on the upper lip: and indeed custom goes along with this; and cut the two veins that are on the lower lip.
A section on bloodletting of the vein under the tongue after cephalic bloodletting.
The two veins that are under the tongue are the seat of bloodletting: because cephalic bloodletting is for obstructions that are in the throat, and trouble of the uvula, and troubles of the mouth.
And the quality of bloodletting from them is that the patient sits between your hands before the sun: and raise his tongue, and look under his tongue at one side for one vein, and on the other side for another vein: and the color of each is declining to blackness.
Letting blood then on both sides: and taking care not to put your hand too far in when letting it.
For under his skin are the arteries, and perhaps a flow of blood may occur from those arteries.
On the three veins in the arm.
The three veins that are let out on the arm are those whose letting is a customary practice with all men.
And the letting of blood from them is done in two ways.
Either by pricking with a myrtle-leaf phlebotomist; or to incline towards fineness with olive oil; or by cutting with a cullery phlebotomist, and it is called Alnesil.
And this is its form.
Thus Alnesil is what is suitable for cutting.
And from these there are broad and fine kinds according to the width and constriction of the veins. The form of the myrtle leaf phlebotomist is broad, as you see.
And it is suitable for opening up concave veins that are full, swelling, swollen, apparent, thick, and those that contain thick, turbid blood.
And this phlebotomist is of smaller width and finer at the extremities.
And it is suitable for letting blood from fine veins that contain subtle yellowish blood.
On the Basilic vein.
The Basilic, which is one of those three veins whose letting is a benefit. Because it draws out blood from afflictions that are under the throat and neck, following from the chest and belly; and it is suitable for a phlebotomist to beware of it and be on guard against it, because there is an artery underneath.
If therefore the phlebotomist makes a mistake and adds to the incision, he will cut into that artery and a flow of blood will occur.
Therefore it is necessary not to let a blood-letter bleed her with a bleeding instrument. Instead, let him cut with Alnesil.
If the basilisk does not appear in a manifest apparition, then it is necessary to have someone else touch her or to exchange with another or seek out a branch of hers. Or, you should find a blood-letter in her place and tie the cord of her arm.
For she is indeed manifest, and cut her with a bleeding instrument made of Alnesil, just as we said.
But if you wish to perform a blood-letting on her own self, then it is necessary before making the incision in the arm, that you touch the place until you recognize the place of the pulse.
Then mark the spot with encaustic, afterwards the arm, and cut the vein in a concave section with a bleeding instrument made of Alnesil, just as we said.
And beware that the blow does not fall through an interval to the place of the artery.
And when you see that as you are binding the bandage, there is swelling in the place which you marked with encaustic, then that swelling is the swelling of an artery; therefore avoid it.
What if you see blood rising in the phlebotomy, like a child's urine, and it is fine, red blood; then you will know that it is from an arterial blood.
Then therefore hasten and put your finger on the same space for a long time, then withdraw your finger.
If therefore the blood is cut off (for it is often cut off) then bind the arm and let it go, and beware that the patient may be injured by its movement, and let it be on his guard against fear.
And do not move him for several days until he is healed.
But if the blood does not flow and conquers you, and medicine is not present to you at the moment, then cut the artery if it appears to you.
For its extremities are contracted, and blood is severed.
Or take the skin of the suture and cut it; take one middle part and bind it above the place of the vein constriction fittingly, with a ligament and fluffing up to another day.
Then if blood is severed, it is good.
And if not: then treat it with the one who was previously mentioned, from the place of powdering off blood flow: and severance of his blood is not difficult in many arrangements, due to the smallness of the wound and the possibility of binding on the arm.
On Bloodletting from the Black Vein.
However, the Black Vein is beneficial for bloodletting because it draws blood from the upper part of the head and lower part of the body: therefore, since it is composed of a branch of the Basilic vein and a branch of the Cephalic vein, as we said.
And it is suitable for bloodletting to be done above the fear of its own bloodletting, because beneath it is a nerve.
Therefore, if you add to the incision of bloodletting and find a nerve, it happens that one becomes numb, and healing becomes difficult for it, and perhaps it does not heal at all.
And this nerve is often perceived by the senses.
But if it is hidden in some people, and is subtle, and does not show itself: then it is necessary for you to place your bloodletting such that you may reach the vein, with a section using Alnasil, and remove the nerve with your own strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in length.
On the Cephalic Vein.
The benefit of bloodletting from the Cephalic Vein is that it attracts blood from the head and relieves eye ailments.
And it is necessary in this vein properly, if you wish, to puncture it with a lancet of olive oil or with a lancet of myrtle: because it is the most healthy of all veins, since there is no artery underneath nor nerve. However, it is fitting for you during venesection that you should first uncover with the lancet just enough of the tip of the wrist and then look for a more gentle place: and it does not harm him if he is not found on the first strike, but rather it may be repeated several times over that place with venesection. However, perhaps an abscess will form in some people if it is not venesected at the first strike, but that abscess does not harm him anyway.
Of the usefulness of Venesection and the cautions to be observed in it.
The quality however of Venesection and its accidents from which you should take thought in its correction.
Firstly then of that you should know, that venesection is not administered unless for the conservation of health, and the perseverance of it, and caution against the advent of diseases.
And so that venesection may be done in one of the three veins on the arm, namely, the Cephalic, and the Fuscous, and the Basilic.
And so that venesection may be done at the beginning of spring after fasting, in truth, and summer; and autumn, and winter after digestion, when signs of fullness appear.
And let venesection be done on the first or third day, after three hours have passed since dawn.
But venesection which is administered in diseases has no fixed hour: but whenever occasion and necessity demand it, whether by night or day, at any hour, and at any time.
And it is not fitting that children should be venesected until they have reached the age of fourteen years.
Nor should a pregnant woman be bled, except from the fourth month up to the seventh.
Nor should elderly men who have passed sixty years be bled.
When someone wants to be bled for any reason, it is necessary that he clean his bowels beforehand with a gentle enema if there is much retained feces in them, so that the veins are not attracted at the time of bleeding by superfluous putridities from the intestines that can harm the principal limbs.
Nor should a patient who is disgusted by eating, that is, one who has no appetite; nor one who is drunk and vomiting from drunkenness, until that is removed from them.
Nor should an invalid with dropsy.
And beware of bleeding again after a bout of colic, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and an increase in sexual activity, and labor, and exercise, and wakefulness, and fasting, and any other thing that dissipates bodily or animal vigor.
Then consider the subtlety of humors before that, whether blood is thickened with food and drink, and medicines: if it is possible for him.
Then enter the bath, if nothing forbids it: or exercise in some way, so that blood may be thinned.
And place the bleeding of him in the chest, around the third day, as we said: and strive to purge his chest that day from all animal evils, such as constriction, and anger, and fear: and from all bodily evils, such as labor, and pain, and superfluities, and similar things.
And make his seat be present with things from which the habit of humans has become accustomed to use through aromaticity, and scent, and joy, and similar things in proportion to their possibility.
Then the bleeding attendant should sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion for bleeding: afterwards he should pull out his own arm and rub it with his hand twice or three times.
Then he ties the ligament with a girdle and wraps it twice.
And let the constriction be tempered, because when the constriction is unequal, either through excess or lack of constriction, then it hinders the flow of blood: or in relaxation, then it also hinders the flow of blood.
Then after the constriction, it is necessary that the phlebotomist rub his hands together in a circular motion until the veins are inflated and become apparent to the sense.
Then the phlebotomist should wipe the phlebotomy site with a little old oil, properly.
Then he should place his index finger of the left hand on top of the vein at the spot where he intends to perform the phlebotomy, slightly: so that the vein does not escape and a blow can be struck.
For it is known that veins are like fleeing strings during phlebotomy: and some of them are full of breath: and when you place the phlebotomy instrument on top of it, it contracts under the phlebotomist, and the phlebotomator is deceived, and the wound does not open: and if it does open, it is narrow: therefore one should be careful to ensure that the phlebotomist is firm and attentive in all these matters.
Then he should remove the phlebotomy instrument.
And if not, then do that on the other side a little bit below or above with haste: if the place does not abscess.
Which if it abscesses or becomes inflamed, then let him rest for a day or two: and do not tie the ligament.
Perhaps indeed an abscess may draw in warmth.
Nor should he enter a bath.
Then he should repeat the phlebotomy if it is desired.
If the incision is small or if the blood flows thinly: and you fear that a quantity of blood may not emerge as desired: then continue to make the venesection at the same opening according to straightness, and add a little to the procedure.
And do it with haste before the place becomes inflamed, for an inflamed place is often found in many people during a small operation.
If therefore you see it already inflamed, then do not make another incision on it at all, for nothing excuses that in your presence. And place something from the fat of oil upon it, since it will ease the flow of blood.
And it is better in this place than oil itself and than other oils.
And similarly administer the fat of oil in every venesection of yours, whereby you make incisions on veins to prevent the flow of blood; and they are called tyriaca alfarach, and sagzenea, when one of them is placed on top of a place.
For blood is refined and dissolved when it is thick.
For if a great inflammation occurs at the site of the venesection, which often happens, especially to one who has not been venesected except by that method, or if the opening of the vein is small, then hasten and place a sponge soaked in water and salt, warmed for a short time, upon the place; and bind it for an hour, since it dissolves.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has come out from the same vein, with its completion, or from another vein.
And many times indeed inflamations and swellings occur during venesection at the basilica.
So then put your hand on it, and if you find softness under your pressure on it, then that prominence is bad.
Therefore, take care to place something from what we said over it.
For perhaps blood may flow from it of the artery.
But make a poultice for it with that which has astringency, so that the place may be hardened.
Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
And it is necessary to remove from every man's blood according to the quantity of his virtue.
And what appears from its victorious color over the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it turns red; and similarly if you see it thick, then let it go until it becomes thin; and similarly if it is sharp, then let its sharpness be removed.
And it is necessary for one who is full, strong, and needs bloodletting to amplify the venous phlebotomy, and let the phlebotomist be on the left side; and conversely for one who is weak.
And it is necessary to remove it through openings and to have a narrow aperture; and better what is administered in venous phlebotomy is that there be a crosswise incision, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood and from cutting the nerve; and it is more praiseworthy and healthier than phlebotomy by width and length.
And one who is accustomed to syncope during phlebotomy should eat before phlebotomy a moderate amount of bread infused with grape juice water; or pomegranate seeds if it is heated up; and remove from him three or four times.
And if it is of a cold complexion, then let him take before phlebotomy bread infused with honey syrup, or with aromatic spices, or with aromatic odoriferous syrup.
If it happens that adhesions occur during phlebotomy and the cause is the exit of much blood: then it is necessary to take a drink of meat broth, and a subtle perfumed syrup; and to use aromaticity with aloes, and to anoint his chest with it: and to use the other things we mentioned in the chapter on adhesions for evacuation.
However, whoever wants to withdraw his arm and release his blood gradually: it is necessary for him whose phlebotomy is for the evacuation of much blood, and whose power is weak, to release his blood little by little according to the quantity of his power over continuous days.
However, whoever wants to withdraw his arm and release his blood gradually, and has a strong body: then let him do it after seven hours or nine hours from his first phlebotomy.
However, whoever wants to attract blood from his body to the opposite side of where it inclines: it is necessary for him that it happen to him on the second day or third.
In whose body is much blood already heated and sharpened, and causes fever to occur: it is necessary that the blood go out from him in one direction, and a great quantity be drawn from him; and the opening be enlarged until adhesions occur: after you have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy, and put your hand on his pulse at the course of the blood, so that death does not occur at the site of adhesions.
For indeed it often happens when the phlebotomist is unaware and falls into negligence.
And it is not necessary when you want to withdraw the arm and release the blood gradually, with the orifice of the vein already closed and the exit of the blood becoming difficult, that you apply pressure on top of it with great force and stretch it quickly.
For this is very bad, nay, leave it be, until it is rephlebotomized again.
Remove with sharpness of phlebotomy what has coagulated from blood in the venous opening, and place something dissolved salt on top of it.
And place something from Tyrian balm or sage wine on top of it, and apply gentle pressure to it until the blood flows out.
If the vein is already inflamed, then leave it alone and do not bind it until the inflammation subsides.
But if necessity demands that you shed blood again, and there is no excuse, then either let blood above that spot or in another arm in a different vein.
The veins of the arm are let blood at the place called Black and Basilian, when the other two cannot be found and are hidden, since they are made up of these.
And the quality of this bloodletting is that the patient should put his hand into hot water until it turns red and the vein becomes clearly visible.
Then bind it with a bandage, a little constricted in the middle.
Then perform the bloodletting across the vein gradually, not widthwise or lengthwise; and have a wide opening and your bloodletting be done slightly above the joining of the hand.
And indeed the flow of blood is placed in hot water more often in winter time.
And the bloodletting of this vein is healthier for all veins, because there is no pulsating artery or nerve under it.
The bloodletting of the Salutella vein of the right hand is conducive to alleviating liver ailments.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that you bind a bandage around the arm with a ligament or your own hand after you put it into warm water until the vein swells and is very noticeable to the sense.
Then, cut the vein across.
And if you cut it entirely, that will not harm him at all.
And preserve so that your hand is not last with the phlebotomist.
Underneath it indeed are the nerves of the fingers exposed from the flesh.
Then put your hand into warm water and let the blood flow freely in it.
For if you do not put it into warm water, the blood will clot in the incision of the vein and prevent its flow.
When therefore you have taken out the necessary quantity of blood, then place oil and salt over the vein: so that it may not clot quickly.
And similarly, it is fitting for you to do this with every tight branch.
The medicine of this phlebotomy is from the left hand, because it is connected to diseases of the spleen; and similarly do the same with its phlebotomy as you did with the second one equally.
The medicine of the phlebotomy of the saphena is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of menses, and weaknesses of the kidneys, and old ulcers of the hips and legs, and similar ones from diseases.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that the patient puts their foot into warm water and makes a friction on it until the veins swell; and binds above the joint of the foot with a garter.
And the location of the veins is at the heel, appearing towards the thumb; and they branch out from there into multiple branches on the surface of the foot.
Letting blood therefore is done on a larger branch of it, or at the heelbone in its gathering; for it is better and more healthful.
But if you let blood on the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath it above the face of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy so that you may let blood from across, as if you wished to cut it; and make the phlebotomist Nasil.
But if the flow of blood is hindered, then go on to his foot in hot water: and let the blood run into it, until it is drained.
For if the phlebotomist goes wrong in the first attempt, then go on to phlebotomy at a higher point for a little while, because the place is safe and you do not fear harm from it, when you beware of nerves, as we said.
And similarly with the vein on the other foot in equal measure.
The location of the Sciatic veins is, as we said, at the heelbone from the left side.
And the benefit of his bloodletting is, to relieve the pain of the ankle, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of his bloodletting is, that the patient enters the bath and hastens; and bind his leg from the side of the ankle up to the heelbone for four digits, with a thin cord long: for it does not appear except on account of this.
When it appears, then let blood it according to your own ability, or across; and it is better, either to cut it by cutting, or to divide it by dividing.
For its location is more healthful, and it is very hidden in many people.
For if you do not find it and it does not appear to your sense at all: then let blood some branch of it, and that is the one which appears on the back of the foot, and towards the ear; and beware of nerves, and make flow from blood as much as you wish.
Then loosen the constriction, and place the skin over the site of venesection, and tie the place.
For indeed it soon heals.
On Pneumatic Therapy, and its Quality.
Chapter Ninety-Eight.
Wind-bags are made from horns, and from air, and from glass.
And Pneumatic Therapy indeed is done in two ways.
With scarification and bloodletting: and the other is pneumatic therapy without scarification. And this Pneumatic Therapy which is done without scarification, is done in two ways.
Or it is with fire.
Or it is without fire.
And the pneumatic remedies which are administered with scarification and bloodletting are fourteen places of the body.
One of which is Ventosa Alnocrati, and it is the last place at the top of the head; and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck; and Ventosas Alhagdahim, and they are two plates on the neck from both sides at once; and Ventosas to the mind, and it is under the jawbone in the lower part of the mouth; and Ventosas of the two spatula-shaped areas; and Ventosas of Alachosos above the end of the tail; and Ventosas of the two elbow regions, and they are in the middle of both arms; and Ventosas of the two leg regions; and Ventosas of the two shoulder-blade areas.
And indeed Pneumatic Therapy does not extract blood from small scattered veins in the flesh, and because of that it does not have power over them, just as is the case with venesection.
Nor is it necessary to administer Pneumatic Therapy, whether with fire or without fire, for any ailment that arises from fullness, until the whole body has been purged.
But if necessity demands Pneumatic Therapy due to illness or habit, we administer it every hour at the beginning, end, and middle of the month, and whenever is necessary.
What is this? Because there are people who when multiplied in him blood increases to the point where it needs to be extracted through venesection, find a swelling in their head and sudden death.
And among them is one who finds repletion and redness on his face, head, and neck.
And among them is one who finds itching on his face and forehead, and darkness and dullness in his eyes.
And among them is one who forms an ulcer at the site of venesection. And among them is one whose laughter increases.
And among them is one who finds the taste of blood in his mouth; or his tongue will ulcerate and spit out blood.
And among them is one whose sleep increases.
And among them is one who sees blood and redness, and dead bodies, and wounds, and things similar to these while sleeping. When we see something from those things and it is exactly on the 15th day of the month: we prescribe then that venesection be done, after two hours or three have passed since dawn. The juice of venesection is: because it brings relief to the heaviness in the head, and what flows out affects the eyes.
